                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             TRACKING WEEKLY STATE-LEVEL ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

                                      Christiane Baumeister
                                       Danilo Leiva-León
                                          Eric R. Sims

                                       Working Paper 29003
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29003


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank Jim Hamilton for helpful comments and the COVID-19 Economic and Social Science
Research Initiative at the University of Notre Dame for financial support. Special thanks to
Thomas D. Evans from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for his invaluable help with the weekly
seasonal adjustment of unemployment claims. Anthony Fonash, Vitor Furtado Farias, and Samuel
Gruenler provided superb research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely the
responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Banco de
España, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christiane Baumeister, Danilo Leiva-León, and Eric R. Sims. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tracking Weekly State-Level Economic Conditions
Christiane Baumeister, Danilo Leiva-León, and Eric R. Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 29003
July 2021
JEL No. C32,C55,E32,E66

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper, we develop a novel dataset of weekly economic conditions indices for the 50 U.S.
states going back to 1987 based on mixed-frequency dynamic factor models with weekly,
monthly, and quarterly variables that cover multiple dimensions of state economies. We show
that there is considerable heterogeneity in the length, depth, and timing of business cycles across
individual states. We assess the role of states in national recessions and propose an aggregate
indicator that allows us to gauge the overall weakness of the U.S. economy. We also illustrate the
usefulness of these state-level indices for quantifying the main forces contributing to the
economic collapse caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and for evaluating the effectiveness of
federal economic policies like the Paycheck Protection Program.

Christiane Baumeister                            Eric R. Sims
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame                         University of Notre Dame
3028 Jenkins Nanovic Hall                        3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556                             Notre Dame, IN 46556
and CEPR                                         and NBER
and also NBER                                    esims1@nd.edu
cbaumeis@nd.edu

Danilo Leiva-León
Bank of Spain
DG Economics, Statistics and Research
Alcala 48
Madrid 28014
Spain
danilo.leiva@bde.es




A Data Dashboard is available at https://sites.google.com/view/weeklystateindexes/dashboard
1       Introduction

Measuring the current state of the economy in an accurate and timely manner is challenging.
Yet such measurements are critical for policymakers, government agencies, economic analysts, and
business people who make decisions about policy, budget allocations, production volumes, sales
strategies, plant closures, and the like. The di¢ culty in accurately measuring the state of the
economy at high frequencies arises from the fact that most headline macroeconomic data series are
measured at the monthly or quarterly frequency and are released with a considerable delay. This
is even more of an issue in a fast-evolving economic environment like the one we experienced at the
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
    In an e¤ort to facilitate an early and reliable assessment of economic conditions, the academic
literature has developed composite indices of economic activity at the monthly (e.g., Stock and
Watson, 1989, 1991; Mariano and Murasawa, 2003; Camacho and Pérez-Quirós, 2010; Baumeis-
ter, Korobilis, and Lee, 2020), weekly (e.g., Lewis, Mertens, Stock, and Trivedi, 2020), and daily
(e.g., Aruoba, Diebold, and Scotti, 2009; Diebold, 2020) frequencies using dynamic factor models
to summarize the comovement among individual economic variables. Higher-frequency indicators
have become particularly popular in the wake of the COVID-19 outbreak for the purpose of keep-
ing abreast of the rapid economic deterioration due to the public health crisis and related policy
measures. While the weekly economic index of Lewis et al. (2020) relies on only one frequency
common to all underlying variables, Aruoba et al. (2009) emphasize the bene...ts of mixing data
observed at di¤erent frequencies to track continuously evolving business conditions.1
    Most studies in this literature have focused on measures of cyclical variation in real activity at
the national level. Much less attention has been devoted to corresponding measures at the state
level. The only ones we are aware of are the monthly coincident indices for the 50 U.S. states of
Crone and Clayton-Matthews (2005), reviewed by Chinn and LeCloux (2018) and regularly updated
by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. These indicators of state-level economic activity are
based on a small set of data series which exclusively capture labor market dynamics.2
    One of the contributions of our paper is to extend recent e¤orts to measure weekly economic
conditions to the state level. For this purpose, we assemble a diverse state-level database that
combines new high-frequency data ­such as credit and debit card spending, business applications,
and mobility indices ­ with more traditional low-frequency indicators such as employment and
income. Speci...cally, we include weekly, monthly, and quarterly data series that cover di¤erent
aspects of state economies, such as labor market indicators, household spending, real economic
    1
     Aruoba et al. (2009) show that incorporating weekly data greatly improves the accuracy of their real activity
factor, especially during recessionary periods, while adding daily data makes little di¤erence.
   2
     The four input series for the Philadelphia Fed state coincident indices are monthly nonfarm payroll employment,
the monthly unemployment rate, monthly average hours worked in manufacturing, and quarterly wage and salary
disbursements de    ated by the U.S. CPI. In January 2020, a ...fth series, proprietors' income, was added to capture
some changes in capital movements unrelated to the labor market.




                                                         2
activity, mobility measures, ...nancial indicators, and expectations measures.3 Recently, Bokun,
Jackson, Kliesen, and Owyang (2020) compiled a real-time dataset for U.S. states that contains
both monthly and quarterly variables, but no weekly variables. Another feature that distinguishes
our dataset from theirs is that they focus on the sectoral breakdown of employment and output
data, while we include a variety of non-standard variables (e.g., electricity consumption, vehicle
miles traveled, oil rig counts, coal and oil production) to capture state-speci...c characteristics as
well as to obtain a more comprehensive measure of economic conditions for each U.S. state.
    We use the resulting state-level indicators of economic conditions to study similarities and
di¤erences in the length, depth, and timing of business cycles across individual states with a
particular focus on the four most recent recessionary episodes over the period 1987-2021.4 We show
that there is considerable cross-state heterogeneity along all three criteria during the early 2000s
slowdown and the Great Recession, while the COVID-19 downturn was nearly perfectly synchronous
across states, even though the magnitude of the economic fallout di¤ered greatly. Given that the
indicators cover multiple dimensions of state economies, we can decompose economic        uctuations
into their main underlying driving forces. For example, adverse labor market developments and the
abrupt decline in mobility were the key determinants of the economic collapse in the early stages of
the COVID-19 pandemic for most states, whereas the sources of the subsequent recovery are more
diverse, even though the labor market continues to play an important role.
     We also show that the weekly frequency of our state-level indices is particularly valuable for as-
sessing the e¢ cacy of policy interventions. When tracing out the dynamic response to the Paycheck
Protection Program, the nation'    s largest ...scal policy initiative to combat the pandemic crisis, we
...nd that the e¤ect is positive but only lasts for a few weeks. Given this rather short duration, an
analysis conducted with lower-frequency data is likely to miss the bene...cial consequences of this
program, which according to our estimates amount to a 1.3 percent increase in state-level economic
conditions indices for every $500 increment in loan volume per capita. This is but one illustration of
how our state-level indices can be put to use in policy analysis. Our indices will enable researchers
to study the responses of individual states to a range of macroeconomic shocks and federal economic
policies including ...scal, monetary, trade, and industrial policies, as well as state-speci...c ...scal mea-
sures, environmental regulations, transportation policies, infrastructure programs, (de)regulation
of energy markets, property tax reforms, and land-use rules.5
    Exploiting the di¤erential behavior of state economies to aggregate shocks can also enhance
our understanding of how the aggregate economy works. For example, Carlino and DeFina (1998)
use the varying strength of responses to monetary policy shocks for states with di¤erent economic
structure to infer the relative importance of di¤erent transmission channels. Similarly, Owyang,
   3
      The bene...ts of a diverse dataset to measure global economic conditions have been illustrated by Baumeister et
al. (2020) in the context of forecasting oil prices and petroleum consumption.
    4
      Studies that analyze state-level business cycle dynamics at the quarterly frequency for some of these and earlier
recessions include Diebold and Rudebusch (1996), Carlino and Sill (2001), Crone (2005), Owyang, Piger, and Wall
(2005), and Hamilton and Owyang (2012).
    5
      The dataset of state-level economic conditions indicators can be downloaded here and will be regularly updated.


                                                          3
Piger, and Wall (2008) rely on heterogeneous state-level patterns in terms of timing and magni-
tude of volatility reductions to uncover the origins of macroeconomic phenomena like the Great
Moderation.
    To study the implications of state-level economic conditions for the U.S. economy as a whole, we
explicitly model the contribution of each state to national economic weakness. Speci...cally, we apply
a Markov-switching model to each state-level indicator in the tradition of Diebold and Rudebusch
(1996), and Owyang, Piger, and Wall (2005) to obtain recession probabilities for each individual
state. We then use these recession probabilities to construct an aggregate economic weakness index.
We analyze various sources of weakness by grouping states according to a set of criteria, such as
the industrial composition of the workforce, the degree of resource richness, and others. In the last
week of February 2021, the end of our sample period, we also generate weekly forecasts of state
economic conditions to project the national recovery path one-year ahead. Again, this is just one
example of how weekly forecasts for each state can be used to inform policymakers. An interesting
extension would be to include our high-frequency state-level indicators in mixed-frequency models
to explore their promise for forecasting lower-frequency national aggregates.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 develops a new set of composite
measures to gauge the economic situation in each of the 50 U.S. states on a weekly basis. Section
2.1 describes our model framework to generate weekly indicators of economic conditions at the
state level and Section 2.2 proposes a new state-level dataset that spans a wide range of economic
variables with mixed frequencies that we consider critical to capture economic developments in
each state. In Section 2.3, we illustrate how these state-level indicators can be used to track the
evolution of economic performance week-by-week, to quantify the main contributors to business
cycle   uctuations in state economies, and to evaluate the impact of government policies like the
Paycheck Protection Program. Section 3 studies the role of state-level economic conditions for the
U.S. economy by aggregating the information on state-level recession probabilities into a national
weakness index. Section 3.1 introduces a regime-switching model that allows for heterogeneity
across both recessionary and expansionary episodes. Section 3.2 discusses the sources of economic
weakness, the evolution of risks during the pandemic, and the projected recovery path. Section
3.3 examines the economic geography of recession probabilities. Section 4 o¤ers some concluding
remarks.


2     Weekly Indicators of Economic Conditions at the State Level

2.1   A Mixed-Frequency Dynamic Factor Model

Since the important early contributions of Stock and Watson (1989, 1991), dynamic factor models
have been widely used to construct indices to measure aggregate real activity in a timely fashion.
We follow Mariano and Murasawa (2003), Aruoba et al. (2009), and Camacho and Pérez-Quirós
(2010) and combine data sampled at di¤erent frequencies within a dynamic factor framework to


                                                  4
generate high-frequency indicators of economic conditions at the state level. The model is estimated
for each of the 50 U.S. states separately.
    The base frequency of observation is weekly. Let t = 1; :::; T index weeks, where T is the total
number of weeks in the sample, and let m = 1; :::; M index months, where M is the total number
of months in the sample. Associated with any week t is a month mt within which the Saturday
for that week falls, and associated with any month m is a number of weeks, c(m) = 4 or 5, whose
Saturday falls in month m. Let Ym be a variable such as employment that gets reported for month
m. We think of this as the sum of unobserved weekly values, Zt , over each of the weeks in month
m. Thus, if week t is the last week in month mt ;

                                  Ymt = Zt + Zt            1   +       + Zt         c(mt )+1 :                                               (1)

We can approximate (1) with

                                                                                            1=c(mt )
                               Ymt = c(mt )(Zt Zt          1         Zt    c(mt )+1 )                  :                                     (2)

Camacho and Pérez-Quirós (2010) note that typically (2) gives an excellent approximation to (1).
Taking logs of (2) yields

                                                      1
                ln Ymt = ln(c(mt )) + [c(mt )]            [ln Zt + ln Zt            1   +       + ln Zt         c(mt )+1 ]:


A typical year consists of 52 weeks. The year-over-year growth rate of Ymt is given by

       ln Ymt    ln Ymt   12   = ln c(mt )       ln c(mt             12)
                                                1
                                  +[c(mt )]         [ln Zt + ln Zt          1   +           + ln Zt         c(mt )+1 ]
                                                      1
                                    [c(mt     52 )]       [ln Zt     52   + ln Zt       53    +            + ln Zt   c(mt     52 )   51 ]:


If the month associated with week t has the same number of weeks as the same month in the
preceding year, then

                                                               1
                    ln Ymt     ln Ymt   12   = [c(mt )]            (zt + zt     1   +          + zt        c(mt )+1 ];                       (3)

for zt = ln Zt ln Zt 52 , the weekly year-over-year growth rate. When t is the last week of a
month, we observe the left-hand side of (3) from the di¤erence between the log of, say, employment
reported for that month and the log of employment for that month in the preceding year.
    Similarly, let q = 1; :::; Q denote quarters and d(q ) the number of weeks falling in quarter q .
d(q ) can take the values of 12; 13; or 14. Let Yq denote the value of a variable such as real GDP in
quarter q and Xt an unobserved weekly level of GDP. We can model growth rates of Yq at a weekly
frequency as
                      ln Yqt ln Yqt 4 = [d(qt )] 1 (xt + xt 1 +    + xt d(qt )+1 ];               (4)

where xt denotes the year-over-year growth rate associated with week t:



                                                               5
    We postulate that there is a single latent weekly cyclical factor, ft , that is common to all the
variables in the system. We assume it is characterized by a Gaussian AR(pf ) process:

                           ft =        1 ft 1   +        2 ft 2   +        +        pf ft pf   +   t        t    N (0; ! ):                 (5)

For variables that are observed weekly, such as new claims for unemployment insurance, we assume
that the observed weekly value for variable i, yit , is given by a loading, i , times the common
cyclical factor, plus an idiosyncratic component, uit :

                                         yit =          i ft   + uit                if i observed weekly.                                   (6)

The idiosyncratic component follows an AR(pw ) process:

                  uit =         i1 ui;t 1   +        i2 ui;t 2    +         +       ipw ui;t pw    + "it        "it   N (0;   i ):          (7)

Modeling the idiosyncratic process explicitly is useful in the case of state-level data, since this
allows us to distinguish between idiosyncratic experiences in speci...c parts of state economies, such
as mining strikes in West Virginia or hurricanes hitting the U.S. Gulf Coast, and the pervasive
component of state-level economic    uctuations.
       The value for a monthly indicator tracks the weekly cyclical factor as in (3)

                                 1
       yit =     i [c(mt )]          (ft + ft    1      +        + ft     c(mt )+1 )    +
                            1
                [c(mt )]        (uit + ui;t      1      +        + ui;t    c(mt )+1 )                  if t is the last day of the month,

with uit again characterized by (7).6 For quarterly indicators we have

                                1
        yit =    i [d(qt )]         (ft + ft    1    +          + ft     d(qt )+1 )   +
                           1
                [d(qt )]       (uit + ui;t      1    +          + ui;t     d(qt )+1 )              if t is the last day of the quarter.

    Let nw ; nm ; and nq denote the number of weekly, monthly, and quarterly indicators, respectively,
and n = nw + nm + nq the total number of indicators for each U.S. state. We can write this system
in state-space form in which the state vector is given by

                                                                                                              0
                           t   = (ft ; ft      1 ; :::; ft D+1 ; u1t ; :::; u1;t D+1 ; :::; unt ; un;t pw +1 ) ;                            (8)

with D max(d(q )) denoting the largest number of weeks that a quarter may contain. The law of
motion for the state vector is

                                                    t   =F       t 1    + vt          vt       N (0; R):                                    (9)

Let yt be an observed vector of indicators associated with week t. Note that yt is an (nt 1) vector
where nt = n if t is the last day of a quarter, nt = nw + nm if t is the last week of the month but
   6
    In the empirical application, we postulate that both the common factor and the idiosyncratic terms follow AR(4)
processes to account for the persistence associated with year-over-year growth rates.


                                                                                6
not the last week of a quarter, and nt = nw for all other weeks. The observation equation is given
by
                                           yt = H t t ;                                       (10)

where the number of rows of Ht is given by nt . Note that the matrix Ht that relates the observables
with the state vector varies over time in order to accommodate all the calendar irregularities
concerning the di¤erent number of weeks within a given month or quarter. In addition to the
missing observations that result from the presence of mixed frequencies, missing data also result
from the "ragged edge" at the end of the sample because of the asynchronous timing of data
releases, from occasional incomplete reporting or data-entry errors, and from data series that are
only available for part of the sample period.
    Equation (9) is the state equation and (10) the observation equation for a state-space system.
This allows us to jointly estimate the common factor, the model parameters, and the missing
observations using the Kalman ...lter in a Bayesian setting that is well suited to deal with the high
dimensionality of the state vector. Even though the monthly and quarterly indicators are observed
irregularly, the Kalman ...lter and smoother associated with the state equation give us an estimate
of the weekly value of t for every t:

                                        tjT   = E ( t jyT ; :::; y1 ):

The ...rst element of this vector is the weekly common factor. More details on the estimation
algorithm and the choices of priors are provided in Appendix A.


2.2   A Diverse State-Level Dataset

We compile a diverse set of indicators that span a broad range of weekly, monthly, and quarterly
variables covering numerous aspects of economic life at the state level. We carefully select publicly
available variables from a variety of data categories sampled at di¤erent observational frequencies
and available over di¤erent time periods. We group variables into six broad categories: mobility
measures, labor market indicators, real economic activity, expectations measures, ...nancial indica-
tors, and household indicators. Table 1 summarizes the state-level data used in the construction of
our weekly economic conditions indices, including information on the data frequency, data source,
data transformation, seasonal adjustment, and the start date of each series.
    Mobility measures. Given the shelter-in-place orders and other restrictions on the movements
of people and goods put into place during the pandemic, mobility measures are an important
component to track economic conditions in the recent crisis. Transportation is key for any type
of economic activity and therefore variables capturing the demand for transportation are useful
indicators, even prior to the pandemic. We include information on vehicle miles traveled, which
is based on count data of vehicles on roads and highways, to determine overall tra¢ c volume
at the monthly frequency. Weekly retail gasoline prices are also indicative of the strength for
transportation demand, even though they are only available for a subset of states. A novel measure

                                                      7
of mobility that has gained popularity in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis tracks people'
                                                                                       s movements
via their cellphones. Even though this cellphone mobility index only starts in January 2020, it is
likely to provide useful information during the lockdown and reopening periods.
    Labor market indicators. The richest state-level information pertains to the labor market. We
include weekly jobless claims, both initial and continued. Initial claims are ...led by an unemployed
individual directly after separation from an employer to determine eligibility for the unemployment
insurance program, while continued claims refer to people who have already been deemed eligible
and claim unemployment bene...ts for that week. Total nonfarm employment, the unemployment
rate, and average hours worked in manufacturing are standard monthly variables to characterize
the state of the labor market that have been used in the construction of state-level indices before
(see, e.g., Crone and Clayton-Matthews, 2005). Crone and Clayton-Matthews (2005) point out that
while nonagricultural payroll employment is the most accurate among the employment series, it
may be less representative of economic conditions in states where agriculture is prevalent. Average
weekly hours of production employees in the manufacturing sector can be viewed as a substitute
for industrial output, which does not exist at the state level.
    Real economic activity. The most comprehensive measure of real economic activity is real GDP.
State-level measures of real GDP were introduced only in 2005, are only available at the quarterly
frequency, and become available with a considerable delay. Therefore, we supplement this classical
indicator of the business cycle with monthly and weekly data. Monthly electricity consumption
is a useful indicator of the overall intensity of economic activity since the production of most
goods and services requires electricity (see Arora and Lieskovsky, 2014). We also include monthly
exports of manufactured and non-manufactured commodities, which capture trade             ows and are
thus indicative of a state's economic activity. Some resource-rich states specialize in the production
of primary commodities like coal and oil. For oil-producing states, we use oil rig counts as a weekly
indicator of real activity starting in 1990, and the amount of oil pumped each month from 1986
onward. Coal mining is, or was, an important sector in about half of the U.S. states. While its
importance has varied across states and time, weekly data on coal production go back to 1984 and
thus contain valuable information for aggregate    uctuations over a long period of time.
    Expectations measures. We include four forward-looking variables that should be indicative of
expected economic conditions. Weekly business applications signal the intent of the establishment
of new businesses, while monthly private housing building permits authorize the future construction
of new homes. For a subset of states, we have survey-based indicators about ...rms' perceptions
of broader business activity and households'assessment of their own ...nancial situation as well as
their outlook on the general economy, respectively represented by the monthly manufacturing and
consumer sentiment indices.
    Financial indicators. We consider three ...nancial indicators. The municipal bond yield index
is a broad, market value-weighted index that seeks to measure the performance of bonds issued
within each state. We include both the yield to maturity and the total return. Given that the
municipal bond market provides funding for state and local governments, it allows one to gauge

                                                  8
a state's overall ...scal situation, which is an important determinant of future spending and thus
in uences economic activity (see, e.g., Bi and Marsh, 2020). The real trade-weighted value of the
dollar is the in ation-adjusted value of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of countries to which
a state exports. The exchange rate movements re        ect trade and ...nancial  ows and are tied to
economic conditions since they capture changes in demand for a state'     s exports.
   Household indicators. We use two quarterly series on the asset side of households' balance
sheets as an indicator for their spending behavior. Speci...cally, we include the wage and salary
component of real personal income, as well as the real all-transactions house price index. As a
more direct measure of spending activity, we also include weekly data on credit and debit card
transactions. Galbraith and Tkacz (2018) document the usefulness of electronic payments data for
monthly nowcasts of Canadian GDP and retail sales growth.
    Overall, this dataset provides a suitable mix of di¤erent frequencies and kinds of variables
representative of state economies, while at the same time keeping the model tractable. While the
three quarterly variables (real GDP, house prices, and household income) are available for all states,
there is some diversity in the number and types of variables available at the monthly and weekly
frequencies, which allows us to take state-speci...c features such as resource richness into account.
The average number of series per state is 21, with a minimum of 19 series and a maximum of 24.
The sample period spans from the ...rst week of March 1986 to the last week of February 2021. The
start date is determined by the weekly series on jobless claims, which go furthest back in time and
are available for all 50 states.


2.3    A Set of Weekly Indicators for all 50 U.S. States

The weekly economic conditions indicator, ECI , for state j is obtained as follows:

                                                         0        1 0 P
                                            ECIj = (     j   j)     j yj ;                                     (11)

where j is the median estimate of the (nj 1) vector of factor loadings for the weekly, monthly,
and quarterly variables and yj P is the (n    T ) dataset, with the missing observations for lower-
                                           j
frequency variables replaced by the projected values of the Kalman ...lter. Deriving the state-level
indices by exploiting the cross-sectional dimension not only provides a more robust assessment of
economic conditions,7 but also allows us to study the main determinants of weekly     uctuations in
the ECI s.
    We next illustrate how these composite measures can be used for the purposes of analyzing
developments of economic conditions in each state at the weekly frequency. Speci...cally, in Section
2.3.1, we compare the evolution of cyclical patterns of selected states over time; in Section 2.3.2,
we focus on the severity of the COVID-19 contraction for a subset of states and decompose the
   7
    Relying on a point estimate for the factor loadings along with the observed and model-implied data to obtain the
indices minimizes the e¤ect of revisions to the factor estimates when new information is added. However, generally
the ECI and the common factor are rather close across all states.


                                                         9
weekly indices into the six broad categories de...ned above to determine the main forces behind
the 2020 downturn at the state level; in Section 2.3.3, we track the economic performance across
states during three recessionary periods; and in Section 2.3.4, we make use of our weekly state-level
indices to evaluate the e¤ectiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program.


2.3.1    Monitoring State-Level Economic Conditions

Figure 1 shows the weekly indices of economic conditions for nine selected U.S. states ­New York
representing the Northeast, Florida and South Carolina representing the South Atlantic region,
California representing the West Coast, Idaho representing the Mountain region, Iowa and Michigan
representing the Midwest, and North Dakota and Texas representing the oil-producing states. We
plot indices from the ...rst week of April 1987 through the end of February 2021.8 To facilitate
comparison across states and to put state-level economic conditions into the national context, we
scale the indices to four-quarter growth rates in U.S. real GDP following the method proposed by
Lewis et al. (2020).9 We normalize the indices such that a value of zero indicates that state economic
conditions are comparable to the nation'  s long-run average growth. The gray bars correspond to
recession dates as identi...ed by the NBER.
    The broad cyclical movements of the weekly state-level indices line up well with general trends
in the aggregate economy.10 For all nine states, the recessions of 1990-1991, 2001, 2007-2009, and
2020 are clearly visible, albeit with varying depth and timing, which we will explore further in
Section 2.3.3. For example, North Dakota performed signi...cantly below average in the aftermath
of the 2014 oil price slump after experiencing a boom during the shale oil revolution in 2011-13.
    However, the most striking feature of the ...gure is the dramatic decline in the indices in the
spring of 2020, with Iowa contracting by a staggering 16% below national trend growth, followed
by New York and Michigan at -14%, Florida and South Carolina at -12%, California and Texas at
-10%, North Dakota at -7%, and Idaho at -5%. The trough is reached in most states in the last
week of April 2020. Compared to earlier recessionary episodes, the recovery has been relatively
swift with economic conditions improving considerably in all states by early 2021. But there is still
substantial heterogeneity in the degree of the recovery across states. As an illustration, while Idaho
was back at the long-run national average by October 2020, growth in the other states was more
sluggish, with the indicators still being 1% to 4% below the national trend in February 2021.
   8
     Figure 1A in the appendix displays the indices for the other 41 states over the same period and Figure 2A zooms
in on the cross section of economic conditions indices for all 50 states during the pandemic period.
   9
     Speci...cally, the weekly state-level indices are normalized to match the mean and standard deviation of the
four-quarter growth of real GDP from 1987Q2 to 2020Q4.
  10
     For completeness, we also report the national analogue of the state-level economic conditions indicators in Figure
3A in the appendix and compare it to the Lewis et al. (2020) Weekly Economic Index (WEI). Our U.S. Economic
Conditions Index is constructed based on 25 indicators that are listed in Table 1A which mimic as closely as possible
the state-level dataset.




                                                          10
2.3.2   What are the Main Drivers of the 2020 Downturn Across States?

To fully appreciate the di¤erences across states not just in terms of the depth of the 2020 contraction,
but also in terms of its key drivers, it is useful to take a closer look at the contributions of each
data category to the economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 crisis and to the subsequent
recovery. This decomposition is presented in Figure 2, focusing on the ...rst week of January 2020
to the last week of February 2021 for another set of selected states which are representative with
regard to economic size, geographic coverage, and resource endowment. We include the three
economically largest states ­ California, Texas, New York ­ which are also geographically spread
out. Illinois, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina belong to the next largest tier and round out the
spatial distribution of state economies that carry economic weight. Texas is the nation'     s top crude
oil-producing state, while Oklahoma and Wyoming recently contributed about 4% and 2% to total
U.S. oil production. Among the resource-rich states, Texas has the most well-diversi...ed economy;
Oklahoma also has a good industry mix with the energy sector accounting for about one ...fth of the
state's income, whereas Wyoming'    s economy is heavily concentrated in mining activities. It is also
among the smallest states both in terms of value added and population. Kansas and Oklahoma are
mid-sized states with distinct economic pro...les and represent the center of the country.
    In the early stages of the pandemic, labor market developments were the dominant driver of
the steep decline in economic conditions, while real activity accounted for only a relatively small
share of the slump, except for Wyoming, where the contribution of both is roughly equal. The
dramatic reduction in mobility as a result of widespread lockdown measures from mid-March to
May 2020 further contributed to the deterioration in economic conditions in all selected states but
Oklahoma and Wyoming. Even during the reopening process, transportation measures continued
to exert some downward pressure, mainly on the economies of New York, Pennsylvania, and Illinois.
Expectations are the third most important contributor to the downturn in New York at the peak
of the crisis; they also matter for Pennsylvania and Kansas, albeit to a lesser extent. The role
of variables characterizing household behavior varies somewhat across states, but overall played a
rather limited role.
    There are also interesting di¤erences in the recovery dynamics across states. After bottoming
out in late April, most states started a steady path to recovery, albeit with varying speed. The
breakdown of the weekly indices reveals that a strengthening of the labor market was key to the
improvement of economic conditions. In North Carolina, and to a lesser extent in Illinois and
New York, ...nancial variables were positive contributors during the recovery phase. Oklahoma
experienced a double-dip recession in the second quarter of 2020, but steeply rebounded thereafter,
which can be almost entirely explained by a rapid improvement in the state'      s labor market situation.
In contrast, Kansas gradually recovered until October 2020, but then made a U-turn, with economic
conditions reaching a trough of 8% below national average growth in January 2021, which was the
lowest level across all 50 states. A similar pattern is observed for Illinois, albeit less stark. The main
factor behind this reversal in both states was a second wave of labor market weakness, which was
more persistent in Illinois than in Kansas. While some of the labor market slack brought about by

                                                   11
lockdown measures and economic dislocations was absorbed relatively quickly in the early stages of
the recovery, it remained a major drag on economic conditions in the majority of states. While the
recovery also stalled in Wyoming, the main force keeping economic conditions below the nation'     s
long-run average was the sustained sluggishness in real activity. The two most buoyant states in our
selection are Kansas and North Carolina. In both states the labor market situation has normalized.
While Kansas is on its way to closing the gap, North Carolina was already back at trend level growth
in September 2020, and has since exhibited more standard business cycle     uctuations, determined
by a mix of factors similar to those in the pre-pandemic months.


2.3.3    Tracking State-Level Economic Performance during Recessions

To further explore the cross-sectional variation in the timing of state-level business cycle dynamics,
we summarize the evolution of economic conditions in a heat map for all 50 U.S. states. Blue colors
indicate that the state economy is performing above average with varying growth rates, while
brighter colors from light green to the extreme of red indicate subpar growth with an increasing
degree of economic slack.11 We compare the pattern of state-level economic developments across
three recessionary episodes.
    Figure 3 focuses on the economic contraction associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the
subsequent recovery. It is based on data from the third week of January 2020 to the last week of
February 2021. The period of benign economic conditions across almost all states at the beginning
of 2020 ended abruptly in the third week of March, when all states switched to red. Relative
to earlier recessions, this sharp deterioration in economic conditions was remarkably synchronous
across states. The majority of states remained in the most contractionary phase until the end
of April. The nascent recovery was more heterogeneous across states, with conditions improving
faster in some states than in others. A few states underwent another, milder spell of slowdown in
the summer of 2020 before continuing on their upward trajectory. The ...rst two states to emerge
permanently from the slump were Alaska and Utah in August 2020, followed by Nebraska and
North Carolina in October 2020. Idaho was on a promising path toward the end of the year, but
experienced a weakening in economic conditions in February 2021. In the last quarter of 2020,
about two-thirds of U.S. states entered a second downturn; for most of these states, this downturn
extended into 2021. While widespread, this second episode is less uniform in timing. The two
states with the longest stretch of dire economic conditions are West Virginia and Wyoming, both
of which have been in negative territory since the beginning of 2020.
    To put the current episode into perspective, we also consider the weeks during the worst part
of the Great Recession, from August 2008 to December 2009, in Figure 4. In contrast to the
  11
    Speci...cally, we distinguish between the following 10 categories of economic performance ranging from dark blue to
red: positive and increasing at an increasing rate; positive and increasing at a decreasing rate; positive turning point;
positive and decreasing at a decreasing rate; positive and decreasing at an increasing rate; negative and increasing at
an increasing rate; negative and increasing at a decreasing rate; negative turning point; negative and decreasing at a
decreasing rate; negative and decreasing at an increasing rate.


                                                           12
COVID-19 pandemic, the economic consequences of the ...nancial crisis were much less synchronized
across states. In particular, the indices for several resource-rich states (e.g., Oklahoma, North
Dakota, West Virginia, and Wyoming) remained above the national average for most of the fall of
2008. While the bulk of red was concentrated in early 2009, indicating that the deterioration in
economic conditions was shared by a large number of states, the timing is more scattered. Signs of
improvement in economic conditions started to appear in June 2009, with about one-fourth of the
states having reached their turning point into the recovery phase. There were nevertheless some
short but temporary reversals. Indiana, Michigan, and New Jersey are the only three states that
were continuously on an upward trajectory from August 2009 to the end of the year.
    Figure 5 examines more closely the economic performance across states during the 2001 re-
cession, covering the weeks from January 2001 to June 2002. It is immediately evident that the
early 2000s slowdown was not as pervasive an event as the other two recessions on which we have
focused. In fact, the economic conditions indices for three states ­ Alaska, Maine, and Wyoming
­ were in positive territory throughout the entire period. While the recession was dated to have
begun in March 2001, roughly half of the states were growing above national trend at that time
and about one-...fth continued to do so at least until the summer. On the other hand, 12 states
had already entered the contractionary phase by January 2001 and stayed there until June 2002 or
later. Despite the disparate pattern of state-level economic conditions, the deceleration in growth
is visibly clustered in the fall of 2001. Even after the o¢ cial end of the recession in November 2001,
the return to normal conditions was sluggish, with protracted periods of orange and red colors for
most states. This is in line with evidence presented in Owyang et al. (2005). The state that comes
closest to being the poster child of this recessionary episode is Pennsylvania, where economic condi-
tions worsened considerably in early April 2001 and a path to recovery emerged in early December
of the same year. In sum, the 2001 recession was not only the mildest one in post-WWII history,
but also the most heterogeneous one at the state level.
    A comparison of Figures 3, 4, and 5 highlights one of the unique aspects of the COVID-19
pandemic, in that the collapse in economic conditions was nearly perfectly synchronous across
states, something that is not a feature of prior recessions.


2.3.4   An Evaluation of the E¤ectiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program

In addition to monitoring the high-frequency evolution of economic performance at the state level,
our measures of economic conditions can also be used to assess the e¤ectiveness of various policy
interventions.
    One of the major policy interventions during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic was
the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). The PPP was instituted as part of the CARES Act to
help businesses remain a  oat during the pandemic. Eligible borrowers contracted with certi...ed
private lenders to obtain loans, who were in turn funded by the Small Business Administration
(SBA). Loan amounts were limited to a multiple of an applicant' s payroll expenses. The ...rst round


                                                  13
of PPP loans were made between April 3 and April 16, 2020. The total loan amount disbursed
to companies in the 50 U.S. states from this ...rst round totaled more than $340 billion, with an
average loan volume per state of $6:8 billion. The average individual loan was slightly more than
$200; 000. Relative to the population size of each state, the average loan volume per capita was
$1; 142, with a standard deviation across states of $295, a maximum loan volume per capita of
$2; 010, and a minimum loan per capita of $641.12
    After the ...rst round, the program was subsequently extended, with more loans being made
over the course of the spring and summer of 2020. The program was paused in August of 2020,
but restarted again in January of 2021. In total, almost $1 trillion in loans have been given out
to small businesses. We focus only on the ...rst round of PPP loans made through April 16 of
2020. These loans were arguably unexpected, whereas with extensions and later incarnations of the
program there was likely an expectation that the funds would continue to    ow. As one illustration
of how our state-level indices of economic conditions might be used by researchers, we estimate the
following regression related to PPP loans:
                                   (h)       (h)          (h)              (h)
                   ECIj;t+h =      0     +   1 xj;t   +   2 ECIj;t k   +   3 ECIj;t `   + "j;t+h ;              (12)

where ECIj;t+h is the economic conditions index for state j at time t + h; for h = 0; :::; H; measured
at a weekly frequency. The reference period, t, is taken to be the week ending April 18, 2020. xj;t
is the log of the total loan volume allocated to state j through the completion of the ...rst round
of the PPP program, which ended on April 16, 2020. The loan volume is expressed relative to a
                       (h)
state's population. 1 is the coe¢ cient of interest. By estimating separate regressions for each
horizon h, we can assess the dynamic e¤ects of PPP loans on state-level economic conditions over
time. Estimating separate regressions for di¤erent horizons is a straightforward application of the
Jordà (2005) local projection technique for constructing impulse response functions.
    To control for the potential endogeneity of PPP loans to states, in estimating (12) we control
for two di¤erent lagged values of the economic conditions index. ECIj;t k is meant to control for
economic conditions at the early stages of the pandemic, but prior to the disbursement of PPP
loans. We take k = 2, using the economic conditions index for the week ending April 4, 2020, as a
control. ECIj;t ` is meant to control for economic conditions prior to the onset of the pandemic.
We set ` = 7, using the economic conditions index for the week ending February 29, 2020, as an
additional control. Our results are robust to using other reasonable values of k and `.13
  12
     We retrieve the volume of PPP loans by state from the SBA. State populations are based on estimates for 2019
made by the Census Bureau, and were downloaded here.
  13
     A caveat here is that k needs to be su¢ ciently small so as to capture economic conditions at the state level
during the early stages of the pandemic. Initial PPP loans were negatively correlated with how states fared during
the initial phase of the pandemic, with a correlation between the log of PPP loans disbursed by April 16 and economic
conditions dated April 4 of -0:2. If we drop ECIj;t k from the regression altogether, and only control for economic
                                                       (h)
conditions prior to the pandemic, our estimates of 1 are signi...cantly lower. This is consistent with our prior that
                                                                            (h)
loans were negatively correlated with economic performance. If the true 2 > 0, excluding a control for the initial
                                                                 (h)
severity of the pandemic will bias downward our estimates of 1 .



                                                           14
                                                   (h)
    Panel A of Figure 6 shows the estimated b 1 against the time horizon h, from separately
estimating (12) at successive horizons, going up to October 3 (H = 24). Point estimates are
plotted along with 68 percent con...dence intervals that are constructed using Newey-West standard
errors. Our point estimates reveal that a one percentage point increase in PPP loans per capita
to a state resulted in a 0.03 percentage increase in the state-level economic conditions index on
impact (i.e. the week ending April 18). To put these units into perspective, a 1 percent increase in
loan volume per capita amounts to about $11 per person. So, our estimates suggest that each $500
increment in loan volume per capita translates into a state-level index that is about 1.3 percent
higher.
    The positive impact e¤ect that we estimate persists and remains statistically signi...cant for an
additional two weeks (weeks ending April 25 and May 2). The estimated e¤ect of the initial round
of PPP loans ceases to be statistically signi...cantly positive by May 9, and dips slightly negative
for several weeks in the early summer of 2020, before returning to zero by mid-summer.
    The estimated responses shown in the upper panel of Figure 6 suggest a positive but short-lived
economic impact of the ...rst round of PPP loans. The ...gure demonstrates an important advantage
of our high-frequency indicators. Given that we estimate a positive e¤ect that persists for only
a matter of weeks, a researcher using a lower frequency of the outcome variable might miss the
initial, positive e¤ects of the intervention.
   Our indices are scaled to match four-quarter growth rates in U.S. real GDP, and are therefore
most closely comparable to a state-level growth rate. To get a better sense of the persistent level
e¤ects on state-level economic activity, we estimate an alternative version of (12):
               h
               X                   (h)       (h)          (h)              (h)
                      ECIj;t+q =   0     +   1 xj;t   +   2 ECIj;t k   +   3 ECIj;t `   +   j;t+q ;   (13)
               q =0

where the left-hand-side variable is the cumulative sum of weekly economic conditions up to horizon
h. Panel B of Figure 6 plots the estimated e¤ects of a one-standard-deviation shock to PPP loan
volume per capita against the time horizon h for this speci...cation. Dashed lines denote 68 percent
con...dence intervals. State-level economic conditions improve on impact and continue to improve
for several weeks, with a peak e¤ect of about 2 percent in mid-May. The e¤ect then slowly dies out,
ceasing to be statistically signi...cantly di¤erent from zero by the end of May, with point estimates
very near zero by mid-June.
     Our results are broadly in line with existing evidence. In particular, Bartik et al. (2020) show
that states that received the least in PPP funds had the lowest trough in hours worked and slower
recoveries relative to states who received more initial PPP funding. Similarly, Chetty et al. (2020)
report that PPP loans stimulated employment at small businesses by about 2 percent. Hubbard
and Strain (2020) conclude that PPP funding has considerably improved the employment situation,
...nancial health, and survival chances of small businesses. Granja et al. (2020) also ...nd a small
but positive e¤ect of PPP loan disbursement on a variety of micro-level economic indicators.


                                                          15
3         The Role of States in National Recessions

To establish a link between the business cycle dynamics of state economies and the national econ-
omy, we ...t a regime-switching model to the weekly common component obtained with the dynamic
factor model for each state.14 Owyang, Piger, and Wall (2005) also apply a Markov-switching
model to state-level coincident indices to compute monthly recession probabilities and study ex-
pansionary and recessionary phases of individual states. In contrast to their approach, we allow
the depth of recessions and expansions to vary over time, which is a particularly useful feature
given the severity of the two most recent contractionary episodes. Moreover, we provide state-level
recession probabilities at the weekly frequency based on indices that cover additional dimensions
of state economies. We also propose an aggregate indicator that allows us to gauge the overall
weakness of the U.S. economy.


3.1        A Markov-Switching Model with Heterogeneous Recessions and Expansions

This section describes the model framework that we use to construct the Economic Weakness
Index for the U.S. economy as a whole. The procedure follows Leiva-León, Pérez-Quirós, and Rots
(2021) and consists of two steps that provide a simple-to-compute and easy-to-interpret index that
measures the state of the aggregate economy in a timely fashion along with its underlying sources.
In the ...rst step, the common component of the estimated weekly state-level economic conditions
indices are used to compute the time-varying recession probabilities associated with each U.S.
state. In the second step, the estimated recession probabilities for each state are aggregated based
on the relative economic size of each state. This composite time-varying probability constitutes
our proposed Economic Weakness Index (EWI). In what follows, we provide a detailed description
of the two steps employed to compute the EWI.
         Step 1: Computing recession probabilities
    Let ft be the common factor associated with a given U.S. state. The aim is to decompose ft
into two components, the mean, t , and a noise term, "t . In doing so, it is assumed that there are
two states of the economy, de...ned by the binary latent variable st = f0; 1g: If the economy is in
its 1 -th expansionary regime at time t, then st = 1 and E (ft ) = 1; 1 , for t 2 1 . Instead, if the
economy is in its 0 -th recessionary regime at time t, then st = 0 and E (ft ) = 0; 0 , for t 2 0 .
This implies that we allow each expansion and recession to be of unique magnitude and account
for the evolving heterogeneity of both regimes over time. Accordingly, the dynamics of ft can be
    14
    This two-step approach was ...rst proposed by Diebold and Rudebusch (1996), where the ...rst step relies on a
linear factor model to construct a coincident indicator that is then used in a second step to compute Markov-switching
probabilities to determine business cycle turning points. Estimating a Markov-switching dynamic factor model in one
step is a useful alternative for identifying turning points, but not so much for deriving composite indices of economic
activity, especially when working with annual growth rates. However, Camacho et al. (2015) show that when the
economic indicators are carefully selected, the two methods do not di¤er much in their ability to track business cycles.




                                                          16
described as follows:
                                                                                                             2
                              ft =   0;   0
                                              (1     st ) +     1;   1
                                                                         s t + "t               "t   N (0;   ")       (14)

where the mean component is de...ned by the regime-dependent means and the latent variable
indicating the state of the economy, t = 0; 0 (1 st ) + 1; 1 st . Our modelling approach for
ft builds on the time-varying regime-dependent means model of Eo and Kim (2016). In their
setting, they constrain 0; 0 and 1; 1 to exhibit time dependence through random walks. This
assumption could be highly restrictive when applying the model to a rapidly, and substantially,
changing economic environment, as is the case for measuring weekly economic conditions during
the COVID-19 period. Therefore, we relax this assumption by letting the magnitudes associated
with all recessions and expansions be independent, that is, cov ( ; ; ; j ) = 0; 8j , for = 0; 1.15
This feature allows the model to ...t business cycle dynamics involving any sequence of expansions
and recessions of either small or extreme magnitudes.
     The variable governing the business cycle, st , is assumed to follow a two-state Markov chain
de...ned by transition probabilities:

                                                   Pr(st = i j st          1   = j ) = pij :                          (15)

Since there are only two states, these probabilities can be summarized by the chance of remaining
in expansion, p, and the chance of remaining in recession, q .
    The model is estimated with Bayesian methods, assuming as priors Normal distributions for
                                                                               2
 0; 0 and 1; 1 , Beta distributions for p and q , and a Gamma distribution for " . Inference on
st is performed by relying on the algorithm implemented in Kim and Nelson (1999), which is an
adaptation of the Carter and Kohn (1994) algorithm.16
       Step 2: Aggregating recession probabilities
    The EWI is constructed as a weighted average of the recession probabilities of all individual
states. Since the models are estimated in a Bayesian fashion, we can generate many replications
                                                                                   (l )
associated with the realization of recessionary episodes for each state, that is, s ;t for = 1; :::; K ,
and l = 1; :::; L, where K = 50 is the number of U.S. states and L = 10; 000 is the number of
retained draws. Consequently, the lth replication of the EWI is given by:
                                                                         K
                                                                         X
                                                              (l)                       (l)
                                                     EW It =                   !    ;t s ;t ;                         (16)
                                                                          =1

where ! ;t denotes the time-varying weight for each U.S. state. These weights are based on the
evolving economic size of each state relative to national real GDP. The collection of all the replica-
            (l) =L
tions fEW It gl l=1 constitutes the simulated density of the weakness index at time t. Based on this
posterior density, we can compute point estimates along with any percentiles for risk assessment.
  15
    For identi...cation purposes, 0; 0 ( 1; 1 ) is truncated so that it can only take negative (positive) values (see, e.g.,
Hamilton and Owyang, 2012).
 16
    For additional details on the sampling algorithm, see Leiva-León et al. (2021).


                                                                     17
3.2    Economic Weakness Index

Panel A of Figure 7 shows the median estimate of the Economic Weakness Index. The EWI can
be interpreted as the share of states that are facing a recession in any given week over the period
April 4, 1987 to present. The gray shaded areas represent periods of national recessions designated
by the NBER. Given that recession start and end dates are usually determined many months after
the fact, we also include the dates when recessions were called by the NBER. The black dashed
lines indicate the week of the announcement of the peak month, and the blue dotted lines indicate
the week of the announcement of the trough month. Note that the NBER announcement dates are
always well after the beginning and the end of the four recessionary episodes in our sample.17
    The EWI generally lines up well with o¢ cial NBER-dated recessions. Furthermore, its mag-
nitude accurately re  ects the severity of the di¤erent recessionary episodes, with the 1990/91 and
2001 recessions being milder and less pervasive compared to the Great Recession and the COVID-
19 recession; these results are in line with the earlier evidence presented in the heatmaps.18 While
the EWI tends to rise steeply before the o¢ cial start dates for all four recessions in the sample,
it remains elevated for some time after the NBER dates these recessions to have ended, indicating
that a considerable fraction of the country is still experiencing slow growth.
    It is also interesting to explore to what extent our probability-based weakness indicator can be
used for dating business cycles. This requires some formal rule that involves a threshold for when
to call and date a turning point. If we were to apply the decision rule proposed by Chauvet and
Hamilton (2006) to our EWI,19 we would always call the beginning of a recession earlier than the
NBER. We would also be fairly accurate in dating the start of three out of four recessions, falling
short of the NBER peak month only by a few weeks. The exception is the Financial Crisis, where
the EWI lagged the start date of the Great Recession by eight months. While we would have
called the end of two out of three recessions around the same time as the NBER, the EWI misses
the turning point and thus is not useful for determining the end date of recessionary periods, at
least not based on this particular rule.20 The fact that the EWI would date recessions as lasting
substantially longer than the NBER is a feature that we share with Hamilton and Owyang (2012),
whose framework relies on monthly state employment growth. While some of this sluggishness
is inherent in the fact that we are using annual growth rates, the likely economic reason for the
protracted nature of recovery periods is the phenomenon of jobless recoveries (see, e.g., Koenders
and Rogerson, 2005; Jaimovich and Siu, 2020) given that labor market variables form an important
part of our state-level economic conditions indicators.
  17
     At the time of this writing, the NBER has not yet declared the COVID-19 recession to be over.
  18
     See also the depth and severity measures for U.S. recessions reported in Diebold (2020).
  19
     Chauvet and Hamilton'   s (2006) decision rule to call and date recessions works as follows: when their index exceeds
0.66, they call a recession and date it to have started when the index ...rst exceeded 0.5; the end of the recession is
called when their index drops below 0.33 and dated when the index fell below 0.5 for the ...rst time. One important
di¤erence is that their analysis is fully real time, while ours is based on full-sample estimates.
  20
     Designing an appropriate rule inevitably involves some judgement and is best based on the past performance of
the indicator itself. We leave such an analysis for future research.


                                                           18
    Prolonged weakness was expected at the end of February 2021 according to the 52-week-ahead
projection of the EWI shown as the red dotted line in Figure 7, panel A. This seems to con...rm
the role of jobless recoveries given that the labor market was at the core of the recent crisis. In
fact, Chetty et al. (2020) anticipate another jobless recovery from the pandemic-induced recession
because job losses in sectors that have been hit hard by the health crisis, such as leisure and
hospitality, might persist for a long time. Applying the same decision rule as above to the projected
path suggests that we would still be in recession in February 2022. Given the new information that
has arrived since, the economy remaining in recession until 2022 seems highly unlikely, but was not
unexpected at the time considering the past performance of the EWI.
    The picture changes dramatically when we include more recent data. Panel B of Figure 7
provides real-time updates of the EWI at the end of March (blue line), April (green line), and May
(black line). While the evolution of the EWI in the ...rst two weeks of March is closely aligned
with the expected path as of February 27, 2021, the situation improves much faster thereafter
with the EWI falling to 0.62 by the end of April relative to the forecasted 0.77. In the ...rst week
of May, we observe a steep decline in economic weakness, which would lead us to declare that
the COVID-19 recession ended on May 8, 2021.21 This acceleration of growth is consistent with
rising vaccination rates which considerably lower the risk of infections, which enables ...rms to
resume normal operations and consumers to make up for subdued spending. Contrary to earlier
assessements, this seems to suggest that we are not in a situation of structural reallocation, but
rather a year of pent-up demand which is likely to bene...t service sectors like travel, leisure, and
hospitality. The predicted trajectory at the end of May signals a stable environment of low economic
weakness over the next year. This once again illustrates the bene...ts of using high-frequency data
to obtain a timely assessment of the current state of the national economy.


3.2.1    Drivers of National Weakness

To get a better sense of the role of the labor market in contributing to national weakness relative
to other factors, Figure 8 presents a decomposition of the weekly EWI into its main driving forces.
Panel A displays the relative importance of each data category for periods of economic weakness
for the entire sample period, while panel B focuses on the COVID-19 episode.22
    The decomposition shows that the labor market accounts for only a modest share in the build-up
of economic weakness in most recessions, with the COVID-19 recession being a notable exception,
where the labor market was the major contributor from the beginning. In the early stages of the
  21
     This time the signal of our weakness indicator would precede the NBER announcement of the trough month.
The Chauvet-Hamilton algorithm already called the end of the recession on January 28, 2021 and dated it to have
ended in the second quarter of 2020 (see here). See Figure 4A in the appendix for the updated EWI in historical
context.
  22
     While it might seem surprising that we report the contribution of data categories for which data are not available
for the entire sample period (e.g. mobility), we take advantage of the Kalman smoother which replaces missing
observations with optimal estimates. Thus, one can interpret this exercise as a counterfactual that shows what the
contribution of these categories would have been had those data existed.


                                                          19
1990 downturn as well as the Great Recession, expectations and household indicators were the
most important drivers of national weakness, whereas real activity and household indicators were
the key contributors during the early 2000s slowdown. During these three episodes, the relative
contribution of the labor market gradually increased and typically plateaus toward the end of a
recession. When real activity, household spending, and expectations start improving, it tends to
be the labor market that keeps economic weakness elevated well after the turning point, which is
in line with the idea of jobless recoveries. Compared to the other categories of variables, ...nancials
play a relatively modest role in all of these recessions. Measures of mobility make a fairly constant
contribution over time. Interestingly, in spite of widespread lockdown orders, mobility variables do
not seem to play an outsized role in the COVID downturn, even though they are temporarily more
relevant than in earlier episodes. Together with labor market variables they drive almost all of the
initial uptick in the EWI at the beginning of the pandemic in the spring of 2020. Expectations
were relatively unimportant throughout this episode. The relative contribution of real activity and
household indicators increases slightly as the pandemic drags on. Most of the reduction in the EWI
since the fall of 2020 comes from improving labor market conditions.


3.2.2      Other Sources of Weakness

Figure 9 considers a set of non-model-based criteria for classifying the sources of national economic
weakness. Panel A provides a geographical breakdown based on the nine census divisions. Not
surprisingly, the Paci...c, East North Central, Mid- and South Atlantic divisions are the main
contributors to the national cycle, which makes sense given that they carry a lot of economic
weight. Although the Mountain, West North Central, and East South Central divisions account for
about half of the contiguous area of the US, they do not make much of a di¤erence for economic
weakness. Overall, the contributions of the di¤erent geographic regions to the EWI are fairly stable
across recessionary episodes.
    Panel B decomposes the EWI according to the degree of economic diversi...cation across states.
We measure diversi...cation using the Hachman Index. The Hachman Index measures the employ-
ment diversity of a given state relative to the US as a whole. The index takes values between 0 and
1, with values closer to 0 indicating greater industrial specialization and values closer to 1 a more
diverse industrial composition similar to the US.23 We group states into three di¤erent categories
based on the time-varying distribution of diversi...cation across states ­ low diversi...cation (lower
  23
       The monthly Hachman Index (HI) is computed as follows:
                                                    "        !      #!      1
                                                XN        S
                                                        Ei;t    S
                                        HIt =             US
                                                               Ei;t
                                                i=1
                                                       Ei;t
           S                                                               US
where Ei;t    is the employment share in industry i of state S at time t, Ei;t is the employment share in industry i for
the U.S. economy at time t, and N is the number of industries. The index is based on the following eight industry
classi...cations for which employment data are available from FRED at both the state and national levels from January
1990 onward: construction, ...nancial activities, information, manufacturing, mining and logging, private services, real
estate, and total government (see also Bokun et al., 2020).


                                                          20
third), intermediate diversi...cation (middle third), and high diversi...cation (upper third). While a
low level of diversi...cation should make states more vulnerable to cyclical   uctuations, their contri-
bution to the total EWI is limited because more specialized states tend to be economically small. In
contrast, the more diversi...ed states are also larger in economic size and thus drive economic weak-
ness at the national level. In the four recessions in our sample, high and intermediate diversi...cation
states contribute about equally to the overall EWI.
    Panel C sorts states by their resource richness. We classify states as "No Resources" if their
monthly mining plus logging share of nonfarm employment is lower than 0.25 percent and as
"Resource Intensive" if this share exceeds 1 percent. States with a mining share between 0.25 and
0.5 percent belong to "Low Resources," and between 0.5 and 1 percent to "Intermediate Resources."
In all recessions, the contributions of di¤erent states to the EWI is roughly inversely related to their
resource intensity. In particular, states categorized as "No Resources" account for the bulk of the
movements in the EWI in the early stages of a recessionary phase, typically followed by "Low
Resources" states. "Resource Intensive" states seem more resilient when economic weakness is
building up, but account for a larger share of the EWI later in a recession. "Intermediate Resource"
states play only a minor role.
    Panel D shows the contributions of states depending on how they voted in each presidential
election. Switches in political positions across states are recorded during inauguration week. The
contributions to the EWI re   ect a combination of voting shares and economic importance of states.
For example, the EWI during and immediately after the 1990-1991 recession was primarily driven
by states that had voted for the Republican party. Instead, the Great Recession appears to have
been dominated by Democratic-voting states. There is a roughly equal split between Republican-
and Democratic-voting states in contributing to the early 2000s and COVID-19 recessions.


3.2.3   Risk Analysis

It is useful to look at the entire distribution of economic weakness to obtain a probabilistic as-
sessment of the build-up of risks. Figure 10 shows the weekly evolution of risks over a two-year
period from February 2019 to February 2021. Throughout 2019, economic weakness is low with
the densities concentrated around a mode of 0.1 or less, placing essentially no mass on values of
the EWI above 0.25. Moving into early 2020, these densities gradually shift to the right attaching
increasingly more weight to downside risks. By the middle of March 2020, the density signals
mounting risks of widespread economic weakness, with the share of states facing a contraction be-
tween 50% and 60%. One week later, the likelihood of entering a phase of high national weakness
rises further, with the density assigning considerable weight to the possibility that at least 75%
of the states will experience a recession. The week thereafter, all mass essentially piled up near
one and risks remained elevated for the remainder of the year. By the end of February 2021, risks
had not substantially subsided. This analysis illustrates how the time-varying densities of the EWI
could be used in real time for risk assessment to inform policymakers.


                                                  21
3.3     The Economic Geography of Recession Probabilities

To get a better sense of the geographic dimension in the relationship between state and national
business cycles, we explore the spatial distribution of weekly recession probabilities of individual
states for three selected episodes. We consider the Great Recession, the oil price decline of 2014-16,
and the COVID-19 recession. Figure 11 presents maps for the 48 contiguous states where shades of
green indicate low recession probabilities and shades of red indicate high recession probabilities.24


3.3.1    The Great Recession

The period in the run-up to the Great Recession was characterized by a sharp reversal of the house
price boom in 2006 and ensuing trouble in the banking sector. In June 2008, the U.S. stock market
plunged but oil was still trading at a historic high of $140 a barrel. The snapshot for the last week of
June reported in Panel A of Figure 11 shows that 16 states, among which many were oil-producing
states, were still in expansion with recession probabilities smaller than 0.3. Even though the NBER
later deemed the recession to have begun in December 2007, only 13 states were in recession in June
2008 and another eight were on the brink of recession. The states with the weakest economies at
the time include Florida, California, and Arizona, three states hit particularly hard by the housing
market bust.
    Between the second and fourth quarter of 2008, we observe a gradual increase in recession
probabilities across states, ...rst spreading along both coasts before gravitating inland. After months
of holding the interest rate steady at 2%, the Federal Reserve lowered the policy rate to 1.5% at its
October meeting and the IMF warned of a systemic meltdown of the global ...nancial system. These
events coincided with a few more states falling into recession, for a total of 27 in the last week of
October 2008. The states that were still withstanding the downturn were mainly oil producers,
even though oil prices had started to decline. The deterioration of economic conditions accelerated
thereafter, with 40 states being in recession by the time that the NBER called the recession in early
December 2008.
    The ...rst half of 2009 was the most contractionary phase of the Great Recession, with almost
all states being in recession throughout this period. What is noteworthy is that, according to our
model, all states still had a recession probability of 1 until August 2009, despite the fact that the
end of the national recession was dated June 2009 by the NBER. However, this seems to be in
line with an assessment made by the FOMC committee that described the situation at the end of
June 2009 as one where "(h)ousehold spending has shown further signs of stabilizing but remains
constrained by ongoing job losses, lower housing wealth, and tight credit [and] (b)usinesses are
cutting back on ...xed investment and sta¢ ng."25
  24
     A movie showing the week-by-week evolution of recession probabilities for the entirety of the three episodes is
available here. Figure 11 is showing frames from this movie for selected weeks.
  25
     See here for the press release of the FOMC statement.




                                                        22
    The snapshot in mid-May 2010 illustrates that the recovery took hold in the second quarter of
2010, with 21 states in expansion and 5 more with a recession probability of less than 40%. The
lingering e¤ects of the housing crisis were concentrated on the West Coast and in Florida, with
those states still performing poorly. Despite the rebound in energy prices, some oil-producing states
were sluggish to recover.
    Overall, Panel A shows that the Great Recession, while severe at the aggregate level, was not
as synchronous across states as one might expect.


3.3.2   The 2014-16 Oil Price Slump

Another interesting episode is the prolonged decline in oil prices that started in the second half of
2014 and persisted until early 2016. Given the increased importance of the U.S. shale oil sector,
oil-producing states were likely to be negatively a¤ected, whereas others might have bene...tted
from lower energy prices. However, there is also the possibility that lower investment by oil states
could spill over to other states that produce machinery and other equipment for the oil industry,
slowing growth nationwide. While many observers expected lower oil prices to boost aggregate
growth, Baumeister and Kilian (2016) show that the net stimulus for the U.S. economy as a whole
was close to zero. We explore the spatial pattern of this ...nding.
    In the last week of July 2014, oil prices stood at $104 before starting their descent to the ...rst
trough of $45; this trough was reached in the last week of January 2015. Panel B of Figure 11
shows that in July 2014 the majority of U.S. states were in the dark green territory with recession
probabilities below 0.1, except for Minnesota, which had been contracting since the beginning of the
year. While Minnesota'    s economy is relatively diversi...ed, its energy-intensive agricultural sector
is a major part of its value added, in particular as it relates to the production of ethanol biofuels.
One possible factor in Minnesota'   s poor performance during this period is the fact that ethanol
prices plunged in early 2014 while oil prices were at record levels.
    When oil prices bottomed out at the end of January 2015, Wyoming ­which is heavily reliant on
fracking and whose economic performance had been deteroriating from week to week since November
2014 ­ entered into recession alongside Minnesota. The only other state showing incipient signs
of weakness was Nebraska. Like Minnesota, Nebraska is an important producer of fuel ethanol.
Over the course of the year, more and more oil-producing states started experiencing di¢ culties.
By early February 2016, when oil prices fell below $30, Panel B shows that states like Louisiana,
North Dakota, New Mexico, and West Virginia ­all of whom had initially weathered the oil price
slump ­were now in contraction. Other oil-producing states such as Texas, Oklahoma, Colorado,
and Montana were, however, resilient throughout this entire episode.
    There is little evidence for spillovers across states ­states adjacent to oil-producing states did
just as well as states without geographic contiguity over this time period. Taken together, the oil
price decline caused some heterogeneity in state-level business cycles with energy-dependent states



                                                  23
in the Great Plains and along the Gulf Coast performing rather poorly while the rest of the country
was in expansion.


3.3.3   The COVID-19 Recession

The outbreak of the global pandemic was a cataclysmic event that pushed the U.S. economy into
collapse in the second half of March 2020, all within a matter of a few weeks. Panel C of Figure
11 tracks the evolution of state-level recession probabilities in three consecutive weeks starting
with the week ending on March 14, 2020. In mid-March, many states were performing quite well,
with 18 states having recession probabilities of less than 40%, even though there were scattered
initial signs of weakness with 11 states already in recession. In the following week, as the public
health crisis unfolded, the deterioration of economic conditions ran rampant with a widespread
jump in recession probabilities, more than tripling the number of states in recession. The economic
shutdown took hold in the last week of March, when another 10 states switched into recession. By
the end of the ...rst week of April 2020, all states were in recession. What stands out most from this
sequence of maps is the extreme degree of synchronization across states in the pandemic recession.
This synchronization of state-level business cycles, particularly in the early stages of a downturn,
is not a feature of earlier episodes.
    In sum, the analysis of these three episodes underscores the heterogeneity in geographic patterns
across events and the value of a high-frequency assessment of economic developments at the state
level.


4    Conclusions

Economic conditions at the state level are a key determinant for the national business cycle. In this
paper we developed a novel dataset of weekly economic conditions indices for the 50 U.S. states
going back to 1987. Our indices are based on mixed-frequency dynamic factor models with weekly,
monthly, and quarterly variables that cover multiple features of state economies going beyond tra-
ditional indicators. We illustrated the usefulness of these indices by studying the weekly evolution
of economic conditions across states for several recessionary episodes and by quantifying the con-
tribution of each data category to the economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 crisis and the
subsequent recovery. We showed that there is considerable heterogeneity across space and time of
state-level business cycle dynamics, except for the economic collapse associated with the COVID-19
pandemic, which was an unusually uniform event. We also studied the geographic distribution of
state-speci...c expansionary and recessionary phases and proposed an economic weakness index that
connects state economies to the national economy by aggregating the state-level information about
recession probabilities.
   Being able to track economic developments at the state level and knowing the probability of
entering a recession on a week-by-week basis should be valuable for state policymakers to take

                                                 24
targeted actions earlier in an e¤ort to counteract contractionary tendencies, especially in turbulent
economic times. Particularly useful for this purpose is the decomposition to identify which segment
of the state economy is the main source of economic weakness to tailor policy measures accordingly.
Understanding cross-state di¤erences in economic performance within one country is also useful for
understanding aggregate dynamics and for informing federal policymaking.
    Our dataset o¤ers many promising avenues for applications in a variety of areas. One interest-
ing question for future research is to what extent the forecasting performance of macroeconomic
variables at the national level can be improved by augmenting standard forecasting models with our
high-frequency state-level information. Studying di¤erences in cross-state dynamics in response to
macroeconomic shocks such as energy price shocks, technological innovation, the di¤usion of news
shocks, changes in economic policy uncertainty, and exchange rate shocks could help uncover eco-
nomic mechanisms at work in shock transmission. Exploiting the cross-sectional and/or time-series
variation of our state-level indices should also improve our understanding of the e¤ectiveness of var-
ious nationwide policy interventions. Given the weekly frequency of our dataset, it is also possible
to study the responses of state economies to high-frequency surprises using instruments or proxies
derived from policy or macroeconomic announcements or narrative sources. This is particularly
useful if the e¤ects are short-lived and aggregation to lower frequencies might result in masking
potentially signi...cant e¤ects.




                                                 25
A         A Dynamic Factor Model with Three Mixed Frequencies

Let = ( q ; m ; w ; q ; m ; w ; q ; m ; w ; )0 be a vector containing all the parameters involved
in the dynamic factor model described by equations (5)-(7) in Section 2.1, where superscripts
q; m; and w indicate parameters associated with quarterly, monthly, and weekly indicators. In
particular, q            q          q
               i = ( i;1 ; :::; i;pq ) ,
                                          0     m         m       m      0
                                                j = ( j;1 ; :::; j;pm ) and
                                                                                    w       w         w      0
                                                                                    k = ( k;1 ; :::; k;pw ) contain the
autoregressive coe¢ cients of the idiosyncratic terms associated with ith quarterly, j th monthly
and k th weekly variables, respectively, and q                  m           w
                                                           i , j , and k denote the corresponding innovation
variances. Accordingly, we have that q = ( 1 ; :::; i ; :::; q  q        q            0
                                                                                  nq ) ,
                                                                                          m
                                                                                             = ( m             m         m 0
                                                                                                    1 ; :::; j ; :::; nm )
                                                                                                       q        q        q
and w = ( w               w          w 0
                1 ; :::; k ; :::; nw ) for the autoregressive coe¢ cients, and
                                                                                              q = ( ; :::;
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                i ; :::; nq ) ,
  m = ( m ; :::; m ; :::; m )0 and w = ( w ; :::; w ; :::; w )0 for the innovation variances. Similarly,
         1        j         nm                       1        k      nw
the factor loadings linking the quarterly, monthly, and weekly variables with the common factor
ft are collected in q = ( q                 q      q 0
                                 1 ; :::; i ; :::; nq ) ,
                                                           m
                                                              =( m          m         m 0
                                                                   1 ; :::; j ; :::; nm ) ,
                                                                                             w
                                                                                               =( w            w         w 0
                                                                                                     1 ; :::; k ; :::; nw ) ,
respectively. The autoregressive coe¢ cients of the common factor are collected in = ( 1 ; :::; pf )0 .
    Let Y = [y1 ; y2 ; :::; yT ] denote the entire set of information on the data of economic variables
at the quarterly, monthly, and weekly frequencies, in that order. t is the state vector de...ned
in (8) that collects all the latent variables in the model. The Bayesian method used to estimate
the proposed dynamic factor model is based on the Gibbs sampler and can be summarized into
two broad steps. First, generate a draw of t , conditional on and Y. Second, generate a draw
of , conditional on t and Y. These two steps are sequentially repeated for a large number of
iterations.26 The collection of those draws constitutes the posterior density associated with each
element of the model. From these posterior densities, point estimates of the parameters and latent
variables, along with the corresponding credible sets, can be easily obtained. In what follows, we
describe in detail each steps of the estimation algorithm and the chosen priors.

    1. Sample latent variables
         Conditional on the parameters and the data Y, the Carter and Kohn (1994) algorithm
         is used to generate inferences on t by using the state-space representation (9)-(10). The
         time-varying matrix of coe¢ cients corresponding to the observation equation is given by
                                                     2      3
                                                       Hq t
                                                     6      7
                                               Ht = 4 Hm t 5;
                                                                    Hw
                                                                     t

         where the ...rst entry     contains the rows associated with indicators at the quarterly frequency,
              2 q                                                                                                 3
                                                10
                          0          0            [d(qt )]  0                0          0           0
              6 d(qqt ) 1[d(qt )]   0[D d(qt )] d(qt ) 0[D d(qt )]          0[d(qt )] 0[D d(qt )] 0[Cnm +pw nw ] 7
                    1

              6 2 0                  0            0         0                                                     7
              6 d(qt ) 1[d(qt )]    0[D d(qt )] 0[d(qt )] 0[D d(qt )]       00          0           0
                                                                             [d(qt )] 0[D d(qt )] 0[Cnm +pw nw ] 7
         Hq = 6                                                                                                   7:
          t   6         .
                        .                           .
                                                    .                  ..                  .
                                                                                           .                      7
              6         .                           .                     .                .                      7
              4 q                                                           10
                                                                                                                  5
                   nq     0         00            0         0                [d(qt )]   0           0
                 d(qt ) 1[d(qt )]    [D d(qt )] 0 [d(qt )] 0[D d(qt )]       d(qt )   0 [D d(qt )] 0[Cnm +pw nw ]
  26
       In the empirical application, we use 12; 000 iterations and discard the ...rst 2; 000 to ensure convergence.


                                                              26
       Recall that d(q ) indicates the number of weeks falling in quarter q and D max(d(q )) denotes
       the largest number of weeks in a quarter. Similarly, c(m) indicates the number of weeks falling
       in month m and C max(c(m)) denotes the largest number of weeks in a month.27
       The second entry of Ht contains the rows associated with monthly indicators,
             2                                                                                                      3
                   m                                 10
                        1  0      00                  [c(mt )]
                                                               00               00           0           0
                                                                                 [c(mt )] 0[C c(mt )] 0[pw nw ]
                   1
             6 c(m   t ) [c(mt )]  [D(1+nq ) c(mt )]  c(mt )    [C c(mt )]                                          7
             6 2 0 m                                                                                                7
             6 c(mt ) 1[c(mt )] 00                    0         0
                                   [D(1+nq ) c(mt )] 0[c(mt )] 0[C c(mt )]      00           0           0
                                                                                 [c(mt )] 0[C c(mt )] 0[pw nw ]     7
        m
       Ht = 66                                                                                                      7;
                         .
                         .                               .
                                                         .                 ..                   .
                                                                                                .                   7
             6           .                               .                    .                 .                   7
             4 m                                                                10                                  5
                    m      0       0                  0         0                [ c(m   )]
                                                                                            00           0
                c(mt ) 1[c(mt )] 0[D(1+nq ) c(mt )] 0[c(mt )] 0[C c(mt )]                    [C c(mt )] 0[pw nw ]
                  n                                                                    t
                                                                                 c(mt )

       while the third entry refers to the rows associated with indicators at the weekly frequency,
                                        2                                   3
                                             w     0
                                                 0
                                        6 1
                                                         q       m
                                                   [D(n +1)+Cn +pw n   w 1]
                                                                            7
                                        6 w      0 0                        7
                                        6    2     [ D (nq +1)+Cnm +p nw 1] 7
                                 Hw t =6
                                                                     w
                                                                            7:
                                        6 .  .                              7
                                        4 .                                 5
                                            w      0
                                            nw 0[D(nq +1)+Cnm +pw nw 1]


       The matrix of coe¢ cients corresponding to the state equation can be de...ned as follows,
                          2 f                                                     3
                             F
                          6                                                       7
                          6       Fq1                                             7
                          6                                                       7
                          6            ..                                         7
                          6               .                                       7
                          6                                                       7
                          6                  q
                                            Fnq                   [0]             7
                          6                                                       7
                          6                                                       7
                          6                      Fm1                              7
                      F =66                                                       7;
                                                       ..                         7
                          6                               .                       7
                          6                                                       7
                          6                                  m
                                                            Fnm                   7
                          6                                                       7
                          6                                                       7
                          6                 [0]                   Fw1             7
                          6                                                       7
                          6                                            ..         7
                          4                                               .       5
                                                                             w
                                                                            Fnw
       where the entry that contains the law of motion of the common factor is given by
                         2                                                            3
                              1          2            pf                00 [ D pq ]
                         6                                                            7
                         6 1           0              0                 0  0          7
                         6                                                 [ D pq ] 7
                         6 .            .       ..    .                       .       7
                         6 . .          .
                                        .          .  .
                                                      .                       .
                                                                              .       7
                         6                                                            7
                         6                                                 0          7
                         6  0          0              1                 0             7
                   F =6
                     f
                         6
                                                                           [ D  p q ] 7:
                         6
                                       0
                                     0 [p q ]              1           0[D pq 1] 7
                                                                         0
                                                                                      7
                         6                                                            7
                         6          00                        1        0 0            7
                         6           [pq +1]                             [D pq 2] 7
                         6              .                        ..           .       7
                         6              .
                                        .                           .         .
                                                                              .       7
                         4                                                            5
                                      00
                                       [pq +(D   pq 2)]                             1          0
27
     The terms 0[a] and 1[b] denote vectors of zeros and ones of size a and b, respectively.


                                                           27
       The entries that involve the autoregressive coe¢ cients of the idiosyncratic terms are given by
                         2                                                               3
                             q           q              q                       0
                                                                              0
                         6 i;1           i;2            i;pq                    [ D pq ]
                                                                                         7
                         6 1            0               0                     0 0        7
                         6                                                      [ D pq ] 7
                         6 .             .        ..     .                         .     7
                         6 .             .           .   .                         .     7
                         6 .             .               .                         .     7
                         6                                                      0        7
                         6   0          0               1                     0          7
                    q
                   Fi = 66                                                      [ D pq ] 7
                                      00                      1              00          7;
                         6              [p q ]                                [D pq 1] 7
                         6                                                               7
                         6           00                           1          00          7
                         6            [pq +1]                                 [D pq 2] 7
                         6               .                           ..            .     7
                         6               .
                                         .                              .          .
                                                                                   .     7
                         4                                                               5
                                     00
                                      [pq +(D   pq 2)]                                                    1        0

       for the ith quarterly indicator, by
                                       2                                                                      3
                                                m            m                m
                                                j;1          j;2              j;pm        00
                                                                                           [C        pm ]
                                         6                                                                    7
                                         6      1         0                   0           00                  7
                                         6                                                 [C        pm ]     7
                                   Fm
                                    j   =6      .         .         ..        .                  .            7;
                                         6      .
                                                .         .
                                                          .              .    .
                                                                              .                  .
                                                                                                 .            7
                                         4                                                                    5
                                                0         0                   1           00
                                                                                           [C        pm ]

       for the j th monthly indicator, and by
                                           2             w          w                     w
                                                                                                     3
                                                         k;1        k;2                   k;pw
                                                 6                                                   7
                                                 6       1          0                     0          7
                                         Fw
                                          k     =6
                                                 6       .          .        ..           .          7
                                                                                                     7
                                                 4       .
                                                         .          .
                                                                    .             .       .
                                                                                          .          5
                                                         0          0                     0

       for the k th weekly indicator.28

 2. Sample parameters
       Conditional on the state variable            t   and the data Y, draws for each set of parameters are
       generated as follows.

        2.1 Sample idiosyncratic autoregressive coe¢ cients
             To sample w  k we use a Normal prior distribution, N (                              ;          ), with    = 0pw and   =
             Ipw , and generate draws from the posterior density

                                                    w w w
                                                    k j k ; uk;t ; Y          N(          ;          );

             where the expressions for the posterior mean and variance are given by

                                                         1                                1
                                            = (              + X 0X )             1
                                                                                      (              + X 0Y )
                                                         1
                                            = (              + X 0X )             1
                                                                                      ;
28
     The term [0] makes reference to all the zero entries required to make the matrix conformable.


                                                               28
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                   T pw                                         uw                          uw                  uw
             with Y      = fyt gT
                                t=pw +1 , X = fxt gt=1 , and yt =
                                                                  pk;t
                                                                     w , xt =
                                                                                                                            pk;t
                                                                                                                                   w
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                                                                        ; :::; k;t   pw
                                                                                                                                                     w            .
                                                                                                     k                             k                 k
             Note that conditional on the generated draws of the idiosyncratic terms associated with
             the quarterly and monthly variables, the same procedure can be applied to sample m    k
             and q k . 29 We use the same prior distribution to sample m and q , that is, N (
                                                                          j         i          ;   ),
             with       = 0p m ;   = Ipm and      = 0pq ;     = Ipq , respectively.
        2.2 Sample idiosyncratic innovation variances
             To sample wk we use an Inverse Gamma prior distribution, IG( ; ), with                                                             = 10 and
              = 0:1, and generate draws from the posterior density

                                                        w        w w
                                                        kj       k ; uk;t ; Y       IG( ; );

             where the corresponding shape and scale parameters are given by
                                                                           T
                                                             =         +
                                                                           2
                                                                                            !   1
                                                                                ew 0 w
                                                                                 k;t ek;t
                                                             =           +
                                                                                   2

                                 w w              w
             with ew       w
                   k;t = uk;t    k;1 uk;t 1 :::         w
                                                  k;pW uk;t pw and where T denotes the sample size.
                                                                                                    30

             Similar to Step 2:1, the same procedure used to generate wk is employed to sample draws
                 m        q
             of j and i , using the same prior distribution.
        2.3 Sample factor loadings
             Conditional on the common factor and idiosyncratic terms, the factor loadings contained
             in w are sampled independently for each weekly variable using a Normal prior distrib-
             ution N ( ; ) with      = 0 and         = 1. The draws are generated from the posterior
             density
                                       w        w     w   w
                                       k jft ; uk;t ; k ; k ; Y N( ; )

             where the posterior mean and variance are given by

                                                             1                              1
                                                  = (            + X y0 X y )      1
                                                                                       (            + X y0 Y y )
                                                             1
                                                  = (            + X y0 X y )      1

                                                                                             w           w    w                 w         w
                          y T                                                               yk;t         k;1 yk;t 1   :::                yk;t
             with Y y = fyt gt=pw +1 ; X y = fxy  T              y
                                               t gt=pw +1 , and yt =
                                                                                                                  p     w
                                                                                                                                k;pW            pw
                                                                                                                                                     ; xy
                                                                                                                                                        t =
                                                                                                                        k
                  w                w
             ft   k;1 ft 1   :::   k;pw ft pw                                                                                            m            q
                         p     w                . Following Antolín-Díaz et al. (2017), draws for                                            and          are
                               k
                                                                                                                                                          w
             generated using GLS, and relying on the same prior distribution as for the case of                                                               .
  29
     A similar approach is pursued by Antolín-Díaz et al. (2017) when estimating a factor model that includes variables
at the quarterly and monthly frequencies.
  30
     In the empirical application, we choose slightly di¤erent values for and for a few U.S. states to accommodate
state-speci...c idiosyncracies.




                                                                  29
       2.4 Sample factor autoregressive coe¢ cients
            To generate draws of , we use the Normal prior distribution N (                                  ;      ) where   = 0pf
            and     = Ipf . Accordingly, draws are sampled from

                                                     jft ; Y      N(            ;       )

            where the moments of the posterior distribution are given by

                                                     1                              1
                                            = (          + X z0 X z )   1
                                                                            (                + X z0 Y z )
                                                     1
                                            = (          + X z0 X z )   1


                      n oT                      n oT       pf                                                0 31
            with Y z = ftz               ; X z = xz
                                                  t             , and xz
                                                                       t = ft               1 ; :::; ft pf    .
                               t=pf +1                   t=1




  31
    Note that the variance of the factor innovations is set to ! = 1 for identi...cation purposes (see Bai and Wang,
2015).


                                                          30
                                        References

   Antolín-Díaz, Juan, Thomas Drechsel, and Ivan Petrella (2017). "Tracking the Slowdown in
Long-Run GDP Growth," Review of Economics and Statistics 99(2): 343-356.
   Arora, Vipin, and Jozef Lieskovsky (2014). "Electricity Use as an Indicator of U.S. Economic
Activity," EIA Working Paper.
    Aruoba, Bora¼
                gan S., Francis X. Diebold, and Chiara Scotti (2009). "Real-Time Measurement
of Business Conditions," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 27(4): 417-427.
   Bai, Jushan, and Peng Wang (2015). "Identi...cation and Bayesian Estimation of Dynamic
Factor Models," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 33(2): 221-240.
   Bartik, Alexander W., Marianne Bertrand, Feng Lin, Jesse Rothstein, and Matthew Unrath
(2020). "Measuring the Labor Market at the Onset of the COVID-19 Crisis," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Summer 2020, 239-268.
   Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian (2016). "Lower Oil Prices and the U.S. Economy: Is
This Time Di¤erent?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2016, 287-336.
   Baumeister, Christiane, Dimitris Korobilis, and Thomas K. Lee (2020). "Energy Markets and
Global Economic Conditions," Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
   Bi, Huixin, and W. Blake Marsh (2020). "Flight to Liquidity or Safety? Recent Evidence from
the Municipal Bond Market," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Working Paper 20-19.
   Bokun, Kathryn O., Laura E. Jackson, Kevin L. Kliesen, and Michael T. Owyang (2020).
"FRED-SD: A Real-Time Database for State-Level Data with Forecasting Applications," Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2020-031.
   Camacho, Maximo, and Gabriel Pérez-Quirós (2010). "Introducing the Euro-STING: Short-
term Indicator of Euro Area Growth," Journal of Applied Econometrics 25(4): 663-694.
   Camacho, Maximo, Gabriel Pérez-Quirós, and Pilar Poncela (2015). "Extracting Nonlinear
Signals from Several Economic Indicators," Journal of Applied Econometrics 30(7): 1073-1089.
   Carlino, Gerald, and Robert H. DeFina (1998). "The Di¤erential Regional E¤ects of Monetary
Policy," Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4): 572-587.
  Carlino, Gerald, and Keith Sill (2001). "Regional Income Fluctuations: Common Trends and
Common Cycles," Review of Economics and Statistics 83(3): 446-456.
   Carter, Christopher K., and Robert Kohn (1994). "On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models,"
Biometrika 81(3): 541-553.
    Chauvet, Marcelle, and James D. Hamilton (2006). "Dating Business Cycle Turning Points,"
in: C. Milas, P. Rothman, and D. van Dijk (eds.), Nonlinear Time Series Analysis of Business
Cycles, Elsevier, North Holland, 1-54.



                                              31
    Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Opportunity
Insights Team (2020). "How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies A¤ect Spending and Em-
ployment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data," mimeo, Harvard
University.
   Chinn, Menzie, and Ryan LeCloux (2018). "Tracking the State Economies at High Frequency:
A Primer," mimeo, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
   Crone, Theodore M. (2005). "An Alternative De...nition of Economic Regions in the United
States Based on Similarities in State Business Cycles," Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4):
617-626.
   Crone, Theodore M., and Alan Clayton-Matthews (2005). "Consistent Economic Indexes for
the 50 States," Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4): 593-603.
   Diebold, Francis X. (2020). "Real-Time Real Economic Activity: Exiting the Great Recession
and Entering the Pandemic Recession," NBER Working Paper 27482.
   Diebold, Francis X., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (1996). "Measuring Business Cycles: A Modern
Perspective," Review of Economics and Statistics 78(1): 67-77.
   Eo, Yunjong, and Chang-Jin Kim (2016). "Markov-Switching Models with Evolving Regime-
Speci...c Parameters: Are Postwar Booms or Recessions All Alike?" Review of Economics and
Statistics 98(5): 940-949.
    Galbraith, John W., and Greg Tkacz (2018). "Nowcasting with Payments System Data,"
International Journal of Forecasting 34(2): 366-376.
   Granja, Joao, Christos Makridis, Constantine Yannelis, and Eric Zwick (2020). "Did the Pay-
check Protection Program Hit the Target?" mimeo, University of Chicago.
    Hamilton, James D., and Michael T. Owyang (2012). "The Propagation of Regional Reces-
sions," Review of Economics and Statistics 94(4): 935-947.
   Hubbard, Glenn R., and Michael R. Strain (2020). "Has the Paycheck Protection Program
Succeeded?" NBER Working Paper 28032.
   Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E. Siu (2020). "Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries," Review of
Economics and Statistics 102(1): 129-147.
  Jordà, Òscar (2005). "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,"
American Economic Review 95(1): 161-182.
  Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles R. Nelson (1999). State-Space Models with Regime Switching,
MIT Press.
   Koenders, Kathryn, and Richard Rogerson (2005). "Organizational Dynamics Over the Busi-
ness Cycle: A View on Jobless Recoveries," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87(4):
555-79.



                                               32
   Leiva-León, Danilo, Gabriel Pérez-Quirós, and Eyno Rots (2021). "Real-Time Weakness of the
Global Economy," mimeo, Bank of Spain.
   Lewis, Daniel, Karel Mertens, James H. Stock, and Mihir Trivedi (2020). "Measuring Real
Activity Using a Weekly Economic Index," Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.
   Mariano, Roberto S., and Yasutomo Murasawa (2003). "A New Coincident Index of Business
Cycles Based on Monthly and Quarterly Series," Journal of Applied Econometrics 18(4): 427-443.
   Owyang, Michael T., Jeremy Piger, and Howard J. Wall (2005). "Business Cycle Phases in U.S.
States," Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4): 604-616.
   Owyang, Michael T., Jeremy Piger, and Howard J. Wall (2008). "A State-Level Analysis of the
Great Moderation," Regional Science and Urban Economics 38(6): 578-589.
    Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1989). "New Indexes of Coincident and Leading
Economic Indicators," in: O. J. Blanchard and S. Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
4: 351-393.
   Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1991). "A Probability Model of the Coincident Eco-
nomic Indicators," in: K. Lahiri and G. H. Moore (eds.), Leading Economic Indicators: New Ap-
proaches and Forecasting Records, Cambridge University Press, 63-89.




                                             33
               Figure 1. Weekly Economic Conditions Indices for Selected States
                                      1987.4-2021.2




NOTES: The gray shaded areas indicate NBER recessions.
Figure 2. Decomposition of Weekly Economic Conditions Indices for Selected States
                                 2020.1-2021.2
Figure 3. Weekly Developments of State-Level Economic Conditions during the COVID-19 Pandemic
                                        2020.1-2021.2




  NOTES: The 10 categories of economic performance from dark blue to red are defined as follows: positive, increasing
  at increasing rate; positive, increasing at decreasing rate; positive, turning point; positive, decreasing at decreasing rate;
  positive, decreasing at increasing rate; negative, increasing at increasing rate; negative, increasing at decreasing rate;
  negative, turning point; negative, decreasing at decreasing rate; negative, decreasing at increasing rate.
Figure 4. Weekly Developments of State-Level Economic Conditions during the Great Recession
                                        2008.8-2009.12




 NOTES: See Figure 3.
Figure 5. Weekly Developments of State-Level Economic Conditions during the 2001 Recession
                                        2001.1-2002.6




NOTES: See Figure 3.
             Figure 6. Weekly Assessment of the Effectiveness of the PPP Program

       Panel A: Effect of a 1% increase in loan amounts per capita on economic conditions




    Panel B: Cumulative effect of a one-standard-deviation shock to loan amounts per capita
                                    on economic conditions




NOTES: The regression coefficients are based on local projections of the PPP intervention on April 16, 2020 on
economic conditions for the weeks from April 18, 2020 to October 3, 2020. The error bands are 68% confidence
intervals based on Newey-West standard errors to account for serial correlation.
                                 Figure 7. Weekly Economic Weakness Index (EWI)
                        Panel A: Historical EWI with one-year-ahead forecast, 1987.4-2022.2




          Panel B: End-of-month real-time update of EWI with one-year-ahead forecasts, 2020.1-2022.5




NOTES: The gray shaded areas indicate NBER recessions. The black dashed lines indicate the week of the announcement date of
the peak month and the blue dotted lines indicate the week of the announcement date of the trough month. The NBER trough month
for the COVID-19 recession has not yet been announced. The red dotted lines are 52-week-ahead forecasts of the EWI as of February
27 and May 29, 2021. The blue, green, and black lines of the EWI in panel B are end-of-month real-time updates based on real-time
recession probabilities similar to Chauvet and Hamilton (2006). The blue vertical lines in panel B indicate the start and end dates of
the COVID-19 recession applying the Chauvet-Hamilton rule to the EWI and the green dashed-dotted lines indicate the call dates.
  Figure 8. Historical Decomposition of the Weekly Economic Weakness Index into its
                                 Main Driving Forces

                                     Panel A: 1987.4-2021.2




                                     Panel B: 2020.1-2021.2




NOTES: This decomposition is obtained by summing the contributions associated with a given category of
indicators across all U.S. states. The gray shaded areas indicate NBER recessions.
    Figure 9. The Role of Additional Criteria in Determining Weekly Economic Weakness
                                  Panel A: Census divisions, 1987.4-2021.2




                       Panel B: Degree of economic diversification, 1990.1-2021.2




                                 Panel C: Resource richness, 1990.1-2021.2




                                   Panel D: Political party, 1987.4-2021.2




NOTES: The definition of the various categories is provided in the text. The gray shaded areas indicate NBER recessions.
           Figure 10. Time-varying Densities of the Weekly Economic Weakness Index
                                        2019.2-2021.2


                                                                              Mar 28, 2020
                   Feb 23, 2019




                                                                             Mar 21, 2020

                                                       Mar 14, 2020




                                                              Feb 27, 2021




NOTES: The figure shows the evolution of the posterior density of the Weekly Economic Weakness Index over time.
Distributions with darker colors are associated with more recent time periods.
                                     Figure 11. Weekly Recession Probabilities across U.S. States for Selected Episodes


                                                                                   Panel A: Great Recession




                                                                            Panel B: 2014-16 Oil Price Slump




                                                                               Panel C: COVID-19 Recession




NOTES: The entries in parenthesis on the color bar for the recessions probabilities indicate the number of U.S. states in the corresponding bin. The entries sum to 48 since we exclude Alaska and Hawaii which
are not shown in the maps.
                                                                      Table 1. State-Level Dataset
                                                                                             Geographic         First                             Data          Seasonal
 Data category          Variables                                           Frequency                                                  Tcode
                                                                                             coverage           observation                       source        adjustment
 Mobility               Cellphone mobility index                            Weekly           All States         Jan 13, 2020              1       Apple         NA
                        Retail gasoline price                               Weekly           Subset**           May 22, 2000              2       EIA           NSA
                        Vehicle miles traveled                              Monthly          All States         Jan 2003                  2       FHWA          NSA
 Labor Market           Initial unemployment insurance claims               Weekly           All States         Mar 1, 1986               1       FRED          NSA*
                        Continued unemployment insurance                    Weekly           All States         Mar 1, 1986               1       FRED          NSA*
                        claims
                        Total nonfarm employment                            Monthly          All States         Jan 1960                  2       BLS           NSA*
                        Unemployment rate                                   Monthly          All States         Jan 1976                  1       FRED          SA
                        Average hours worked in                             Monthly          All States         Jan 2001                  1       FRED          SA
                        manufacturing
 Real Activity          Coal production                                     Weekly           Subset**           Jan 7, 1984               2       CEIC          NSA
                        Oil rig counts                                      Weekly           Subset**           Jan 5, 1990               4       BH            NA
                        Oil production                                      Monthly          Subset**           Jan 1981                  2       EIA           NA
                        Electricity consumption                             Monthly          All States         Jan 2003                  2       EIA           NSA
                        Real exports of goods                               Monthly          All States         Aug 1995                  2       FRED          NSA*
                        Real GDP                                            Quarterly        All States         Q1:2005                   2       BEA           SA
 Expectations           Business applications                               Weekly           All States         Jan 7, 2006               2       FRED          NSA
                        New housing permits                                 Monthly          All States         Jan 1988                  3       FRED          SA
                        Consumer sentiment index                            Monthly          All States         Mar 1978                  1       UMS           NA
                        Manufacturing sentiment index                       Monthly          Subset**           varying                   1       FED           NA
 Financials             Municipal bonds: yield to maturity                  Weekly           All States         Dec 3, 2011               1       SPG           NA
                        Municipal bonds: performance                        Weekly           All States         Jun 11, 2010              2       SPG           NA
                        Real trade-weighted value of the dollar             Monthly          All States         Jan 1988                  2       FRED          NSA*
 Households             Credit and debit card spending                      Weekly           All States         Jan 24, 2020              1       AS            SA
                        Real wage and salary income                         Quarterly        All States         Q1:1980                   2       BEA           SA
                        Real home price index                               Quarterly        All States         Q1:1975                   2       FRED          NSA*
NOTES: Tcode indicates the transformation of the variable where 1 indicates the variable is included in its original units, 2 stands for year-over-year growth rates, 3 refers to
taking logs, and 4 to taking annual differences. To accurately measure the large fluctuations during the COVID-19 period, we switch from logs to percent when computing
growth rates. However, the results are similar when using log differences throughout the sample period. The codes for the data sources are as follows: Apple
(https://covid19.apple.com/mobility), AS ­ Affinity Solutions via Opportunity Insights (https://github.com/OpportunityInsights/EconomicTracker), BEA ­ Bureau of
Economic Analysis, BH ­ Baker & Hughes (https://rigcount.bakerhughes.com/), BLS ­ Bureau of Labor Statistics, CEIC (https://www.ceicdata.com), EIA ­ U.S. Energy
Information Administration, FED ­ data collected from the following regional Federal Reserve Banks: Chicago, Dallas, Kansas City, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond,
FHWA ­ Federal Highway Administration, FRED ­ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Database, SPG ­ S&P Global (https://www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/index-
family/fixed-income/us-municipal/#overview), UMS ­ Survey of Consumers, University of Michigan, broken down by 4 regions with each state getting assigned its regional
value (http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/). If data are available at a frequency higher than weekly, we obtain weekly data by averaging. NSA indicates that the series has not been
seasonally adjusted, SA indicates that the series is available in seasonally-adjusted form, an asterisk indicates that the series has been seasonally adjusted using the X13-
ARIMA procedure for monthly and quarterly data and the BLS MoveReg procedure for weekly data, and NA indicates that seasonal adjustment does not apply. We only
seasonally adjust the weekly series that enter the model in levels; for weekly series that enter in annual growth rates, this transformation takes care of the seasonal component
(see Lewis et al., 2020). A dagger indicates that the nominal series has been deflated with the national personal consumption expenditure price index obtained from FRED.
**Retail Gasoline Price: CA, CO, FL, MA, MN, NY, OH, TX, WA
**Coal Production: AL, AR, CO, IL, IN, LA, MD, MT, NM, ND, OH, OK, PA, TN, TX, UT, VT, VA, WV, WY
**Oil Rig Counts: CO, LA, NM, ND, OK, PA, TX, WY
**Oil Production: AL, AK, CA, CO, IL, KS, LA, MS, MT, NM, ND, OK, TX, UT, WY
**Manufacturing Sentiment Index: CO, DE, IL, IN, IA, KS, MD, MI, NE, NJ, NC, OK, PA, SC, TX, VA, WV, WI, WY
Figure 1A. Weekly Economic Conditions Indices for all 50 U.S. States, 1987.4-2021.2
Figure 2A. Weekly Economic Conditions Indices for all 50 U.S. States
                        2020.1-2021.2
                Figure 3A. Weekly Economic Conditions Index for the U.S. Economy
                                        1987.4-2021.5
              Panel A: Comparison of weekly U.S. Economic Conditions Index with WEI




                   Panel B: Decomposition of weekly U.S. Economic Conditions Index




NOTES: WEI is the Weekly Economic Index proposed by Lewis et al. (2020) and available from FRED from 2008-01-05
onward. Note that WEI is not normalized such that zero corresponds to long-run average growth, which is why we do not
apply this normalization to the U.S. Economic Conditions Index in panel A for comparability; however, in panel B a value of
zero indicates long-run average growth for comparability with the state-level indicators. The U.S. Economic Conditions Index
is constructed based on 25 indicators that are listed in Table 1A, which mimic as closely as possible the state-level dataset.
      Figure 4A. Updated Weekly Economic Weakness Index as of May 29, 2021
                                 1987.4-2022.5




NOTES: See Table 7. The red dotted line is a 52-week-ahead forecast of the expected path of the Economic
Weakness Index as of May 29, 2021.
                                     Table 1A. Dataset for Weekly U.S. Economic Conditions Index
                                                                               First                                 Seasonal
 Data category        Variables                                    Frequency                  Tcode    Data source
                                                                               observation                           adjustment
 Mobility             Cellphone mobility index                     Weekly      Jan 13, 2020        1   Apple         NA
                      Retail gasoline price                        Weekly      May 22, 2000        2   EIA           NSA
                      Vehicle miles traveled                       Monthly     Dec 1970            2   FRED          NSA
 Labor Market         Initial unemployment insurance claims        Weekly      Jan 7, 1967         1   FRED          SA
                      Continued unemployment insurance claims      Weekly      Jan 7, 1967         1   FRED          SA
                      Total nonfarm employment                     Monthly     Jan 1939            2   FRED          SA
                      Unemployment rate                            Monthly     Jan 1948            1   FRED          SA
                      Average hours worked in manufacturing        Monthly     Jan 1960            1   FRED          SA
 Real Activity        Coal production                              Weekly      Jan 8, 2000         2   CEIC          NSA
                      Oil rig counts                               Weekly      Jul 18, 1987        4   BH            NA
                      Oil production                               Monthly     Jan 1920            2   EIA           NA
                      Electricity consumption                      Monthly     Jan 2003            2   EIA           NSA
                      Real exports of goods                        Monthly     Jan 1992            2   FRED          SA
                      Industrial production                        Monthly     Jan 1919            2   FRED          SA
                      Real GDP                                     Quarterly   Q1:1947             2   FRED          SA
 Expectations         Business applications                        Weekly      Jan 7, 2006         2   FRED          NSA
                      New housing permits                          Monthly     Jan 1960            3   FRED          SA
                      University of Michigan: Consumer sentiment   Monthly     Nov 1952            1   FRED          NA
                      Business Tendency Survey for Manufacturing   Monthly     Jan 1960            1   FRED          SA
 Financials           10-year Treasury yield                       Weekly      Jan 5, 1962         1   FRED          NA
                      Corporate bond spread: BAA-AAA               Weekly      Jan 5, 1962         2   FRED          NA
                      Real trade-weighted value of the dollar      Monthly     Jan 1973            2   FRED          NSA*
 Households           Credit and debit card spending               Weekly      Jan 24, 2020        1   AS            SA
                      Real wage and salary income                  Quarterly   Q1:1986             2   FRED          SA
                      Real home price index                        Quarterly   Q1:1975             2   FRED          NSA*
NOTES: See Table 1.
