                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           VOTING IN SHAREHOLDERS MEETINGS

                                          Laurent Bouton
                                        Aniol Llorente-Saguer
                                           Antonin Macé
                                         Dimitrios Xefteris

                                        Working Paper 29005
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w29005


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2021




We greatly benefited from the insights, comments, and suggestions of Alon Brav, Micael Castanheira,
Florian Ederer, Garance Genicot, German Gieczewski, Alessandro Lizzeri, Moqi Xu, and seminar
and conference participants at Queen Mary University of London, UC-Berkeley, University of Cyprus,
Université Paris 1, University of Leicester, the Columbia University Political Economy Conference,
and the 3rd ETH Workshop on Democracy: Theoretical Political Economy. This project has received
funding from the European Research Council (Laurent Bouton) under the European Union's Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 637662). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Laurent Bouton, Aniol Llorente-Saguer, Antonin Macé, and Dimitrios Xefteris. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Voting in Shareholders Meetings
Laurent Bouton, Aniol Llorente-Saguer, Antonin Macé, and Dimitrios Xefteris
NBER Working Paper No. 29005
July 2021
JEL No. D72,G3

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies voting in shareholders meetings. We focus on the informational efficiency of
different voting mechanisms, taking into account that they affect both management's incentives
before the meeting and shareholders' decisions at the meeting. We first focus on the case in which
the management does not affect the proposal being voted on. We prove that, for any distribution
of shareholdings, the one-share-one-vote mechanism (1S1V) dominates the one-person-one-vote
mechanism (1P1V), independently of whether or how shareholdings correlate with information
accuracy. We also show that 1S1V becomes efficient only if votes are fully divisible. Second, we
consider the case in which the management decides whether to put the proposal to a vote. The
properties of a voting mechanism then depend both on its voting efficiency and on how it affects
managers' incentives to select good proposals. We uncover a trade-off between selection and
voting efficiency underlying the comparison of 1S1V and 1P1V: the higher voting efficiency of
1S1V implies worse selection incentives. In some cases, the negative effect of worse selection
incentives on shareholders' welfare can be large enough to wash out the higher voting efficiency
of 1S1V.

Laurent Bouton                                  Antonin Macé
Georgetown University                           Paris School of Economics
Department of Economics                         48 boulevard Jourdan
37th & O Streets, NW                            75014 Paris
Washington,DC 20057                             antonin.mace@gmail.com
and CEPR
and also NBER                                   Dimitrios Xefteris
boutonllj@gmail.com                             University of Cyprus
                                                Department of Economics
Aniol Llorente-Saguer                           xefteris.dimitrios@ucy.ac.cy
School of Economics and Finance
Queen Mary, University of London
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS
United Kingdom
a.llorente-saguer@qmul.ac.uk
1     Introduction

This paper studies voting in shareholders meetings. Given that shareholders typically
hold di¤erent numbers of shares,1 corporations face a non-trivial choice of how to allocate
voting rights. Should each shareholder be allocated a unique vote, following the one-
person-one-vote principle ? Or should shareholders instead hold multiple votes depending
on the number of shares they own, following the one-share-one-vote principle ? Nowadays,
most corporations follow the latter approach and attach one vote to each share.2 Pro-
ponents argue that this fosters good governance by aligning voting power and economic
incentives, among other reasons (see Burkart and Lee 2008 for a thorough discussion of
the literature). We consider a complementary perspective focusing on which allocations of
voting rights (i.e., voting mechanisms) foster information aggregation, and hence produce
the best outcome for shareholders.3 Crucial to this question is how di¤erent voting mech-
anisms a¤ect both shareholders'decisions at the meeting and the management incentives
before the meeting.
    In the ...rst part of the paper, we focus on the meeting, taking the management proposal
as given.4 Since we allow for heterogeneity in shareholdings, shareholders di¤er in how
much they care about the performance of the ...rm, and hence the decision at the meeting.
Yet, in line with the literature on shareholders meetings, we focus on cases in which (most)
shareholders have state-contingent preferences: if the management proposal increases the
value of the ...rm, they are all better o¤ if approved. Otherwise, they prefer to stick to the
status quo. The issue is that, at the time of the vote, shareholders are only imperfectly
informed about the desirability of the proposal. Moreover, some shareholders may be more
precisely informed than others.
    We establish two main results for this case with an exogenous proposal. First, we
compare mechanisms with a ...nite ballot space in terms of their information aggregation
e¢ ciency (i.e., the likelihood of selection of the best alternative). We show that, for any

     1
       For instance, 96% of the ...rms in a representative sample of US ...rms have at least one blockholder, i.e.,
a shareholder who own more than 5% of the outstanding shares (Holderness 2009). Similarly, as Edmans
and Holderness (2017) discuss, many institutional investors hold less than 5% of the outstanding shares
of a given ...rm but still hold a very substantial number of shares. By contrast, retail shareholders hold
much fewer shares of a given ...rm. Moreover, the dispersion of shareholdings among retail shareholders is
substantial (Brav et al. 2019).
     2
       The hegemony of the one-share-one-vote principle is a 20th century phenomenon. In the 19th century
most corporations used to restrict the voting power of any given shareholder; with many of them employing
one-person-one-vote mechanisms (see, e.g., Hansmann and Pargendler 2013). The more recent trends goes
in the opposite direction: deviations from the one-share-one-vote principle are now mostly progressive, e.g.,
dual-class stock, instead of regressive (see, e.g., Adams and Ferreira 2008, and Hayden and Bodie 2008).
     3
       The heterogeneity in shareholdings, and hence the question of which voting mechanism to use, has
been overlooked by most of the literature on voting in shareholders meetings. Bar-Isaac and Shapiro (2020)
is a notable exception.
     4
       As discussed in Christo¤ersen et al. (2007) and Yermack (2010), management'           s proposals include,
e.g., possible mergers and acquisitions, the issuance of new shares, the sale of the ...rm, amendments to
governance procedures, changes in voting rights of directors, and new compensation package for directors.


                                                        1
distribution of shareholdings and any informational asymmetry among shareholders, a
voting mechanism with a richer ballot space dominates a voting mechanism with a poorer
one. This is because shareholders can use the richer ballot space to adjust their impact
on the voting outcome to the accuracy of their information. It directly follows from that
result that the one-share-one-vote mechanism (1S1V ) dominates the one-person-one-vote
mechanism (1P1V ), simply because the former has a richer ballot space.5 If there is a
positive correlation between shareholdings and information accuracy, this result is quite
intuitive: under 1S1V more informed shareholders have a larger in uence over the outcome
than under 1P1V, and hence outcomes are better. What we prove, though, is that 1S1V
outperforms 1P1V even when there is zero or negative correlation between information
accuracy and shareholdings. Key to this result is that, under 1S1V, shareholders have the
possibility to vote some of their shares and abstain on others.6
    However, because there is not necessarily a perfect correlation between the number of
shares held by a shareholder and how well-informed she is, 1S1V is not e¢ cient (i.e., it
does not guarantee full-information equivalence). This leads to our second main result:
the one-share-one-vote mechanism with divisible votes (1S1V-D ) is e¢ cient.7 This is so
because, under this mechanism, all shareholders have the ability to reveal their information
fully, even if they hold only a small number of shares. The e¢ ciency of 1S1V-D is robust
to the presence of (i) partisan shareholders, (ii) super-majority thresholds, (iii) ambiguity
about the information technology of other shareholders, and (iv) endogenous acquisition
of information by shareholders.
    In the second part of the paper, we explore how voting mechanisms a¤ect the man-
agement'  s incentives to shape the proposal before the meeting. We focus on the extensive
margin: the management decides whether to put a proposal to the vote after observing
a signal about its quality. If the management blocks the proposal, then the status quo
remains. The properties of a voting mechanism then depend both on (i) selection (i.e.,
the incentives it provides the management to select good proposals and veto bad ones),
and (ii) voting e¢ ciency (i.e., the quality of information aggregation at the meeting).
   Following the corporate governance and ...nance literature, we allow for conict be-
tween shareholders and the management (see Tirole 2005 and references therein). We
consider two speci...c dimensions of conict. First, the manager may be misaligned, in
   5
       Under 1S1V, shareholders are endowed with one point per share they own, and they can allocate
these points in favor or against the proposal, or abstain. Under 1P1V, shareholders are endowed with only
one point. Under both rules, the proposal is approved if the number of points in favor is larger than a
predetermined (super-)majority threshold (50% in the case of simple majority).
     6
       The standard version of 1S1V that we consider, which allows for partial abstention, also dominates
its rigid counterpart (1S1V-R ) under which shareholders have to vote either all their shares in favor of the
proposal or all their shares against. As discussed in Bar-Isaac and Shapiro (2020), both partial and full
abstention are costly (and maybe even illegal) for some types of shareholders.
     7
       Under 1S1V-D shareholders can, for every share they own, allocate any fraction of point between 0
and 1 in favor or against the management'    s proposal. The proposal is approved if and only if the total
number of points in favor is larger than the ones against.


                                                     2
the sense that she wants the proposal to be adopted even when it is undesirable for the
shareholders.8 Second, the manager may incur a (reputation) cost if a proposal is rejected
at the shareholder meeting.9
     We uncover a trade-o¤ between selection and voting e¢ ciency underlying the com-
parison of 1S1V and 1P1V mechanisms. In particular, we ...nd that the higher voting
e¢ ciency under 1S1V implies worse selection incentives for managers, and conversely for
1P1V. Higher voting e¢ ciency reduces the incentives of an aligned manager to veto any
reform because she trusts that the shareholders will choose correctly with high probabil-
ity. Therefore, the proposals she puts forward under 1S1V are, on average, inferior to
the proposals she puts forward under 1P1V. As we show, this tradeo¤ is preserved even
when the manager is misaligned with some probability, and when rejection is costly. We
...nd that, in some cases, the negative e¤ect of worse selection incentives on shareholders'
welfare can be large enough to wash out the higher voting e¢ ciency of 1S1V. This can
only happen when the manager is misaligned and su¤ers a reputational cost when her
proposal is rejected.
    While our focus is on shareholders meetings, some of our results apply beyond that
setting. For instance, mechanisms with rich ballot spaces are often used to aggregate
the opinions of judges that have to select a winner in sport competitions (e.g., gymnastic
and ice skating). Our results about exogenous proposal are relevant to that case. The
main di¤erence is that, in most of those competitions, judges have to evaluate more than
two contestants. Yet, we can show that, under some conditions, voting mechanisms with
rich ballot spaces feature similarly desirable information aggregation properties in multi-
winner elections. Our results also suggest that the adoption of such mechanisms could be
desirable in various situations in which some voters may be better informed than others.
These include juries, expert panels, and debt restructuring votes. In some of these cases,
when one of the players has agenda power, our results about the e¤ect of the richness of
the ballot space on the incentives of the proposers may also be relevant.

    8
      For instance, as discussed in Becht et al. (2016), there is empirical evidence showing that a substantial
share of corporate acquisisions are associated with negative returns for acquirer shareholders. One expla-
nation is that, in the case of M&A, managerial wealth and shareholder wealth are decoupled (Grinstein
and Hribar 2004; Harford and Li 2007; Fu, Lin, and O¢ cer 2013). Another area of con          ict is Say-on-Pay
proposals (Cunat, Gine, and Guadalupe 2016). Finally, Bach and Metzger (2016) and Babenko, Choi, and
Sen (2019) ...nd evidence that managers manipulate the voting process to increase the success rate of their
proposals. Those manipulations appear to be value-destroying. For a more thorough discussion of con          ict
between managers and shareholders see, e.g., Tirole (2005, Chapter 1).
    9
      Becht et al. (2016) and Gantchev and Giannetti (2020) mention the existence of such reputational
costs but we are not aware of direct evidence. However, there is suggestive evidence. For instance,
Cai, Garner, and Walking (2009) and Aggarwal, Dahiya, and Prabhala (2017) ...nd that dissent votes in
uncontested director elections have negative consequences for both directors and executives. The rejection
of a management proposal at the meeting could have similar implications for the management. Also, Li et
al. (2018) ...nd that managers trying to acquire another corporation implement various strategies to avoid
shareholder voting on the acquisition, and hence the risk of an embarassing rebuke at the shareholder
meeting.


                                                       3
1.1     Related Literature

There is a large empirical literature studying the e¤ect of shareholder voting on ...rms
performance and management'        s behavior. Overall, this literature ...nds that control by
shareholders (i) a¤ects positively ...rms'performance, and (ii) is key to provide proper in-
centives to the management.10 The speci...cs of corporate governance rules and procedures
appear to play an important role. As summarized by Yermack (2010, p. 106): research
that studies the "[...] general e¤ects of voting restrictions on ...rm value and performance,
often [...nds] that ...rms perform worse when the shareholder franchise is curtailed [...]. No-
table recent papers in this large literature include Gompers et al. (2003), which examines
a range of takeover defenses and voting restrictions; Bebchuk and Cohen (2005) and Faleye
(2007), both of which focus on staggered boards; and Gompers et al. (2009), which stud-
ies dual-class voting structures."  11 More directly connected to us, Burkart and Lee (2008)

review the theoretical literature on the one-share-one-vote principle and highlight three
classes of e¤ects of the security-voting structure (aka voting rules): e¤ects on takeovers,
e¤ects on incentives of blockholders, and e¤ects on the ...rms' choice of ownership and
...nancing.12 We complement that literature by highlighting the e¤ect of voting mecha-
nisms on the quality of decisions at shareholders meetings, and how that shapes managers'
incentives.
   The exogenous proposal part of our paper contributes to the literature on information
aggregation in committees and elections with exogenous alternatives (see, e.g., Austen-
Smith and Banks 1996, Feddersen and Pesendorfer 1996, 1997, 1998, Fey 1997, Myerson
1998, Mandler 2012; Bouton and Castanheira 2012, Bhattacharya 2013, McMurray 2013,
Bouton et al. 2018, Barelli et al. 2019, Herrera et al. 2019, and Bar-Isaac and Shapiro
2020). The closest paper to ours is Bar-Isaac and Shapiro (2020). They consider a setup
with one blockholder who owns many shares, and many retail shareholders who own
one share each. We generalize their model, and their result of the desirability of partial
abstention, by considering any distribution of shares among shareholders, including but
not limited to multiple blockholders. Two other key di¤erences are that, ...rst, we compare

   10
       For instance, Appel, Gormley, and Keim (2016) ...nd that even passive investors a¤ect positively
...rms'longer-term performance through voting; Fos, Li, and Tsoutsoura (2018) ...nd that the proximity to
an election a¤ects the behavior of directors; Li et al. (2018) ...nds that, in the US, shareholder voting help
mitigate agency problems that plague corporate acquisitions; Becht et al. (2016) ...nd that shareholder
voting has a substantial positive e¤ect on the quality of acquisitions by ...rms in the UK; Richardson (2000)
...nds a positive relationship between information asymmetry between managers and shareholders, which
impedes the ability of the latter to control e¢ ciently the former, and earnings management (i.e., funky
accounting by managers); Cai et al. (2006) and Aggarwal et al. (2019) focus on directors elections in US
...rms and ...nd that even uncontested elections a¤ect the ...rms and directors in various dimensions; Conyon
and Sadler (2010), Ferri and Maber (2012), and Alissa (2015) study the e¤ects of say-on-pay votes in the
UK and ...nd that they constraint the size and the structure of top managers'pay.
    11
       Note however that Frankenreiter et al. (2021) have recently cast some serious doubts on the reliability
of the datasets used in this literature.
    12
       See Adams and Ferreira (2008) for a survey of the empirical literature on the topic.


                                                      4
the properties of various voting mechanisms in our generalized setup. This includes the
identi...cation of the optimal voting mechanisms for any shareholdings. Second, we study
the information aggregation properties of voting mechanisms taking into account of their
e¤ects on the management'     s incentives. That allows us to identify situations in which
partial abstention, through its e¤ects on the management'   s incentives, is detrimental to
information aggregation.
    The endogenous proposal part of our paper contributes to the literature on information
aggregation with endogenous alternatives. We are only aware of two papers exploring that
question: Henry (2008), and Bond and Eraslan (2010). The latter is the closest to our
paper. It stresses the importance of endogenizing the proposal when one studies the
information properties of a voting system. But, given our focus on shareholders meetings,
our model and insights are quite di¤erent than those in Bond and Eraslan (2010). For
instance, we permit the distribution of votes to depend on the shareholding structure. This
allows us to compare 1P1V to 1S1V mechanisms instead of focusing on di¤erent types of
1P1V mechanisms such as majority and unanimity rules, as Bond and Eraslan (2010) do.
Moreover, by comparing two mechanisms which admit an unambiguous ranking in terms
of voting e¢ ciency (1S1V and 1P1V ), we uncover a general tradeo¤ between voting
e¢ ciency and selection incentives that is not possible to detect when limiting attention to
classes of 1P1V mechanisms.13 Also, we focus on the extensive margin of action for the
manager, instead of the intensive margin in Bond and Eraslan (2010). That allows us to
show that selection incentives can upset the welfare ordering of two mechanisms even if
the manager only controls the agenda and has limited power to adjust the details of the
proposal.


2        Model

In this section we present our baseline model. Section 4.3 proves the robustness of our
results to various extensions of the model. Section 6 provides a discussion of some of the
key assumptions.
     Consider a ...rm with a set N = f1; 2; :::; ng of shareholders, with n > 2, and m
                                                                      P
n shares. A shareholder i 2 N holds di 2 N shares, with                  i2N di = m. Let d =
(d1 ; d2 ; :::; dn ) be the vector of the shares among the n shareholders, hi = d      m be the
                                                                                        i


fraction of shares held by shareholder i, and h = (h1 ; h2 ; :::; hn ) the vector of the fraction
of shares held by the n shareholders.
   At the shareholders meeting, they have to choose, through voting, whether to approve
a proposal by the management, A; or keep the status quo, B: We denote the set of
    13
     Super-majority rules­  a prominent class of 1P1V mechanisms­    do not admit a clear ranking in terms
of voting e¢ ciency: each super-majority rule is optimal under certain informational assumptions (see, e.g.,
Maug and Rydqvist 2009).


                                                     5
alternatives by O = fA; B g: For now, we assume that the proposal is exogenously given.
In Section 5 we allow the management to shape the proposal.
   Shareholders are uncertain about the quality of the proposal. There are two states of
the world, ! 2 = f ; g that are unobserved at the time of the vote. For the sake of
simplicity, we assume that the states are equiprobable.
   While shareholders do not necessarily have the same stakes, they all agree that the
proposal is good in state but bad in state :

                                     ui (Aj ) = hi ; ui (Aj ) =            hi ;
                                     ui (B j ) = ui (B j ) = 0:

We relax that assumption in Section 4.3.1.
   Before the meeting, each shareholder i receives a signal si 2 S := [0; 1] distributed
according to a shareholder-speci...c distribution function, Fi ( j! ), with density fi ( j! ).14
Conditional on the state, signals are drawn independently. The type of shareholder i after
the draw of the signal is ti = f i (s i j )
                               fi (si j ) 2 Ti = [ i ; 1= i ]. We make the following assumption
about the signal technology:

Assumption 1 (Strong MLRP and Bounded Support) For every shareholder i 2
N , ti is strictly increasing in si and there exists i 2 (0; 1) such that f i (0j )
                                                                          fi (0j ) = i and
fi (1j )
fi (1j )   = 1= i .


    The ...rst part of Assumption 1 means that shareholders who receive higher signals
attach a larger probability to the state of the world being state , while the second part
means that there is no shareholder with arbitrarily precise information about the state
of the world. This assumption allows for various structures of shareholders'information
technology. For instance, it allows for arbitrarily large di¤erences in the (expected) in-
formation quality of two shareholders, and for any type of correlation between (expected)
information quality of a shareholder and the number of shares she owns.
   We consider a broad class of voting mechanisms. A voting mechanism V associates to
any share distribution d a voting rule V (d) = fX; wg, where X = (X1 ; X2 ; :::; Xn ) with
Xi    R and w 2 R, and is such that each shareholder i 2 N chooses xi 2 Xi and the
outcome is:                        8            P
                                   >
                                   < A       if      xi > w
                            w                   Pi2N
                          G (x) =      AB if         xi = w
                                   >
                                   :            Pi2N
                                       B     if  i2N xi < w;

where AB denotes the fair lottery between A and B .15
   14
        In Section 4.3, we endogenize the acquisition of information by shareholders.
   15
        All results can be easily extended to a more general formulation of the voting rule V (d) = fX; wA ; wB g


                                                         6
    This class of voting mechanisms nests most popular mechanisms, including some that
are closer to one-person-one-vote procedures, like (super-)majority rules, and some that
distribute voting power depending on the exact number of shares that each shareholder
holds. The fact that we allow the voting rules to vary with the distribution of shares
enriches our model.
    While we formally consider simple capital structures consisting only of common shares,
our model also accommodates dual class structures with both common shares (which carry
voting rights) and preferential shares (which do not carry voting rights). Indeed, if each
shareholder holds some common shares, and some preferential ones, then, again, the voting
rules should depend only on the distribution of the common shares, leaving the model
intact.16
    It will be useful to distinguish between cases in which there is a shareholder who can
always a¤ect the outcome independently of the choices of the other shareholders, and the
more interesting cases in which such a player is not present. In particular, we say that
there is no decisive shareholder if, for a given voting mechanism V and a share distribution
d, there exists a strategy pro...le such that A (B ) wins with certainty and the outcome
cannot be a¤ected by any individual deviation. In all other cases, we say that a decisive
shareholder exists.
    Due to their empirical relevance in shareholders meetings (as discussed in the Intro-
duction), two mechanisms are of particular interest to us.17 First, the one-share-one-vote
with partial abstention mechanism, V 1S 1V , is such that V 1S 1V (d) = f i2N f di ; di +
1; di + 2; :::; di g; 0g. Second, the one-person-one-vote mechanism, V 1P 1V , is such that
V 1P 1V (d) = f i2N f 1; 1g; 0g. Under 1S1V, each shareholder i can choose from a richer
set of ballots: either fully supporting A (action di ), fully supporting B (action di ), or
intermediate intensities of support (integer numbers between di and di ). Under 1P1V,
each shareholder has to choose among two ballots, voting for A (action 1) or voting for B
(action 1).18 Under both mechanisms, the proposal is approved if the total support for
A is strictly larger than the total support for B , and ties are broken randomly.
    Two extreme variations of the 1S1V voting mechanism will also prove of particular
interest. First, the one-share-one-vote without partial abstention mechanism, V 1S 1V R , is

                                                 P                    P                             P
with wA        wB , where the outcome is A if      i2N xi > wA , B if  i2N xi < wB , and AB if         i2N xi 2
[wA ; wB ].
    16
       In this more general case one should allow hi to depend on both kinds of shareholdings. As it will be
made clear in our analysis, the exact value of hi does not alter shareholder i'    s incentives, and hence the
equilibria of the game.
    17
       It is noteworthy that while the de...nitions of some mechanisms consider a simple majority threshold
for the adoption of the proposal (i.e. w = 0), we could easily adapt the de...nitions and consider super
majority versions of these mechanisms. That is, keep the same ballot structure X but introduce a larger
(or smaller) quota, w 6= 0, for the passing of proposal.
    18
       We do not allow for abstention for simplicity of exposure. However, as it will become clear in section 4,
all our results are robust to allowing for abstention.


                                                       7
such that V 1S 1V R (d) = f i2N f di ; di g; 0g. Second, the one-share-one-vote with divisible
votes mechanism, V 1S 1V D , is such that V 1S 1V D (d) = f i2N [ di ; di ]; 0g. Under both
mechanisms, the maximum number of votes that a shareholder can cast is equal to the
total number of shares she owns, and hence both mechanisms conform to the one-share-
one-vote principle. They are polar variations of the standard 1S1V in the sense that
1S1V-R is maximally rigid in terms of vote divisibility ­     each shareholder has to decide
between fully supporting A (action di ) or fully supporting B (action di )­ and 1S1V-D
allows for maximal vote divisibility ­  shareholders can choose any intermediate intensity
of support, not only integers. The ballot space is thus richer under 1S1V-D than 1S1V,
and richer under 1S1V than 1S1V-R. Again, all our results are robust to allowing for full
abstention under 1S1V-R .
    The 1S1V-D mechanism belongs to the class of continuous voting mechanisms:

De...nition 1 A voting mechanism V with associated rules V (d) = fX; wg is a contin-
uous voting mechanism if for every d there exists ( i )i2N 2 i2N int(Xi ), such that
P
  i2N i = w .


    The class of continuous voting mechanisms is such that (i) all shareholders have access
to a continuous ballot space, and (ii) the ballot space allows for a tie in which each voter
can increase and decrease the net vote total by any arbitrarily small degree.
      For each voting rule fX; wg and each shareholder i 2 N , a strategy is a function
  i : Ti !         (Xi ). As it is standard in the literature, (Xi ) is the set of all probability
distributions which support is a subset of Xi . When i is a pure strategy, we sometimes
abuse notation and denote by i (ti ) the action x that the shareholder picks with probability
1: Since i can be a mixed strategy, it is useful to distinguish the random variable, i ,
from a potential realization, bi : we say that bi is a potential realization of i if and
only if bi belongs in the support of i : Consequently, when i is a pure strategy we have
  i (ti ) = b i (ti ) for every ti 2 Ti .

    We focus on (interim) Bayesian Nash Equilibria (BNE) such that equilibrium strategies
are best responses at the interim stage (when each shareholder knows her own type).


3    Welfare Benchmarks

We consider two di¤erent welfare benchmarks, which serve di¤erent purposes: one is to
assess the e¢ ciency of a mechanism, and the other to compare mechanisms which are not
e¢ cient.
   Our e¢ ciency benchmark corresponds to the preferred outcome of shareholders when
they have access to all the information dispersed in the electorate (i.e., if they were able


                                                8
to observe the signal pro...le). In that case, shareholders would prefer the alternative that
is most likely to match the state of the world, conditional on the available information:

De...nition 2 Given a vector of signals s = (s1 ; s2 ; :::; sn ), the e¢ cient outcome, E , is
equal to A if Pr ( js) > 1=2, B if Pr ( js) > 1=2, and AB otherwise.

   This leads to a natural implementation notion:

De...nition 3 Given a voting rule fX; wg, a BNE                = ( 1 ; :::; n ) is e¢ cient if
  w
     P
G ( i2N bi (ti )) = E for every t 2 i2N Ti and every potential realization b(t) of the
random variables f 1 (t1 ); 2 (t2 ); :::g. A voting mechanism V implements the e¢ cient out-
come in equilibrium, if for every d, V (d) admits an e¢ cient BNE.

   Our second welfare benchmark corresponds to the preferred outcome of shareholders
when they know the state of the world:

De...nition 4 Given the state of the world ! , the correct outcome is A in state , and B
in state .

    The two welfare benchmarks are fully compatible: when the state of the world is un-
observable, then the alternative that is most likely the correct outcome given the available
information coincides with the e¢ cient outcome. Moreover, in our common value environ-
ment, both these welfare benchmarks are aligned with utilitarian principles. The correct
outcome is the utilitarian outcome (i.e. the alternative that maximizes the sum of ex-post
utilities), and the e¢ cient outcome is the outcome most likely to be the utilitarian one
given all the shareholders'information.
    We then compare the performance of voting mechanisms focusing on the ex-ante (i.e.
before the state of the world and types are drawn) probability with which they implement
the correct decision, considering both the best equilibria (in terms of selecting the correct
outcome), and the worst ones:

De...nition 5 Voting mechanism V dominates voting mechanism V 0 given a share dis-
tribution d if (i) for every BNE of V 0 (d), there is a BNE of V (d) such that the ex-ante
probability of implementing the correct outcome is higher under V than V 0 ; and (ii) for
every BNE of V (d), there is a BNE of V 0 (d) such that the ex-ante probability of imple-
menting the correct outcome is lower under V 0 than V: If, moreover, either (i) or (ii) (or
both) hold strictly, we say that V strictly dominates V 0 .

    Voting mechanisms typically admit multiple equilibria. Therefore, assessing the poten-
tial performance of a mechanism considering only the best (worst) equilibrium, in terms of

                                              9
the ex-ante probability of selecting the correct alternative, might be overly optimistic (pes-
simistic). For this reason, we opt for a comparative criterion that combines both the best
and the worst possible equilibrium outcomes. We say that a mechanism dominates another
if and only if the former is superior to the latter in both dimensions. This is particularly
important in our case because, as we will illustrate below, mechanisms with richer ballot
spaces allow for both better and worse outcomes compared to mechanisms with poorer
ballot spaces. Hence, focusing only on the best (worst) equilibrium of each mechanism
might not be very informative with respect to the range of equilibrium performances.


4    Equilibrium Analysis: Exogenous Proposal

In this section, we analyze the equilibrium performances of various voting mechanisms
when the manager is passive, i.e., the proposal is exogenously given. We split the section
in two parts. First, we compare the information aggregation properties of ...nite voting
mechanisms, i.e., mechanisms with ...nite ballot spaces such as 1P1V, 1S1V, and 1S1V-R.
Second, we focus on the informational e¢ ciency of all types of voting mechanisms.
    We ...rst introduce the following Lemma, which is not only useful to prove some of our
key results, but also to understand the bene...ts and pitfalls of a mechanism with a richer
ballot space.

                        1       P
Lemma 1 Pr ( js) >      2   ,   i2N   ln (ti ) > 0:

Proof. See Appendix A.

    This is reminiscent of the results in Nitzan and Paroush (1982), which characterizes the
weights that a rule should attach to votes in situations where agents have heterogeneous
information precision in a common-value game.
    This result suggests that if a voting mechanism allows shareholders with di¤erent
information precision to cast votes in proportion to the logarithm of their type, then
e¢ ciency can be reached. For instance, let us consider a group of voters with the same
type space T = fe 10 ; e 1 ; e; e10 g: The voting mechanism V = f i2N f 10; 1; 1; 10g; 0g
allows them to secure the e¢ cient outcome if they each cast ln (ti ) votes in favor of A. Of
                                                                                            1
course, such a mechanism also makes the "ine¢ cient"outcome (i.e., A when Pr ( js) < 2
                          1
and B when Pr ( js) > 2     ) attainable, since a voter of type ti could cast ln(ti ) votes
in favor of A. By contrast, the mechanism V 0 = f i2N f 10; 10g; 0g does not allow the
voters to reach the e¢ cient outcome, nor the ine¢ cient one. Hence, it is not obvious how
to rank mechanisms V and V 0 in terms of potential outcomes. As we prove in the rest of
this section, when we focus on equilibrium outcomes, this indeterminacy is resolved.



                                                 10
4.1    Comparison of Finite Mechanisms

We start this section by comparing two arbitrary ...nite mechanisms, with one having a
ballot space that is a subset of the other's ballot space. To state our results in a compact
manner it is useful to pin down this possible relationship between two voting mechanisms.

De...nition 6 Consider two voting mechanisms, V and V 0 , with associated rules
V (d) = fX; wg and V 0 (d) = fX 0 ; wg. If Xi0      Xi for every shareholder i and every
share distribution d, then V is said to have a richer ballot space than V 0 .

    We are now ready to state our ...rst main result:19

Proposition 1 Under Assumption 1, if a ...nite mechanism V has a richer ballot space
than mechanism V 0 , and there is no decisive shareholder, then V dominates V 0 .

Proof. See Appendix A.

    Why does the mechanism with the richer ballot space dominate the other? First, let us
consider the comparison of the best equilibria under those two mechanisms. Recall from
McLennan (1998) that in a pure common value environment, a strategy pro...le producing
the maximal ex-ante utility must be an equilibrium.20 Given that mechanism V has a
richer ballot pro...le, any outcome under mechanism V 0 can be reproduced under V by
simply replicating the strategy. Hence, there always exists an equilibrium under V that
produces an ex-ante utility at least as high as in the best equilibrium under V 0 .21 Notice
that for this argument to hold it is not necessary that the best equilibrium of V is e¢ cient,
nor that a decisive player is absent. As long as V provides more ballot options to the
shareholders than V 0 , then the best equilibrium of V leads to the correct outcome with at
least as high a probability as the best equilibrium of V 0 .
    Second, let us consider the comparison of the worst equilibria under those two mech-
anisms. The proof has two main steps. In the ...rst step, we prove the intuitive result
that under any voting mechanism, a pro...le of monotone strategies is at least as good as
a pro...le where all voters vote in favor of the same outcome independently of their signal.
This last pro...le is in fact an equilibrium under any voting mechanism, provided that no

   19
      We prove the result under Assumption 1 for clarity of exposition. The result would still hold under
the milder assumption of Weak Monotone Likelihood Property. The proof can indeed be directly adapted
to that case, by de...ning shareholders'strategies as functions de...ned on the (compact) signal space rather
than on the type space.
   20
      McLennan (1998) assumes that types are ...nite to guarantee the existence of such a utility-maximizing
pro...le. We prove that pro...les that maximize ex-ante utility under any ...nite mechanism also exist in
settings with in...nite types, like ours.
   21
      Ahn and Oliveros (2016) use a similar argument to show the superiority of approval voting over
plurality.


                                                     11
shareholder is a decisive shareholder (as de...ned above). The second step consists in prov-
ing that any equilibrium is welfare-equivalent to a pro...le of strategies increasing in the
voters'types. We show that if an equilibrium exhibits strategies that are not monotonic,
with a shareholder i casting xi votes when of type ti but a larger amount x0  i > xi when of
            0                                                      0
lower type ti < ti , then it must be that the di¤erence between xi and xi is small enough
that it does not a¤ect the outcome. By following this line of reasoning, the equilibrium
can be shown to be equivalent to a pro...le of monotone strategies.
    Proposition 1 has two corollaries that are relevant for the three discrete rules introduced
in Section 2, 1P1V, 1S1V, and 1S1V-R. First, given its richer ballot space, 1S1V dominates
both 1P1V and 1S1V-R when there is no decisive shareholder:22

Corollary 1 If the share distribution d is such that there is no decisive shareholder under
V 1P 1V , V 1S 1V , and V 1S 1V R , then V 1S 1V dominates both V 1P 1V and V 1S 1V R .

     Given Lemma 1, the dominance of 1S1V over 1P1V seems intuitive when sharehold-
ings are positively correlated with information accuracy (especially, when di s are propor-
tional to ln (ti )s). But, if one relies on this intuition to try to assess which mechanism is
better when there is no correlation between information accuracy and shareholdings, one
might end up with the wrong conclusion that in such cases 1P1V should perform better
than 1S1V. This would be true only if shareholders behaved in an unsophisticated manner
(i.e., if they always cast the maximum allowed number of votes for the alternative they
consider more likely to be correct). As we prove, and explain after Proposition 1, when the
shareholders are strategic, then 1S1V dominates 1P1V independently of whether there is
a correlation between information precision and shareholdings.
    We can actually show, using numerical examples, that for some values of the para-
meters, the dominance is strict. Consider a ...rm with six shareholders. Shareholders 1,
2, and 3 hold k 2 f1; 2; 3g shares each, while shareholders 4, 5, and 6 hold 4 k shares
each. Signals are binary, si 2 fa; bg, and the likelihood of receiving the right signal is
p (aj ) = p (bj ) = pH 2 [:55; 1) for shareholders 1 3, and p (aj ) = p (bj ) = :55 for
shareholders 4 6.23 That is, shareholders 1 3 have more accurate information ­        they
estimate correctly the true state of the world with a probability pH      0:55­ while the
other three shareholders are less accurately informed ­they correctly infer the true state
of the world with a probability 0:55. Figure 1 plots the probability of taking the right
    22
       When a decisive shareholder exists under 1S1V (i.e., a shareholder that holds more than 50% of the
shares), then the dominance of 1S1V over 1P1V is reinforced as the worst equilibrium under 1S1V is
strictly better than the worst equilibrium under 1P1V. Indeed, under 1P1V the worst equilibrium is the
uninformative one in which a su¢ ciently large majority of shareholders votes for the same alternative inde-
pendently of their signals, while under 1S1V the worst equilibrium should at least re    ect the information
of the decisive player.
    23                                                                                                  1
       These parameters would be equivalent to having fi (si j ) = fi (1 si j ) = 2p for every si < 2     and
                                                   1
fi (si j ) = fi (1 si j ) = 2(1 p) for every si    2
                                                     , where p = pH  for shareholders  1   3 and  p = :55  for
shareholders 4 6.


                                                     12
                                              k = 1 (Pos. Corr.)                 k = 2 (No Corr.)                  k = 3 (Neg. Corr.)

                                  .75
   Probability Correct Decision

                                  .7




                                                                                                                                              1P1V
                                                                                                                                              1S1V-R
                                                                                                                                              1S1V
                                  .65




                                                                                                                                              1S1V-D
                                  .6




                                        .55           .6            .65 .55              .6              .65 .55           .6           .65

                                                                   Probability of Correct Signal - High Types




  Figure 1: Probability of a correct decision under 1P1V, 1S1V-R, 1S1V and 1S1V-D.



decision under 1S1V, 1S1V-R and 1P1V (and 1S1V-D as the e¢ cient benchmark, that
will be discussed later).
     As we know from Lemma 1, a key to aggregate information e¢ ciently is to attach
more weight to more informative signals. In our simple example, shareholders 1 3 are
always the ones that have more informative signals, and therefore their signals should have
more weight in the group decision. Under 1P1V, however, all votes have the same weight
and this undermines the ability of shareholders to aggregate information well, especially
compared to 1S1V. Under 1P1V there are two types of equilibria: (i) an equilibrium where
all shareholders vote their signal and (ii) an equilibrium in which two of the lowly informed
shareholders mute themselves by voting for opposite options. Each type of equilibria has
a di¤erent type of ine¢ ciencies: in the former, the cost is that lowly informed voters
overwrite decisions by the highly informed while in the second some of the information by
the lowly informed shareholders is lost.
    Under 1S1V-R, shareholders votes have weights proportional to their shares. The
ability of this mechanism to aggregate information critically depends on the correlation
between the number of shares and the quality of shareholders' information. When k =
2, all shareholders hold the same number of shares, and 1S1V-R mimics the properties
of 1P1V. When k = 1, there is a positive correlation between shares and quality of
information, and in this case 1S1V-R outperforms 1P1V only if shareholders with more
shares are su¢ ciently better informed. When k = 3, there is a negative correlation between
shares and quality of information, and in this case it is 1P1V that outperforms 1S1V-R.
   Finally, as one can see from Figure 1, 1S1V dominates both 1P1V and 1S1V-R. The
key for that result is that voters can endogenously determine the weight of their vote.


                                                                                              13
This allows the group' s decision to depend more heavily on more informative signals. The
di¤erence is particularly signi...cant in cases with negative correlation between shares and
information (k = 1).24
    Despite the superiority of 1S1V, it may not be fully e¢ cient (as one can see in the
case of k = 3 in Figure 1). The sources of ine¢ ciency of 1S1V are the discreteness of the
action space and, perhaps more importantly, the potential mismatch between the number
of shares own by a shareholder and the quality of her information. When k = 3 in the
previous example, 1S1V is not e¢ cient because better informed shareholders have too few
shares in order to reveal their information through the voting process. This leads to our
second corollary of Proposition 1: 1S1V becomes more e¢ cient when we multiply the
shares that all shareholders hold (i.e., when we split stocks).25

Corollary 2 Under V 1S 1V , splitting votes weakly increases welfare. That is, V 1S 1V (k d)
weakly dominates V 1S 1V (d) for any k 2 N.

    As discussed in the introduction, this result shows that, through their e¤ect on the
number of shares held by shareholders, stock splits indeed increase shareholders' ability
to reveal their information about the quality of management proposals through voting.
    Finally, Proposition 1 also has implications for dual class capital structures in which
some shares do not carry voting rights. Allowing for shares with no voting rights reduces
the e¤ective ballot space of some shareholders, limiting their ability to convey information
through voting. This a¤ects negatively information aggregation. Therefore, 1S1V where
all shares have voting rights dominate dual class systems.



4.2    E¢ ciency of Continuous Mechanisms

In this section, we focus on the e¢ ciency of the various voting mechanisms. We can achieve
a full characterization, both of the voting mechanisms that lead to e¢ ciency in equilibrium,
and of the complete set of e¢ cient equilibria corresponding to each such mechanism. The
overall message is that, to be e¢ cient, a voting mechanism must have a ballot space at
least as rich as the signal space.
    To prove the results in this section, we need one additional assumption:

Assumption 2 For every shareholder i 2 N , Ti = T (i.e.                     i   =   2 (0; 1)) and ti is
continuous in si .


  24
      It is worth pointing out that in the more general setup, it is not ex-ante clear which subjects will
receive the most informative signal, and this makes 1S1V-R relatively worse.
   25
      Note that increasing the number of shares proportionally has no e¤ect under 1P1V and 1P1V-R.


                                                   14
   This assumptions requires that all types that are possible for one shareholder are
possible ­but not necessarily equally likely­for any other. Even with this assumption, our
model allows for arbitrarily large di¤erences in the expected information quality of two
shareholders.26
    We ...rst characterize the unique e¢ cient equilibrium under 1S1V-D :

Proposition 2 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for any share distribution d, the one-share-
one-vote with divisible votes mechanism, V 1S 1V D (d), admits a unique (up to admissible
multiplicative and additive constants) e¢ cient BNE such that 1  i
                                                                   S 1V D
                                                                          (ti ) = c ln ti + i
     P                              di      di + i
with i2N i = 0 and c 2 (0; minf ln ; ln g] for every i 2 N .
                                        i




Proof. See Appendix A.

                                                                    P
    The equilibrium strategy implies that A wins if and only if i2N c ln (ti ) > 0, which
guarantees that the outcome is e¢ cient. As mentioned above, we know from McLen-
nan (1998) that a strategy that maximizes ex ante welfare must be an equilibrium.27
Uniqueness (up to a multiplicative and an additive constant) follows from the fact that
                                                   P                    P
any e¢ cient BNE must guarantee that sgn              i2N i (ti ) = sgn  i2N ln (ti ) : Only
                                                P
strategies such that i (ti ) = c ln ti + i with i2N i = 0 and c 2 (0; minf d i
                                                                            ln
                                                                                 i
                                                                                   ; d i+ i
                                                                                      ln    g]
                                         28
for every i 2 N satisfy that condition. The maximum value of c simply guarantees that
the ballot of any given type of voter ...ts in the ballot space.
     This equilibrium characterization provides interesting insights regarding the optimal
majority threshold for the passing of a proposal (see, e.g., Maug and Rydqvist 2009).
Indeed, under one-person-one-vote mechanisms or one-share-one-vote mechanisms that do
not allow for vote divisibility, we know that the majority requirement maximizing the
probability of implementing the correct alternative varies with the information structures
(i.e. for di¤erent Fi s). By contrast, under 1S1V-D we have an e¢ cient equilibrium for any
majority requirement; w. Hence, 1S1V-D remains e¢ cient even if a super majority thresh-
old is necessary for alternative reasons (e.g. to prevent aggressive acquisition attempts)
or is mandated by law (e.g., for changes in the Bylaws of the ...rm).


   26
       The continuity of the mapping from signals to types amounts to having a connected type space. This
helps us to fully focus on the essential nature of the strategies in an e¢ cient equilibrium, without being
distracted by the possibility of multiple best responses. Indeed, when gaps in the type space are allowed
all the equilibria that we identify still exist, but additional ones emerge due to indi¤erences of types close
to points of discontinuity.
    27
       We can even show that 1S 1V D is an ex-post equilibrium: no shareholder has incentives to deviate
ex post, when all types are known.
    28
       This result highlights a challenge for shareholders: they need to coordinate on the correct multiplica-
tive and additive constants. It seems that a focal equilibrium is the one in which shareholders use the
highest possible vote weight when they receive the most informative signal and zero votes when completely
indi¤erent. This prediction could be tested in the laboratory.


                                                     15
   Next, we show that continuous voting mechanisms, like 1S1V-D, are the only e¢ cient
mechanisms:

Proposition 3 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, a voting mechanism implements the e¢ cient
outcome in equilibrium if and only if it is a continuous voting mechanism.

Proof. See Appendix A.

     The "if" part of the proposition follows from the fact that the e¢ cient equilibrium
of the 1S1V-D mechanism can be properly rescaled to ...t the ballot space of any con-
tinuous voting mechanism (i.e. to ...t within any open set around any vector ( i )i2N
           P
such that i2N i = w): The "only if" part of the proposition follows from the fact that
any e¢ cient equilibrium must be strictly increasing in the shareholder'       s type, and only
continuous voting mechanisms satisfy that requirement. To understand why it must be
strictly increasing, just consider two type pro...les t and t0 such that (i) t i = t0 i , (ii)
Pr ( jt) > Pr ( jt) ; and (iii) Pr ( jt0 ) < Pr ( jt0 ) : It must then be that ti > t0 i . But, if
               0                                            0
  i (ti )  i (ti ) ; then either the outcome for t or for t is not e¢ cient (or both).

   Proposition 3 has the following implication for the comparison of 1S1V-D, or any
continuous voting mechanism, with 1S1V, 1S1V-R and 1P1V :29

Corollary 3 Any continuous voting mechanism admits a BNE that implements the correct
outcome with a higher probability than any BNE of 1S1V, 1S1V-R, and 1P1V. For some
values of the parameters, the inequality is strict.

    The intuition of this result is similar to the one of Proposition 2. First, note that
the ballot space is richer under continuous voting mechanisms than under 1S1V, 1S1V-R,
and 1P1V (or any other mechanism under consideration). Hence, any strategy pro...le
under 1S1V, 1S1V-R, or 1P1V can be reproduced under a continuous voting mechanism.
In particular, this is true for any e¢ cient equilibrium under 1S1V, 1S1V-R, or 1P1V.
Thus continuous voting mechanisms are at least as good as 1S1V, 1S1V-R, and 1P1V. On
the other hand, the unique e¢ cient equilibrium under any continuous voting mechanism
cannot be reproduced under any other mechanism. This is simply because 1S1V, 1S1V-R,
and 1P1V do not have ballot spaces su¢ ciently rich to accommodate for every possible
small change in the type pro...le.
    There are various speci...c weaknesses of the discrete mechanisms we analyzed that
1S1V-D solves. While we know that 1P1V aggregates information asymptotically in
various sets of situations (see, e.g., Feddersen and Pesendorfer 1997, Myerson 1998, Bhat-
tacharya 2013, and Barelli et al. 2019), we also know that it does not typically aggregate
  29
     Under the same assumptions used in Proposition 1, and with a general ­  but ...nite­ type space, we
can further establish that the worst equilibrium of a continuous voting mechanism is no worse than the
worst equilibrium of any ...nite mechanism.


                                                  16
information well in relatively small groups (see, e.g., Feddersen and Pesendorfer 1996). It
is easy to prove that the same is true for 1S1V-R. In contrast, 1S1V-D performs well both
in large and small groups.
    Another weakness of 1P1V, 1S1V-R and 1S1V is that shareholders need to know the
information technology of all other shareholders, i.e., Fi ( j! ), in order to determine their
optimal strategy. If they are mistaken or have ambiguous beliefs about the information
technology of others, then 1P1V may even fail to aggregate information asymptotically.
By contrast, it is clear from Proposition 2 that the equilibrium strategy for any share-
holder under 1S1V-D is independent of the information technology of other shareholders.
This directly implies that 1S1V-D remains e¢ cient even in presence of such mistakes or
ambiguities.


4.3     Robustness

In this section, we explore the robustness of the above results when we allow for partisan
shareholders, and when we endogenize the acquisition of information by shareholders.


4.3.1    Partisans

There is evidence that disagreement among shareholders may not only stem from infor-
mation asymmetries, but also from di¤erences in preferences (Bolton et al., 2020). As
mentioned in Cvijnovic et al. (2019, p.3), preferences may vary due to di¤erences in, e.g.,
portfolio allocation (Cohen and Schmidt 2009), business ties (Davis and Kim 2007, and
Cvijnovic et al. 2016), reputational concerns (Chevalier and Ellison 2009), and political
and social goals (Woidtke 2002).
   We consider the same model as in Section 2 except that we allow for three types of
shareholders: A; B , and C: The utility of the di¤erent shareholders are given by:
                                    8
                                    >  A
                                    < ui (Oj! ) = hi        1fO=Ag
   8O 2 fA; B g; 8! 2 f ; g;          uB
                                       i (O j! ) = hi       1f O = B g                           (1)
                                    >
                                    : C
                                      ui (Oj! ) = hi        (1fO=A;!=    g   1fO=A;!= g ):

That is, A (resp. B )-shareholders want A (resp. B ) to be selected irrespective of the
state ! , whereas C -shareholders are common-value shareholders who want the decision
to match the state. We denote the fraction of shares held by A(resp. B )-shareholders
by hA (resp. hB ). Common-value shareholders own the remaining fraction of the stock,
hC = 1 hA hB . Only C -shareholders receive a signal about the quality of the proposal.30
In what follows, we consider two di¤erent cases: (i) hA and hB are common knowledge,

  30
    Allowing partisan shareholders to be informed does not alter the results, but requires additional
notation.


                                                 17
and (ii) hA and hB are not common knowledge.
    Partisan shareholders (A and B types) are always (weakly) better o¤ by giving the
largest possible number of votes to their favorite alternative, independently of the behavior
of the other shareholders (as in Nunez and Laslier 2014). To ensure that our results do
not hinge on possible beliefs that make partisan voters indi¤erent between several actions,
we consider that such voters always play that unique dominant strategy. This directly
implies that when there are only partisan shareholders (hC = 0), then 1S1V, 1S1V-R, and
1S1V-D lead to the same outcome.
    Another implication of partisan voters' dominant strategy is that if di¤erent mecha-
nisms allow for a di¤erent maximum number of votes for di¤erent shareholders, partisans
will have an asymmetric e¤ect across mechanisms. For this reason, we limit attention to
comparing voting mechanisms which result in the same distribution of power:

De...nition 7 If two mechanisms, V and V 0 , with associated rules V (d) = fX; wg and
V 0 (d) = fX 0 ; wg, are such that max Xi = max Xi0 and min Xi = min Xi0 for every share-
holder i and any distribution of shareholdings d, then V assigns power similarly to V 0 .

   That is, while di¤erent shareholders might have a di¤erent maximum number of votes,
each shareholder must have the same maximum number of votes under any mechanism
that we compare.
    Finally, while the game now includes non-common value shareholders, we still use the
notion of dominance and e¢ ciency de...ned in Section 3. The main reason to do so is that
our focus is on the informational e¢ ciency of voting mechanisms. Another reason is that
these welfare benchmarks, even if they are better suited for the analysis of common-value
elections, also admit a utilitarian interpretation in certain contexts with heterogeneous
preferences.31


Partisan Shareholders are Common Knowledge. When there is no uncertainty
about the fraction of shares held by partisans, all our main results mostly hold. In par-
ticular, we can prove that (i) mechanisms with richer ballot spaces dominate mechanisms
with poorer ballot spaces if these mechanisms do not di¤er in how they distribute power
accross shareholders, and (ii) the 1S1V-D mechanism is e¢ cient and its superiority over
other mechanisms might be reinforced.
   31
      When there are partisan shareholders, the correct outcome (i.e., A in state , and B in state )
does not necessarily coincide with the utilitarian one. Under 1S1V, 1S1V-R, and 1S1V-D, when partisans
have so many votes that common-value shareholders cannot a¤ect the ...nal outcome, then in one state
the correct outcome coincides with the one that maximizes the sum of utilities; and in the other state
they di¤er. Importantly, those situations are the same for 1S1V, 1S1V-R, and 1S1V-D. In the remaining
situations, when the behavior of the common-value shareholders matters for the ...nal outcome, the correct
outcome coincides with the utilitarian one. Hence, if one of the three voting mechanisms is found to
admit a BNE that implements the correct outcome with higher probability than any BNE of the other
mechanisms, then it follows that it also implements the utilitarian outcome with higher probability.


                                                   18
Proposition 4 Consider that hA and hB are common knowledge. Under Assumption 1:
(i) if a ...nite mechanism V has a richer ballot space than mechanism V 0 ­   but the two
mechanisms distribute power similarly­ and d is such that there is no decisive voter, then
V dominates V 0 ; and (ii) if d is such that hC > jhA hB j, then V 1S 1V D , admits an
e¢ cient BNE.

Proof. See Appendix A.
    To understand this result, let us ...rst focus on the e¢ ciency of 1S1V-D. Shareholder
i will choose +di if she is a A-shareholder, and di if she is a B -shareholder. When hA
is larger than hB ; it is as if the voting mechanism were biased against the status quo,
and conversely for hA < hB . To implement the e¢ cient outcome, C -shareholders must
then ...nd a way to compensate for that bias. An easy way to do so is for common-value
shareholders to make two modi...cations to the e¢ cient equilibrium strategy under 1S1V-D
as characterized in Proposition 2. First, common-value shareholders have to rescale their
strategy by a factor of 1 jhAhChB j to leave room for compensation. Second, if say
                                                              hB hA
hB > hA ; each common-value shareholder i includes di           hC    points in favor of A on
her ballot.
    For instance, consider a case with ten common-value shareholders holding 10 shares
each, and partisan shareholders, all of them of type B , holding cumulatively 20 shares.
Assume that, without the partisans, each common-value shareholder would give 10 points
to A when receiving the most informative signal in favor of A; 2 points to A when receiving
another, less informative signal in favor of A, and -5 points to A (i.e. 5 points to B )
when receiving a signal in favor of B . With partisan shareholders, each common-value
shareholder would rescale her strategy by a factor of 0.8 (i.e., giving 0.8 times the number of
points she would have given without partisan shareholders), and add 2 points for A: Thus,
she would still give 10 (= 10 0:8 + 2) points to A when receiving the most informative
signal in favor of A, but she would now give 3.6 (= 2 0:8 + 2) points to A when receiving
the less informative signal in favor of A, and -2 (= 5 0:8 + 2) points to A (i.e. 2 points
to B ) when receiving a signal in favor of B .
    We can also show that 1S1V not only continues to dominate 1S1V-R in the presence
of a known number of partisans, but that this dominance may be reinforced. This is
so because the presence of partisans makes information aggregation under 1S1V-R less
e¢ cient. The problem comes from the fact that shareholders cannot at the same time
reveal their information and compensate for the bias. This is particularly evident in the
asymmetric equilibrium. In that equilibrium, under 1S1V-R, some shareholders specialize
in compensating for the bias and others in sharing information (i.e., they vote sincerely).
Thus, the information of shareholders who compensate for the bias is lost (the same is
true in symmetric BNE in which all shareholders mix between the compensating strategy
and the sharing information one). We illustrate this with a numerical example in which,

                                              19
                                              .62
               Probability Correct Decision

                                              .6
                                              .58                                                    1S1V
                                                                                                     1S1V-R
                                              .56
                                              .54




                                                    0   1        2           3           4       5            6
                                                            Number of (additional) B-partisans




Figure 2: Probability of correct decision under 1S1V and under 1S1V-R. There are 7
symmetric non-partisan shareholders: they hold the same (large) amount of shares and
have the same information technology. Signals are binary, and the likelihood of receiving
the right signal is .55 in both states.



without partisan shareholders, 1S1V-R would perform as well as 1S1V (see Figure 2).


Partisan Shareholders are Not Common Knowledge. To explore this case, we
assume that the distribution of shares d = (di )i2N is common knowledge among share-
holders, but the partisan type of each shareholder is unknown. Speci...cally, the partisan
type of each shareholder i 2 N is drawn from a distribution pi 2 (fA; B; C g), and her
utility is given by (1). We let p = (pi )i2N denote the shareholder-speci...c partisan-type
distribution.
   In this extended model, we show that mechanisms with richer ballot spaces still domi-
nate mechanisms with poorer ballot spaces (provided that they distribute power similarly)
when we restrict our attention on their best equilibria.

Proposition 5 Consider two ...nite mechanisms V and V 0 , a distribution of shareholdings
d, and a partisan-type distribution p. Under Assumptions 1, if V has a richer ballot space
than mechanism V 0 ­   but the two mechanisms distribute power similarly­  , then for any
               0
BNE under V (d) there exists a BNE under V (d) such that the probability of making the
correct decision is higher.

Proof. See Appendix A.


                                                                      20
                                             (i) Pr(s a|a) = Pr(s b|ß)              (ii) Pr(s a|a) < Pr(s b|ß)              (iii) Pr(s a|a) > Pr(s b|ß)


                                   .7
    Probability Correct Decision

                                   .65
                                   .6
                                   .55
                                   .5




                                         0   .2     .4      .6       .8   1   0    .2      .4       .6      .8      1   0   .2      .4      .6       .8   1

                                                                                  Frequency B-partisans

                                                                                    1S1V                   1S1V-R




Figure 3: Probability of correct decision under 1S1V (with a large number of votes) and
1S1V-R with binary signals and a random number of B partisans. n = 6 and priors
are even. The conditional probabilities of receiving the correct signals in each state are
P r(sa j ) = P r(sb j ) = 55% in (i), P r(sa j ) = 55% and P r(sb j ) = 65% in (ii), and
P r(sa j ) = 65% and P r(sb j ) = 55% in (iii).



   To understand this result, ...rst note that partisan shareholders behave in the same way
under V and V 0 : they give as many points as possible to their favorite alternative. Thus,
they create the same noise under the two voting mechanisms. To implement their desired
outcomes, common-value shareholders have to correct for that noise while still ...nding a
way to reveal their information. The relatively richer ballot space under V than V 0 gives
more leeway to common-value shareholders to achieve this.
    Focusing on the comparison between 1S1V-R and 1S1V, we can show, using numerical
examples, that the latter sometimes strictly dominates the former (Figure 3). Figure 3
also illustrates that the presence of partisan shareholders creates ine¢ ciencies, even under
1S1V : the probability of reaching the correct decision given the collective information
decreases with the frequency of partisan shareholder B under both 1S1V-R and 1S1V.
This suggests an explanation for the empirical ...nding that ...rms with more heterogeneous
shareholder base under-perform (see, e.g., Kandel et al. 2011, and Schwartz-Ziv and
Volkova 2020).


4.3.2                              Endogenous Information

Consider now that the signal is not free. Speci...cally, we introduce a pre-stage to the
game in which shareholders independently and simultaneously decide whether to acquire
an informative signal at cost l > 0, or to stay only with the prior. In the next stage of

                                                                                        21
the game, the shareholders observe who acquired a signal, and then vote. For tractability,
we focus on equilibria in which shareholders use pure strategies in the ...rst stage, and the
BNE that maximizes the probability of making the correct decision in each subgame.
    This is the model considered in Persico (2004), with two di¤erences: (i) we allow for
more general signal structures and a more general class of voting mechanisms, and (ii) he
allows for imperfect information (i.e. shareholders do not necessarily observe who acquired
a signal). This simplifying assumption helps us deal more easily with the large variety of
voting rules and signals that we consider here, but we argue after the statement of the
result why it is robust to having unobservable information acquisition at least as far as
the comparison of best equilibria of di¤erent mechanisms is concerned.
    In this setup, we can show that continuous voting mechanisms (like 1S1V-D ) still
dominate all the other voting mechanisms but with a di¤erent welfare criterion in mind:
the probability of making the correct decision net of total information acquisition costs.
It seems reasonable that shareholders should care both about the accuracy of their choice
and the cost of information acquisition. Now, this does not exclude the possibility that
another mechanism is superior in terms of maximizing the probability of making the correct
decision independent of the information acquisition costs.

Proposition 6 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the probability of making the correct decision
net of total information costs is higher under a continuous voting mechanism compared to
any other voting mechanism.

Proof. See Appendix A.

    The intuition behind this result relies on the following fact. Consider a given pro...le
of information acquisition decisions of the other shareholders. Then, an increase in the
expected utility of a shareholder if she acquires information corresponds to the increase in
the probability of making the correct decision net of the increase in total information ac-
quisition costs. Hence, the information acquisition game is a potential game. Its potential
is the probability of making the correct decision net of the total information acquisition
costs.
    Now, let us consider shareholders using the same pro...le of information acquisition
decisions under a continuous voting mechanism as in the equilibrium of another voting
mechanism. The value of the potential corresponding to the continuous voting mechanism
must be at least as high as that of the other mechanism. This follows from the superior
information aggregation properties of continuous voting mechanisms. For that pro...le
of information acquisition decisions, the information costs are the same under the two
mechanisms, but the probability of making the correct decision is higher under continuous
voting mechanisms. Hence, in every equilibrium under continuous voting mechanisms the


                                             22
value of the potential must be strictly larger compared to the value of the potential in any
equilibrium of any other mechanism.
    The above result is robust to information acquisition decisions being unobservable.
To see this, notice that the best equilibrium of the game with observable information
acquisition decisions remains an equilibrium of the game with unobservable information
decisions under any voting mechanism. Indeed, under observable information acquisi-
tion, in the best equilibrium of a voting mechanism when a shareholder who is expected
to acquire information does not acquire information, she decreases her expected utility
(otherwise, we would not be in equilibrium), but less so compared to the case of unob-
servable information acquisition decisions: in the ...rst case, all shareholders adjust and
use the welfare maximizing BNE of the voting subgame, but in the latter they cannot
do so and the probability of making the correct decision decreases even more. Hence,
continuous voting mechanisms deliver a higher probability of making the correct choice
net of total information acquisition costs, even when information acquisition decisions are
unobservable.


5     Endogenous Proposal

As we discussed in the Introduction, a key role of shareholder meetings is to provide
proper incentives to managers.32 The ...rst part of our analysis abstracted from the issue
of managers' incentives with respect to the design and selection of proposals, to instead
focus on the information aggregation properties of voting mechanisms. In this section,
we explore the e¤ect of the voting mechanism on the managers'incentives. In particular,
we allow the management to decide whether to put a proposal (of exogenously given
quality) to the vote.33 The management thus has veto power on the proposal. We allow
for management'   s preferences to di¤er from shareholders'preferences over two dimensions.
First, the manager may prefer the proposal to be adopted in both states. We then say that
the manager is misaligned. Second, the manager may incur a cost if a proposal is rejected
at the shareholder meeting. In order to disentangle the impact of those two dimensions,
we ...rst consider the case with costless rejection. We then consider the case with costly
rejection.


    32
       The proper use of information by shareholders appears to be crucial. As mentioned in Harford et
al. (2018, p. 425): "Monitoring by imperfectly informed market participants can lead managers to make
myopic investment decisions (Stein, 1988). Indeed, most managers admit that they are willing to sacri...ce
long-term shareholder value for short-term pro...ts (Graham et al., 2005)." Similarly, Richardson (2000)
...nds a positive relationship between information asymmetry, between shareholders and managers, and
earnings management (i.e., funky accounting practices by managers).
    33
       In a previous version of the paper, we explored another margin of action for the management: the
intensive margin. To do so, we allowed the management to exert costly e¤ort in order to increase the
quality of the proposal.


                                                   23
5.1    A General Model

We introduce a general model that encompasses all the cases that will be discussed in this
section. The shareholders are modeled as in our baseline model. For the sake of conciseness,
we mostly restrict our attention to two voting mechanisms: 1P1V and 1S1V-D ; which are
the two polar cases in terms of vote divisibility, and hence informational e¢ ciency.
     We introduce a new player: the manager, denoted by M . She does not belong to the
set of shareholders.34 After receiving a signal (more details below), the manager decides
to either put the proposal to a vote (xM = P ) or veto it (xM = V ). If the manager vetoes,
the proposal is not considered by the shareholders, and the outcome is B . If the manager
calls for a vote, shareholders decide whether to accept it (outcome A) or reject it (outcome
B ).
    Before making her decision, the manager receives a signal sM 2 [0; 1]. In any state ! ,
the signal sM is drawn from a distribution FM ( j! ), with density fM ( j! ), independently
from the signals of the shareholders. We assume that the manager'     s type tM is weakly
increasing in sM :
    The utility of the manager uM can be decomposed into two parts: an outcome-utility
uoM and a potential (reputation) cost c. The outcome-utility depends on whether the
manager is aligned (a = 1) with the shareholders or misaligned (a = 0). When aligned, the
manager has the same outcome-utility as a shareholder holding one share. In particular,
for any decision O 2 fA; B g and state ! 2 f ; g, we have:

                         uo
                          M (O j!; a = 1) = 1fO=A;! =      g   1fO=A;!= g :

When misaligned, the manager only wants the reform to pass:

                                    uo
                                     M (O j!; a = 0) = 1fO=Ag :


We assume that the manager has an ex-ante probability 2 [0; 1] to be misaligned, and
that the draw of a is independent of both the state and the signals. Only the manager
knows whether she is aligned.
    The manager also incurs a cost c 0 if the proposal is turned down by shareholders at
the meeting. Shareholders know the value of c. The utility of the manager can be written
as:
                  uM (O; xM j!; a) = uo
                                      M (O j!; a)  c 1fxM =P;O=B g :

     While the game has now an additional player, we still use the notion of dominance
de...ned for the exogenous proposal case: a voting mechanism dominates another if the

  34
    This assumption is not crucial for our results except for the case of a fully aligned manager under
1S1V. Without that assumption, the manager never vetoes in that case, making it less interesting.


                                                  24
best and worst equilibrium of the former mechanism (in terms of informational e¢ ciency,
taking both shareholders' and the manager' s signals into account), outperform the best
and worst equilibria of the latter.
    In order to analyze the endogenous proposal case, we need to consider asymmetric
priors. In particular, shareholders may attach di¤erent probabilities to each state because
of the strategic behavior of the manager. Crucial to the analysis that follows, our result
that 1S1V-D dominates 1P1V is robust to asymmetric priors. In fact, 1S1V-D remains
e¢ cient in that case.35


5.2     Costless Rejection

We start by investigating the case for which the manager does not su¤er from a cost if her
proposal is turned down at the shareholders meeting (c = 0). The only potential source of
con  ict with shareholders is then whether the proposal should pass only in state ! = ;
or in both states.
     The analysis of this case allows us (i) to show that the informational e¢ ciency of a
voting mechanism a¤ects the incentives of the manager, whether or not there is con          ict
with the shareholders; (ii) to identify a new rationale for the selection of good proposals by
the manager and hence the high approval rate of management'        s proposal in practice; and
(iii) to highlight a new testable prediction about the relationship between the approval
rate of proposals at the meeting and the alignment of manager and shareholders.


5.2.1     Comparison of Voting Mechanisms

The following proposition shows that, when rejection of the proposal at the meeting is
costless for the manager, 1S1V continues to perform better than 1P1V :

Proposition 7 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for every probability          2 [0; 1] that the
manager is misaligned, the one-share-one-vote with partial abstention mechanism (V 1S 1V )
dominates the one-person-one-vote mechanism (V 1P 1V ). For some parameter values, the
dominance is strict.

Proof. See Appendix B.

   To understand this result, let us ...rst suppose that the manager is aligned with share-
holders with probability one (i.e., = 0). When an aligned manager takes the behavior of
   35                                                                                                          1
     A simple modi...cation of Lemma 1 to allow for asymmetric priors shows that the posterior Pr ( js) > 2
               P                    1 Pr( )
if and only if    i2N ln (ti ) > ln  Pr( )
                                            . Thus, in order to implement the e¢ cient decision at the
voting stage, shareholders need to compensate for the di¤erent likelihood across states. Under 1S1V-D,
shareholders can still implement the e¢ cient decision with the equilibrium 1i
                                                                               S 1V D
                                                                                      (ti ) = c ln ti + i , with
P              Pr( )
    i = c ln 1 Pr( ) .



                                                      25
shareholders as given, she puts the proposal to a vote only if she believes that it is su¢ -
ciently likely to be a good proposal (i.e., that the state is ). The de...nition of "su¢ ciently
likely"depends on the magnitude of type-I (outcome A in state ) and type-II (outcome
B in state ) errors at the voting stage. The higher the overall probability of error, the
higher the manager'   s incentives to veto. As we have seen in the previous section, for any
given information structure, errors at the voting stage are higher under 1P1V than 1S1V.
Hence, the aligned manager has stronger incentives to veto the proposal under 1P1V than
1S1V.
    Given that the manager is (partially) informed about the state of the world, her decision
of whether to veto in   uences the beliefs of shareholders about the quality of the proposal.
The higher propensity of the manager to veto under 1P1V implies that the decision to call
for a vote is a stronger signal that the proposal is good under 1P1V than 1S1V. Hence,
shareholders start their meeting with more precise information (and more favorable to
A) under 1P1V than 1S1V, which increases the probability that they make a correct
decision. There is thus a trade-o¤ between the informational e¢ ciency of 1S1V in the
voting phase and the poorer selection incentives it gives to the manager before the meeting.
In Proposition 7, we prove that, despite this trade-o¤, 1S1V continues to dominate 1P1V.
For the case of a perfectly aligned manager, the intuition is similar to that of previous
results: conditional on the state, all players prefer the same outcome. Since 1S1V gives
more    exibility to transmit information than 1P1V, it dominates.
    The case with a potentially misaligned manager is less straightforward. The trade-
o¤ between selection and voting e¢ ciency remains when the manager is misaligned with
positive probability, i.e., > 0: The only di¤erence is that under both 1S1V and 1P1V,
when the manager is misaligned (a = 0), she always puts the proposal to a vote. This
is true even if she receives a very precise signal that the proposal is undesirable. Hence,
the ratio of bad proposals over good ones proposed by a misaligned manager is higher
than the same ratio for an aligned managers. This a¤ects the shareholders'beliefs at the
meeting. But, since the behavior of the misaligned manager is the same under 1S1V and
1P1V, this e¤ect does not change di¤erently the beliefs of shareholders under the two
voting mechanisms.


5.2.2   Empirical Implications

This analysis sheds a new light on the very high approval rate of management'    s proposals
by shareholders in practice (see, e.g., Maug and Rydqvist 2009, Babenko et al. 2018, and
Bach and Metzger 2019). It has been argued (informally) that such a high rate can be
explained by the selection of proposals by managers (see, e.g., Becht et al. 2016). The idea
is that the fear of having a proposal turned down, which has negative consequences for
the managers, gives managers incentives to withhold low quality proposals. This means


                                              26
that only high quality proposals are put to a vote, and are approved at a very high rate.
    In our model, shareholders approve the proposal more frequently when the manager
has the power to veto it than when she does not. Yet, the mechanism at play is di¤erent.
As we explained above, it does not necessarily rely on the management incurring a cost
when its proposal is rejected by shareholders, as we assumed c = 0 in this subsection. It
instead relies on the manager' s willingness to make decision that are bene...cial for the ...rm
and shareholders. This is another source of selection for proposals at shareholders meetings
that has implications for the empirical literature studying the e¤ects of shareholders voting
on ...rms'performance.
    Our analysis also produces a testable prediction: the approval rate of proposals at the
shareholder meeting is decreasing in ; the probability that the manager is misaligned.
Di¤erent measures of alignment between shareholders and management could be used to
test this prediction, such as the extent of the CEO equity-based compensation as in Datta
et al. (2001), bonus-compensation as in Grinstein and Hribar (2004), and the sensitivity of
the CEO compensation to stock performance post acquisition as in Harford and Li (2007).


5.3     Costly Rejection

We now analyze the case in which the manager incurs a cost when her proposal is rejected
at the meeting (c > 0). There are thus two sources of conicts with shareholders: the man-
ager may want the proposal to pass in both states of the world (when she is misaligned),
and she fears a no vote by shareholders (independently of whether she is misaligned).
    Costly rejection moderates the incentives of the manager to call for a vote. This mod-
erating e¤ect is stronger (i) the higher the cost of rejection c; and (ii) the higher the
probability of rejection by shareholders. Given that the probability of rejection is gener-
ically di¤erent under 1S1V and 1P1V, the moderating e¤ect a¤ects manager'        s behavior
di¤erently under the two mechanisms. Our main ...nding is that, in some cases, the cost of
rejection alters the trade-o¤ between selection and voting e¢ ciency so that the selection
e¤ect under 1P1V becomes su¢ ciently strong to overturn the dominance of 1S1V.
    To simplify the analysis, we work under the assumption that the manager is perfectly
informed about the quality of the proposal (i.e., she knows the state of the world). Thus,
the aligned manager (i) always vetoes a bad proposal, and (ii) has the same incentives as
the misaligned manager when the proposal is good.


5.3.1    Equilibrium Behavior

Given that the probability of rejection is higher in the bad state (under both 1S1V and
1P1V ), a misaligned manager has stronger incentives to veto when the proposal is bad.
Hence, she must veto with a higher probability in the bad state. This narrows down


                                              27
the potential equilibrium strategy to three forms: (i) the manager never vetoes, (ii) the
manager never vetoes in the good state but vetoes with positive probability in the bad
state, and (iii) the manager vetoes in both states. That latter case, which occurs only
with speci...c out-of-equilibrium beliefs for shareholders or very large c, is uninteresting.
We thus focus on the two other types of equilibria in what follows.
    In these equilbria, the manager never vetoes in the good state (regardless of her type),
she always veto a bad reform when aligned, and vetoes in the bad state with probability
                               36 Together,
  V 2 [0; 1) when misaligned.                  and V determine the shareholders' prior
that the reform is good conditional on a vote, which in turn determines the shareholders'
optimal behavior at the meeting. In equilibrium, it must be that the probability of vetoing
in the bad state is optimal given the best response of shareholders.
    A key driver of the manager'   s behavior is the probability that the proposal is rejected
by shareholders. For the misaligned manager considering whether to veto the proposal in
the bad state, the decision relies on the probability that the proposal is rejected in that
state, i.e., 1 minus the probability of type-I error, pI . The expected payo¤ of the manager
when she calls for a vote is, therefore, pI c (1 pI ) : This has to be compared to a payo¤
                                                                                            c
of 0 if she vetoes the proposal. As a result, the manager strictly prefers to veto if pI > 1+ c;
                            c
and is indi¤erent if pI = 1+c .
    How does pI vary across voting mechanisms? Depending on the situation, it may
be higher or lower under 1S1V than 1P1V. This is illustrated in Figure 4, which shows
the probability of type-I errors as a function of the prior for the case of an exogenous
proposal. The parameters used for this example are n = 5, and binary signals with
Pr (s j ) = Pr (s j ) = 0:6. The ...gure shows that, depending on shareholders'prior ( ),
type-I error can be more or less likely under 1P1V than 1S1V. Thus, incentives to veto
in the bad state are stronger under 1P1V only in some cases.37


5.3.2    Comparison of Mechanisms

When the probability of type-I error is higher under 1S1V, the better selection of proposals
by the manager reinforces the voting e¢ ciency advantage of 1S1V (which is de...ned in
terms of both types of errors). 1S1V then dominates 1P1V even more than when the
proposal is exogenous. By contrast, when the probability of type-I error is higher under
1P1V, the better selection of proposals by the manager under 1P1V compensates for its
lower voting e¢ ciency. As we show below with a numerical example, in equilibrium, this
   36
      Note that if V = 1, the shareholders can make the inference that conditional on voting, the state
must be good. In that case, the incentives of shareholders is to always approve the reform. But this would
give the manager incentives to deviate from V = 1. Hence, this cannot be an equilibrium.
   37
      In the case of binary signals, the optimal decision is simply implemented with a threshold: the reform
is only accepted given a number of signals in favor of the reform. All priors that have the same optimal
threshold generate the same probability of type-I error. This, together with the fact that the optimal
threshold decreases with the prior explains the step function under 1S1V in Figure 4.


                                                    28
                                                1
                                                          1P1V
                                                          1S1V-D



                 Type-I Errors (A in state ß)

                                                .8
                                                .6
                                                .4
                                                .2




                                                     .5     .6     .7                 .8   .9   1
                                                                        Prior Pr(a)




Figure 4: Probability of a type-I error under 1P1V and 1S1V as a function of the prior
on state (with an exogenous agenda). Parameters assumed: n = 5, and binary signals
with Pr (s j ) = Pr (s j ) = 0:6.



selection e¤ect can be strong enough to overturn the higher voting e¢ ciency of 1S1V.
     Consider the following case: there are 5 shareholders (n = 5), the prior of the good
state is Pr ( ) = 0:5, and there are binary signals with Pr (s j ) = Pr (s j ) = 0:6.
Suppose, moreover, that the manager is misaligned with probability = 0:6; and that
the cost of rejection c 2 [0; 1]. Figure 5 shows how the utility of shareholders varies with
c.38 For su¢ ciently low values of c (below 0.63), when the manager calls for a vote with
probability 1 in the bad state under both mechanisms, then pI  1S 1V , p1P 1V > c : Hence, it
                                                                        I        1+c
is a best response for the manager not to veto under both 1S1V and 1P1V. Since there is
no di¤erential selection, the only di¤erence across mechanisms comes from their ability to
aggregate the information dispersed among shareholders. Consistent with what we have
seen in the case of an exogenous proposal, 1S1V then dominates 1P1V. By contrast, when
c is higher than 0:63, the same strategy by the manager implies p1        S 1 V > c > p 1P 1V .
                                                                        I         1+c   I
It is thus not a best response for the manager to always call for a vote under 1P1V (but
it is under 1S1V ). In equilibrium, she calls for a vote in the bad state with probability
1                                                        39 This selection of proposal by
       V 2 (0; 1) under 1P1V, with V increasing in c.
the manager is bene...cial to shareholders. For c su¢ ciently large (above 0.85), 1P1V
dominates 1S1V.
  38
    In these numerical examples we focus on the optimal symmetric equilibria at the voting stage.
  39
    For a given c; there is a unique probability of type-I error such that the manager is indi¤erent under
1P1V : p1
        I
          P 1V    c
               = 1+ c
                      :


                                                                    29
                                   .765




                                                                                                .15
                                              Utility 1S1V-D
                                              Utility 1P1V
                                              Gamma (1P1V)




                                   .76




                                                                                                .1
                 Voters' utility




                                                                                                      Gamma
                                   .755




                                                                                                .05
                                   .75
                                   .745




                                                                                                0
                                          0      .2              .4             .6     .8   1

                                                               Reputational cost (c)




Figure 5: Welfare comparison between 1S1V and 1P1V. The parameters assumed for this
comparison are n = 5, Pr ( ) = 0:5, and binary signals with Pr (s j ) = Pr (s j ) = 0:6.



   Expanding on the previous example, we can compare the utility of shareholders under
1S1V and 1P1V for various values of c and : Figure 6 shows that 1P1V dominates 1S1V
when both c and are su¢ ciently high. The high value of c guarantees that the manager
vetoes in some situations, and hence that the stronger selection advantage of 1P1V is
present. The high value of guarantees that the manager is often misaligned, and hence
that the selection advantage of 1P1V is large enough.40


5.3.3    Empirical Implications

In equilibrium, the quality of the proposal conditional on a vote being called is increasing
in c under both 1S1V and 1P1V. Thus, the probability of approval of the proposal is
also increasing in c: This con...rms the informal argument in the literature (see discussion
above) that the presence of a reputation cost for managers helps explain the high approval
rate of the management'  s proposals. This result also suggests an explanation for the much
higher approval rate of management'    s proposals than shareholders'proposals in practice
(Bach and Metzger 2019): shareholders do not su¤er (as high) reputation cost when their
   40
      When aligned, the manager vetoes for sure when the state is bad. She does so under both 1S1V and
1P1V. When the state is good she has similar incentives as the misaligned manager (that is, she trades o¤
the risk of rejection with the gain in case the proposal is adopted). Thus, the decision to put the proposal
to a vote has a di¤erent e¤ect on shareholders' beliefs than when the manager is always misaligned. In
particular, due to the veto by the aligned manager in the bad state, the expected quality of the proposal
conditional on a vote being called increases. This is bene...cial for shareholders. Given that this positive
selection e¤ect when the manager is aligned occurs both under 1S1V and 1P1V, it results in a decrease of
the overall advantage of 1P1V in terms of selection (this advantage only materializes when the manager
is misaligned).


                                                                        30
                1
                .8
                .6

                                                             1S1V-D Dominates
            m




                                                             1P1V Dominates
                                                             Equivalent
                .4
                .2
                0




                     0   .2      .4       .6        .8   1
                                      c



Figure 6: Welfare comparison across systems for di¤erent combinations of c (horizontal
axes) and     (vertical axes). The parameters assumed for this comparison are n = 5,
Pr ( ) = 0:5, and binary signals with Pr (s j ) = Pr (s j ) = 0:6.



proposals are turned down at the meeting. Di¤erences in this cost among shareholders
could potentially help explain why the approval rate of shareholder proposals is strongly
associated with the identity of the sponsor (Gillan and Starks 2000).
    Note also that the aforementioned testable prediction that the approval rate of man-
agers'proposals at the meeting is decreasing in the probability that the manager is mis-
aligned ( ), also holds when c > 0:


6     Discussion of Modeling Assumptions

6.1   State-Contingent Preferences

A central assumption of our baseline model is that shareholders have state-contingent
preferences: conditional on the state of the world, they all agree whether the management'
                                                                                         s
proposal should be approved or rejected. This is a standard assumption in the literature
on shareholders voting (see, e.g., Maug and Yilmaz 2002, Marquez and Yilmaz 2008, Levit
and Malenko 2011, Eso, Hansen, and White 2015, Malenko and Malenko 2019, Bar-Isaac
and Shapiro 2019, Meirowitz and Pi 2020, Ma and Xiong 2020). It indeed seems natural
to assume that (most) shareholders share the common goal of maximizing the value of the
...rm.


                                               31
    There are various pieces of empirical evidence that are coherent with the state-contingent
preferences assumption. More precisely, the literature uncovers facts that are in line with
models of strategic voting making that assumption, similar to the one developed above.
For instance, Maug and Rydqvist (2009) structurally estimate such a model of strategic
voting using data about U.S. shareholders meetings between 1994 and 2003. They ...nd
that the voting behavior of shareholders at those meetings is in line with their model.
As predicted: (i) shareholders vote more in favor of proposal when the supermajority
threshold increases, and (ii) there is essentially no e¤ect of supermajority thresholds on
acceptance rate.
    Christo¤ersen et al. (2007) study vote trading in the US and the UK and ...nd patterns
that are in line with information aggregation theory of voting (see, e.g., Eso, Hansen,
and White 2015). They indeed uncover an active market for votes, both in the US and
the UK, where the average vote sells for a price of zero. Moreover, as predicted by the
theory, vote trading increases (i) with asymmetric information among shareholders, (ii)
the importance of the proposal at stake (proxied by poor performance of ...rm), and (iii) if
the pivot probability is high. Finally, warnings of votes that violate corporate governance
standards (which they interpret as a negative public signal about the proposal that reduces
information asymmetry among shareholders) reduce vote trading.
   Calluzzo and Dudley (2019) study the in     uence of proxy advisors on ...rm voting out-
comes, policies and values. They ...nd that, as predicted by Malenko and Malenko (2019)
based on a model including shareholders with state-contingent preferences, proxy advisors
have a large in uence when shareholders have weak incentives to acquire information.
    There is also evidence that, at ...rst sight, appears to contradict the predictions of a
model of strategic voting including shareholders with state-contingent preferences: Li et
al. (2021) ...nd that there is a lot of trading by mutual funds after shareholder meetings.
Yet, Meirowitz and Pi (2020) show that this is actually consistent with such a model
once one takes into account that shareholders who vote in the meetings are also traders
after the meeting. In such a setting, shareholders do not fully reveal information through
their vote, which prevents information aggregation. This creates opportunities to trade
after shareholder meetings. In our model, under 1P1V, there would be a di¤erent reason
for trading after the vote. Depending on the precision of their signal, shareholders have
di¤erent beliefs about the probability that the decision at the meeting was correct. Hence,
shareholders with su¢ ciently precise signals against the decision made at the meeting
would be willing to sell their shares, and those with su¢ ciently precise signals aligned
with the decision made at the meeting would be willing to buy more shares. These trading
patterns are in line with the ...ndings of Li et al. (2021) about the behavior of mutual funds
after the meetings.41
  41
    Our model also predicts that the trading patterns would be systematically di¤erent under 1S1V-D
and 1P1V. Under 1S1V-D, when voting fully aggregates information, shareholders'posteriors are identical.


                                                  32
    Last but not least, it is important to stress that we are not trying to argue that every
single shareholder has state-contingent preferences. Indeed, as we mentioned in Section
4.3.1, there is evidence suggesting that disagreement among shareholders may not only
stem from information asymmetries. This is exactly the reason why, in that section, we
consider an extension of our model that allows for the presence of partisan shareholders.
And we have shown that, in the presence of such shareholders, 1S1V-D still outperforms
other voting mechanisms in terms of information aggregation.


6.2    Information Asymmetry

Another key assumption of our model is that some shareholders are better informed than
others. We view this assumption as uncontroversial. First, as explained in Knyazeva,
Knyazeva, and Kostovetsky (2018, p. 681): "the precision of a trader'     s [...] private infor-
mation may be a function of the trader'    s overall or company speci...c investment experi-
ence, local knowledge, or the extent of resources that the trader can allocate to information
gathering."And, indeed, Kim and Verrecchia (1991) show that traders react di¤erently to
release of public information about a given ...rm, i.e., less informed traders, who revise the
beliefs more, react more. Also, Iliev and Lowry (2015) and Iliev, Kalodimo, and Lowry
(2018) ...nd that mutual funds vary greatly in their reliance on proxy advisory recommen-
dations, with the more informed voting less in line with the recommendations.
    Second, the literature provides evidence that shareholders have di¤erent incentives to
invest in acquisition of information (see, e.g., Chen, Harford, and Kai 2007, and Fich,
Harford and Tran 2015).
    Third, information asymmetries among shareholders help explain phenomena that are
di¢ cult to explain without such asymmetries (see, e.g., Glosten and Milgrom 1985 discus-
sion of the bid-ask spread).
    Finally, there is an empirical literature studying information asymmetry among share-
holders, using di¤erent measures (see, e.g., Brown and Han 1992, Healy, Palep, and
Sweeney 1995, Welker 1995, Iliev and Lowry 2014, and Knyazeva, Knyazeva, and Kos-
tovetsky 2018). It points toward substantial information asymmetries among sharehold-
ers/investors. This is true both across types of shareholders (see, e.g., Sias, Starks, and
Titman (2006) for evidence of the informational advantage of institutional investors over
other types of investors), and within a given type (see, e.g., Knyazeva, Knyazeva, and
Kostovetsky (2018) for evidence of heterogeneity among institutional investors).




There is then no room for trade after the meeting.


                                                     33
6.3   No Communication

In our baseline model, we assume that shareholders cannot communicate before the vote.
This is not an innocuous assumption. If costless, communication can indeed improve
information aggregation (see, e.g., Coughlan 2001), and mute di¤erences between voting
mechanisms (see, e.g., Gerardi and Yariv 2007). The idea is simple: when shareholders
have state-contingent preferences, they have incentives to truthfully reveal their private
information to one another, and then vote unanimously for the e¢ cient outcome.
    There are nonetheless several hurdles to communication among shareholders. First,
in the presence of partisan shareholders, communication is impeded (Coughlan 2001).
The problem is that those shareholders have incentives to pretend that they have state-
contingent preferences but that they have received a signal in favor of their preferred
alternatives. And, as we have shown above, 1S1V-D still dominates other voting mecha-
nisms in the presence of such shareholders (without communication).
    Second, even if there are no partisan shareholders, communication among sharehold-
ers is far from costless. In the case of most public ...rms, shares are distributed among
many, scattered, individuals and institutions. It is thus logistically challenging to organize
communication. Moreover, as explained in Malenko and Malenko (2019, p.2470), "[...] in-
vestors fear that communication with others can be considered "forming a group"        , which
would trigger costly administrative ...lling requirements and, in some cases, a poison pill.
There could also be a cost of publicly disclosing your information: "[...] investors are of-
ten reluctant to publicly disclose their intention to vote against management, fearing that
doing so would be viewed as an activist campaign and lead to managerial retaliation."


6.4   Vote Trading

Our baseline model does not allow shareholders to trade votes before the meeting. Yet,
we know that there is an active market for votes (Christo¤ersen et al. 2007) and that vote
trading can be bene...cial for information aggregation. Eso, Hansen, and White (2015)
study vote trading and, assuming one share per shareholder, prove the existence of an
e¢ cient equilibrium under 1P1V in which vote trades at a price of zero. In that equilib-
rium, uninformed shareholders sell their votes to informed shareholders. As in the case
of communication, allowing for vote trading could then mute di¤erences between 1S1V-D
and other voting mechanisms. But, there are reasons to believe this is not the case.
   First, note that vote trading is irrelevant under 1S1V-D : there is no gain from trade
because the equilibrium is e¢ cient. Second, there are various hurdles to vote trading
under other voting mechanisms. For instance, the e¢ cient equilibrium in Eso, Hansen,
and White (2015) is not robust to the presence of su¢ ciently many partisan shareholders.
Moreover, we conjecture that di¤erences in signal precision would also prevent e¢ cient


                                             34
aggregation of information. The problem in that case is that shareholders need to know
how precise their information is compared to that of other shareholders in order to decide
optimally whether to "buy" or "sell" votes. There is no clear way for shareholders to do
so. This issue becomes even worse if there is ambiguity about the information technology
of other shareholders.


7     Conclusions

Shareholders typically hold di¤erent number of shares. This fact, which has been over-
looked by most of the literature on voting at those meetings, raises questions about which
voting mechanism should be used. In this paper, we have explored this question with
a special focus on the informational e¢ ciency of di¤erent voting mechanisms. We ...rst
considered the case in which the management is passive and does not select the proposal
being voted on. We proved two main results. First, for any distribution of sharehold-
ings, the one-share-one-vote mechanism (1S1V ) dominates the one-shareholder-one-vote
mechanism (1P1V ) independently of whether information accuracies and shareholdings
are correlated. Yet, 1S1V is not always e¢ cient. Second, the one-share-one-vote mech-
anism with divisible votes (1S1V-D ) ­   and any other continuous voting mechanism­ is
e¢ cient. We then considered the case in which the management decides whether to put
the proposal to a vote. We uncovered a trade-o¤ between selection and voting e¢ ciency
underlying the comparison of 1S1V and 1P1V : 1S1V '      s higher voting e¢ ciency implies
worse selection incentives for the management. We found that the negative e¤ect of worse
selection incentives on shareholders'welfare can be large enough to wash out the higher
voting e¢ ciency of 1S1V.
    Beyond possible calls for allowing perfect vote-divisibility at shareholders meetings, our
results also have implications for the consequences, and hence desirability, of dual class
capital structures and stock buybacks and splits. Through their e¤ect on the number of
voting shares held by shareholders, dual class shares, stock buybacks and splits indeed
a¤ect shareholders' ability to reveal their information about the quality of management
proposals through voting. Hence, preferential shares and stock buybacks should a¤ect
negatively the e¢ ciency of decisions at shareholder meetings, while stock splits should
a¤ect it positively. Through their in   uence on voting e¢ ciency, they should also a¤ect
the incentives of managers to select proposals that bene...t shareholders. These e¤ects
complement the common arguments in favor and against dual class capital structures,
stock buybacks and splits.42
   42
      Stock buybacks are often considered as a more     exible way than dividend to return money to share-
holders. They are particularly appealing for ...rms sitting on unused cash and facing poor growth opportu-
nities (see, e.g., Dittmar 2000, Grullon and Michaely 2004, and Brav et al. 2005). The typical argument
against stock buybacks is that they are used by the management of the company to manipulate the short-
term stock prices (see, e.g., Hribar, Jenkins, and Johnson 2006, and Almeida, Fos, and Kronlund 2016).


                                                   35
    Our analysis also informs the empirical literature and the interpretation of existing
empirical results. For instance, we found that the strategic selection of proposal by man-
agers can explain the very high approval rate of management'   s proposals in practice. Our
result that this selection becomes more stringent as the (reputation) cost of a proposal
rejection at the meeting increases suggests that the much higher approval rate of manage-
ment' s proposals than shareholders'proposals in practice may be due to a lower reputation
cost for shareholders. Our model also predicts that the approval rate of proposals at the
shareholder meeting is decreasing in the misalignment of the manager with shareholders;
a testable prediction. Finally, our result that heterogeneity in preferences among share-
holders impedes the aggregation of information at the meeting proposes a mechanism for
the empirical ...nding that ...rms with more heterogeneous shareholder base under-perform.
    Our analysis inevitably abstracts from important real-life features of shareholder meet-
ings. We view the trading of shares before (and after) the meeting as particularly inter-
esting and important.43 Under the one-share-one-vote mechanism, the trading of shares
before the meeting determines the distribution of votes among shareholders. This could af-
fect the outcome of the vote dramatically. The e¤ect could be bene...cial if better informed
shareholders have stronger incentives to acquire shares, but detrimental if the opposite
is true. With continuous voting mechanisms such an e¤ect of share trading before the
meeting is potentially less impactful (or even mute). We plan to explore this issue further
in future research.




Stock splits are more of a puzzle in the literature (see discussion in Easley, O'Hara, and Saar 2001). It
has been argued that they are used to increase the liquidity of the company' s shares and to get the stock's
price in an acceptable trading range (see, e.g., Copeland 1979, and Baker and Gallagher 1980). Another
explanation is that the company'  s management prefers di¤use ownership in order to avoid control by large
shareholders (see, e.g., Powell and Baker 1993). Yet another explanation is that stock splits aim at reduc-
ing information asymmetry, either by directly revealing some private information or by attracting more
attention to the company (see, e.g., see Grinblatt, Masulis, and Titman 1984, Brennan and Copeland 1988,
Brennan and Hughes 1991). Empirical evidence in support of those di¤erent theories are mixed.
   43
      Recent theoretical papers on the topic include Meirowitz and Pi (2020), and Levit, Malenko, and
Maug (2021a,b).


                                                    36
Appendix A: Proofs for Section 4
Proof of Lemma 1. First, note that
                                                                 Q
                                                           fi (si j ) P ( )
                                                                i2N
                                  P ( js) = Q                       Q                    :
                                              fi (si j ) P ( ) +        fi (si j ) P ( )
                                                   i2N                          i2N

                                        Q                      Q                                   P                    fi (si j )
Thus, P ( js) > 1=2 requires                    fi (si j ) >         fi (si j ), or equivalently           i2N     ln   fi (si j )   > 0.
                                        i2N                    i2N


Proof of Proposition 1 . In the sequel, we denote the conditional density of shareholder i'                   s
type ti in state ! by gi (ti j ! ), it is de...ned by gi (ti j ! ) = fi (si ) 1 (ti ) j ! : We denote by Gi ( j
! ) the corresponding cumulative distribution function. Moreover, we denote the (unconditional)
density associated to shareholder i'      s type ti by gi (ti ), i.e. de...ned by gi (ti ) = P( )gi (ti j ) +
P( )gi (ti j ).
    We know from Lemma 2 (in this Appendix) that the best BNE under fX; wg is weakly better
than the best BNE under fX 0 ; wg. Applying Lemma 3 (in this Appendix), we obtain that the
worst BNE under fX; wg, , yields at least an expected utility of 0 to each shareholder. As there
exists a BNE under fX 0 ; wg,               0
                                                , which exactly yields an expected utility of 0 to each shareholder
(as there is no decisive shareholder by assumption, any pro...le yielding a sure outcome with no
decisive shareholder is an equilibrium), we also obtain that the worst BNE under fX; wg ( ) is no
worse than the worst BNE under fX 0 ; wg ( 0 ).



Lemma 2 Let fX; wg and fX 0 ; wg be ...nite voting rules with Xi0    Xi for all i. Then,
for any BNE     0         0
                  under fX ; wg, there exists a BNE under fX; wg such that the ex-ante
probability of implementing the correct outcome is (weakly) higher at than at 0 .

Proof. As the utility of every shareholder is linearly increasing with the probability that the
correct outcome is implemented, we employ in this proof as in the later proofs the terms "welfare"
and "more e¢ cient" to refer to this common utility. The main task of the proof is to show that
a welfare-maximizing (and thus a BNE) exists for any ...nite voting rule fX; wg. This is shown in
two steps.
     Claim 1: for any pro...le , there is a pro...le 0 such that E[ui ( 0 )]                                E[ui ( )] and where for
all i 2 N , 0
            i : Ti ! Xi is a pure, weakly increasing strategy.

    For any i 2 N , we may write:
                                   0                 0                                                                          1
                                                                  X                  1          X
  E[ui (x;    i)   j ti ] = h i    @P( j ti ) @P               i
                                                                 (  xj >        xj )+ P       i(  xj =                  x j )A
                                                                                     2
                                                                j 6=i                              j 6=i
                                                         0                                                                           11
                                                                      X                    1            X
                                   (1     P( j ti )) @P            i
                                                                     (  xj >          xj )+ P        i
                                                                                                       (  xj =              x j )AA :
                                                                                           2
                                                                        j 6=i                              j 6=i




                                                                        37
Hence,
                                                         0
      @ E[ui (x;      i)   j ti ]            @ P( j ti ) @                         X                                          X
                                    = hi                  P                   i
                                                                                  (  xj >                xj )+P          i
                                                                                                                             (  xj >              xj )
               @ti                               @ti
                                                                                       j 6=i                                  j 6=i
                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                            1                X                            1                X
                                                           + P            i
                                                                            (  xj =                  xj )+ P            i
                                                                                                                          (  xj =               x j )A :
                                                            2                                             2
                                                                              j 6=i                                          j 6=i


                                      gi (ti j )                ti                         1                          @ P( jti )              1
We have P(      j ti ) =       gi (ti j )+gi (ti j )       =   1+ti       =1              1+ti ,     and we get          @ti           =   (1+ti )2      > 0. This
              @ E[ui (x;       i )jti ]
implies that          @ti   is weakly increasing in x (increasing di¤ erences ). As Xi is ...nite, let us
                        0
de...ne the best reply i to    i as the smallest value of x 2 Xi maximizing the expected utility (we
                      0
abuse notation as i is a pure strategy) :

                            0
         8ti 2 Ti ;         i (ti )   = minfx 2 Xi j E[ui (x;                              i)   j ti ]   E[ui (y;      i)    j ti ];       8y 2 Xi g:

The strategy 0                                                                        0
                i must be weakly increasing. Assume by contradiction that x = i (ti ) > y =
                                                                                                                                                              0 0
                                                                                                                                                              i (ti )
          0                           0
for ti < ti . Then, by de...nition of i (ti ) as a minimum, we have E[ui (x; i )jti ] > E[ui (y;                                                              i )jti ]
and thus, using the property of increasing di¤ erences, we obtain :
                                                                              Z    t0
                                  0
                                                                                    i          @ E[ui (x;    i )jt]
            E[ui (x;         i )jti )   = E[ui (x;             i )jti ]   +              dt
                                                                                  ti                   @t
                                                                              Z    t0
                                                                                    i          @ E[ui (y;    i )jt]                               0
                                        > E[ui (y;             i )jti ]   +              dt                           = E[ui (y;             i )jti ];
                                                                               ti                      @t

a contradiction with y being a best reply at t0                                0
                                              i . Hence, the (pure) strategy i is weakly increasing
in t0
    i . By applying the same reasoning iteratively for i = 1; : : : ; n, we obtain the pro...le
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                  , as
desired.
    Claim 2: the rule fX; wg admits a welfare-maximizing strategy pro...le, which is thus a BNE.
    Let us consider the family of pro...les consisting in pure, weakly increasing strategies. Let us
write Xi = fx1 ; : : : ; xk g with x1 < : : : < xk . A pure, weakly increasing strategy i is thus described
by a series of cuto¤s (tj    i )0 j k 2 (Ti )
                                              k+1
                                                  , with t0           k    1
                                                          i = i and ti = i , and such that 8j , ti
                                                                                                   j
                                                                                                       tj
                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                          +1

           j j +1
and ti 2 (ti ; ti ) ) i (ti ) = xj +1 . A pro...le of such strategies is thus described by a series of
cuto¤s for each shareholder i 2 N . Now, as each distribution Gi ( j ! ) does not admit any atom,
the expected utility attached to such pro...le is a continuous function of its cuto¤s. As cuto¤s are
taken in a compact set, there is a pro...le          maximizing the expected utility among all pro...les in
the family. By application of Claim 1,              maximizes the expected utility among all pro...les. As
the game is of common interest, the pro...le             must be a BNE, and hence a welfare-maximizing
BNE (this is the original argument of Mc Lennan, 1998).
    Finally, to conclude, whenever two rules fX; wg and fX 0 ; wg are such that 8i 2 N , Xi
                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                Xi ,
                                               0
then each pro...le under rule fX ; wg can be reproduced under rule fX; wg. It follows that the
welfare-maximizing pro...le (BNE)                      under fX; wg achieves at least as much expected utility as the
                                                       0
welfare-maximizing pro...le (BNE)                          under fX 0 ; wg. This concludes the proof.




                                                                               38
Lemma 3 For any BNE                     under a ...nite rule fX; wg, we have 8i 2 N; ui ( )                                                  0.

Proof. We introduce a couple of notations for the proof. For a strategy pro...le and a type
vector t = (ti )i2N , we denote by pA ( (t)) the probability that A is implemented given the votes
 (t):                                                 !                       !
                                      X                 1     X
                        A
                       p ( (t)) = P       bi (ti ) > 0 + P        bi (ti ) = 0 :
                                                        2
                                                 i2N                                       i2N
                       R               Qn
Note that we have          pA ( (t))        i=1 gi (ti )dti   = P(O = Aj ).

    Claim 1: For any pro...le of pure, weakly increasing strategies , we have ui ( )                                                    0 for all i.
   Let be a pro...le of pure, weakly increasing strategies. Let us denote by U ( ) = ui ( )=hi the
common utility. We may then write:
                                       Z                                                  n
                                                                                          Y
                           U( ) =           (P( jt)          P( jt)) pA ( (t))                  gi (ti )dti
                                                                                          i=1
                                       Z                                            n
                                                                                    Y
                                  =         (2P( jt)          1) pA ( (t))                gi (ti )dti
                                                                                    i=1
                                     Z                n
                                                      Y
                                  = 2 P( jt)pA ( (t))   gi (ti )dti                              P(O = Aj ):
                                                                       i=1
                                        |                        {z                        }
                                                              e( )
                                                              U


To prove the claim that U ( ) 0, it thus su¢ ces to show that U    e ( ) 1 P(O = Aj ). We ...rst ob-
                                                  R         Qk 1             2
                                          k
serve that, for any k 2 N , the function g : tk 7! P( jt) i=1 gi (ti )dti is non-negative and weakly
                                                                               R       Qk 1
increasing (for each t k ). Moreover, for any k 2 N , the function hk : tk 7! pA ( (t)) i=1 gi (ti )dti
is non-negative and weakly increasing (for each t k ) since k is weakly increasing. By repeated
application of Lemma 4, we thus obtain:
                   Z                            n
                                                Y
          e( ) =
          U            P( jt)pA ( (t))                gi (ti )dti
                                                i=1
                   Z       Z                                     Z                                        n
                                                                                                          Y
                               P( jt)g1 (t1 )dt1                      pA ( (t))g1 (t1 )dt1                       gi (ti )dti
                                                                                                          i=2

                   :::
                   Z Z                  k
                                                             !         Z                       k
                                                                                                                   !    n
                                        Y                                                      Y                        Y
                                                                                A
                               P( jt)          gi (ti )dti                     p ( (t))              gi (ti )dti               gi (ti )dti
                                        i=1                                                    i=1                     i=k+1

                   :::
                     Z              n
                                                         !        Z                   n
                                                                                                             !
                                    Y                                                 Y                                1
                                                                           A
                           P( jt)          gi (ti )dti                 p ( (t))                gi (ti )dti       =       P(O = Aj ):
                                    i=1                                               i=1
                                                                                                                       2

This concludes the proof of Claim 1.
                                                                                 +
    Claim 2: For any BNE , there exists a pro...le                                   in pure, weakly increasing strategies such
that 8i 2 N; ui ( ) = ui ( + ).
                                                                                                                                             +
    Let    be a BNE. For any strategy                    i   of shareholder i, we consider a re-ordering                                     i ,   i.e. a

                                                                      39
strategy such that:

          +
          i   is pure and weakly increasing
                                                                                                  +
         for any ballot xi 2 Xi , we have P(bi                                 xi ) = P(          i         xi ).

                                                                                   +                                                    +
    To construct such a re-ordering, we de...ne                                    i     by (abusing notation as                        i     is pure):
                                                8                                                                                                                  9
                                                <                               X             Z    1                                      Z     ti                 =
                                 +                                                                             0          0    0
     8ti 2 Ti ;                  i (t i ) = min  xi 2 Xi j                                                 i (ti )(x)gi (ti )dti      >              gi (t0    0
                                                                                                                                                          i )dti       :
                                                :                                                                                                                  ;
                                                                           x2Xi ;x xi


The strategy +       i is pure, weakly increasing and continuous (and even       at) everywhere but on a
...nite number of points. We shall prove that for almost any type vector t = (ti )i2N , the sign of
P                                        P      +
    i2N b i (ti ) is the same as that of   i2N i (ti ). In the sequel, we refer to the sign of a number x
as positive if x > 0, negative if x < 0, and null (neither positive nor negative) if x = 0.
      Let ti 2 Ti be a type such that +  i is continuous at ti and assume that there exists xi 2 Xi
for which i (ti )(xi ) > 0 and xi 6= i (ti ). We focus on the case for which +
                                       +
                                                                                   i (ti ) > xi (the other
case can be treated analogously) and we further assume that xi = minfx 2 Xi j i (ti )(x) > 0g :=
                                                                                               +
min bi (ti ). Observe that there must exist t0                       0
                                               i < ti such that i (ti )(yi ) > 0 with yi       i (ti ) > xi .
                        0                                0           0       +
Indeed, if this type ti didn' t exist, we would have 8ti < ti ; bi (ti ) < i (ti ) for any realization of
      0
   (t
  i i   ), which would imply:
                                                                           0                                       1
      X             Z   1                                         Z   ti          X                                                            Z     ti
                            i (t"i )(x)gi (t"i )dt"i
                                                                           @                                 A
                                                                                                  i (t"i )(x) gi (t"i )dt"i =                             gi (t"i )dt"i :
          +                                                                         +
    x<    i (ti )                                                            x<     i (ti )



We would then have for any t < ti (since gi is positive on Ti ):

                                         X           Z       1                                             Z   t
                                                                 i (t"i )(x)gi (t"i )dt"i              >           gi (t"i )dt"i :
                                           +
                                      x<   i (ti )



By de...nition of +                            +        +
                   i , we would have 8t < ti ; i (t) < i (ti ). This contradicts the fact that i is
                                                                                                     +

                                                              +                          0
continuous at ti . We thus obtained the existence of yi       i (ti ) > xi such that i (ti )(yi ) > 0 for
some t0
      i < ti .

    As        is a BNE, xi must be optimal for i at ti and yi must be optimal for i at t0
                                                                                        i:

                                                   1
                                            i   :=    (ui (xi ;                i jti )     ui (yi ;            i jti ))      0
                                                   hi
                                            0      1                               0                               0
                                            i   :=    (ui (yi ;                i jti )    ui (xi ;             i jti ))      0:
                                                   hi
                                                                  0
By summation, we obtain that                             i   +    i        0. Now, we may write:
                            Z                                                                                                         Y
                    i   =       (2P( jti ; t i )             1) pA (xi ;          i (t i ))            pA (yi ;           i (t i ))           gj (tj )dtj :
                                                                                                                                      j 6=i




                                                                                  40
Similarly,
                          Z                                                                                                     Y
                 0
                 i   =        (2P( jt0
                                     i; t i)              1) pA (yi ;        i (t i ))          pA (xi ;            i (t i ))           gj (tj )dtj :
                                                                                                                                j 6=i


We thus have:
                         Z                                                                                                                    Y
             0
     i   +   i   =2           (P( jt0
                                    i; t i)             P( jti ; t i )) pA (yi ;               i (t i ))       pA (xi ;         i (t i ))             gj (tj )dtj
                                                                                                                                              j 6=i

                     0:

As t0                                          0
    i < ti , we have that for all t i , P( jti ; t i )    P( jti ; t i ) < 0. Moreover, as yi > xi , we
                         A                     A
have by de...nition of p that for all t i , p (yi ; i (t i ))         pA (xi ; i (t i )). To reconcile the
three inequalities, it must be that i + 0     i = 0 and that for almost all t i , p (yi ;
                                                                                         A
                                                                                                    i (t i )) =
 A                                                                  A
                                                                                       P
p (xi ; i (t i )). This last equality implies, by de...nition of p , that P xi            j 6=i b j   yi = 0.
                                        +
As xi = min bi (ti ) and                i (ti )         yi , we obtain
                                                    0                                                      1
                                                                             X
                                              P @min bi (ti )                        bj          +
                                                                                                 i (ti )
                                                                                                        A      = 0:
                                                                             j 6=i


Following a symmetrical argument, we also obtain
                                                  0                                                        1
                                                                     X
                                             P@         +
                                                        i (ti )              bj        max bi (ti )A = 0:
                                                                     j 6=i

                                                    P                                +             P
It follows that P sgn bi (ti ) +                        j 6=i   bj 6= sgn            i (ti )   +     j 6=i   bj         = 0. Moreover, by construc-
                                       +
tion of the strategies (               j )j 6=i ,
                               the probability of the previous event remains null if some strategy
realizations bj are transformed into +                                    +
                                      j (the transformation from j to j is measure-preserving
by design). This can be written: for all S N nfig,
    0        0                                                       1                 0                                                              11
                                X                       X                                                    X                    X
  P @sgn @bi (ti ) +                   bj +                         +A
                                                                    j    6= sgn @              +
                                                                                               i (ti )   +          bj +                         + AA
                                                                                                                                                 j           = 0:
                                j 2S           j 2(N nS )nfig                                                j 2S          j 2(N nS )nfig
                                                                                                                                                     (2)
                                                                             +                                                  +
We have just shown that (2) holds whenever                                   i    is continuous at ti . As                      i   is continuous almost
everywhere, we have: for all S N nfig,
         0       0                                                  1                0                                                       11
                              X                     X                                              X                      X
    P @sgn @bi +                     bj +                         +A
                                                                  j     6= sgn @          +
                                                                                          i    +           bj +                           + AA
                                                                                                                                          j           = 0:          (3)
                              j 2S           j 2(N nS )nfig                                        j 2S              j 2(N nS )nfig

                                 P                    P
To conclude, we observe that sgn( j 2N bj ) 6= sgn( j 2N +    ) can be satis...ed only if there exists
                           Pk 1       Pn                   Pj
                                                            k          Pn
some index k for which sgn( j =1 bj + j =k +   j ) 6 = sgn( j =1 b j +
                                                                                 +
                                                                        j =k+1 j ). Hence, we may




                                                                             41
write, applying (3):
  0                                          1            0                                                                    1
          X                     X                 n
                                                  X                k
                                                                   X 1           n
                                                                                 X                   Xk       n
                                                                                                              X
P @sgn(          bj ) 6= sgn(           + A
                                        j )             P @sgn(           bj +           +
                                                                                         j ) 6 = sgn(   b j +              + A
                                                                                                                           j )     = 0:
          j 2N                 j 2N               k=1              j =1          j =k                j =1         j =k+1


Therefore, and + lead to the same outcome with probability one, i.e. for almost any type vector
t. It follows that 8i 2 N , ui ( ) = ui ( + ). This concludes the proof of Claim 2.
                                                                                                                           +
      To conclude the proof, note that any BNE                         yields the same utilities as a pro...le                 of pure,
weakly increasing strategies (Claim 2), under which all expected utilities are positive (Claim 1).
Thus for all i 2 N , ui ( )            0.



Lemma 4 Let f be a density function on a real interval T , let g; h : T ! R be two
non-negative and weakly increasing functions. Then:
                       Z                                  Z                              Z
                           g (t)h(t)f (t)dt                   g (t)f (t)dt                   h(t)f (t)dt :

                 R                        R
Proof. If   h(t)f (t)dt = 0, we also have g (t)h(t)f (t)dt = 0, so that the inequality is valid.
                R
Assume now that h(t)f (t)dt > 0. Let f^ be the density on T de...ned by


                                                         ^(t) = R h(t)f (t) :
                                                 8t 2 T; f
                                                                  h(z )f (z )dz

As h is weakly increasing, there exists a threshold t 2 T such that f        ^(t)  f (t) for t    t and
 ^
f (t) f (t) for t > t .
                                   R                                                            R
     Our objective is to show that g (f^ f ) 0, as this will imply the desired inequality hgf
 R     R                  R            Rt               R +1
( gf )( hf ). We write: g (f  ^ f) =           ^ f)+
                                            g (f                 ^ f ). Now, as g is weakly increasing
                                                              g (f
                                          1
                                                   Rt t                      Rt
and f ^ f is non-positive on ( 1; t ], we have              ^ f)
                                                         g (f          g (t ) 1 (f^ f ). Similarly, as
                                             R +1      1              R +1
 ^
f f is non-negative on (t ; +1), we have t            ^                      ^
                                                   g (f f ) g (t ) t (f f ). As f and f        ^ are two
                    R                     Rt                  R +1
densities, we have (f  ^ f ) = 0, so that        ^ f) =
                                                (f                  ^ f ). We thus obtain:
                                                                   (f
                                                              1                      t

                           Z                              Z                      Z               !
                                                              t                       +1
                                   ^
                                g (f        f)   g (t )            ^
                                                                  (f      f) +              ^
                                                                                           (f   f)   = 0:
                                                              1                   t




                                                                                                 1S 1V -D
Proof of Proposition 2. The fact that each i 2 N employing                                       i        (ti )
                                                                                                   = c ln ti with c =
mini2N f ln(di) g is an e¢ cient BNE of the game is straightforward, by application of Lemma 1. We
can easily rule out the existence of a non-degenerate mixed e¢ cient BNE. If is a non-degenerate
mixed BNE of the game, there exists at least one i 2 N and at least one y 2 T such that the random
variable i (y ) admits at least two distinct potential realizations. Consider without loss of generality
                                                                                                              1
that this player is the ...rst shareholder. If is e¢ cient then for t = (t1 ; t2 ; t3 ; t4 ; :::) = (y; y       ; 1; 1; :::)
we have that the e¢ cient alternative is AB . Hence, given any two vectors of potential realizations
                   1                                                1
b = (b1 (y ); b2 ( y ); b3 (1); b4 (1); :::) and e = (e1 (y ); e2 ( y ); e3 (1); e4 (1); :::) with bi (ti ) = ei (ti ) for

                                                                  42
                                   P                    P
every i > 1, we must have that i2N b(ti ) = 0 and i2N e(ti ) = 0. But this means that b1 (y )
must be identical to e1 (y ) and hence 1 (y ) cannot admit at least two distinct potential realizations,
which contradicts the assumption above. Hence, if is an e¢ cient BNE, it must be pure.
      We now turn attention to pure equilibria. First we argue that an e¢ cient pure BNE must be
symmetric across shareholders up to an additive constant (i.e. there exist i;j such that i (y ) =
  j (y ) + i;j , for every i; j 2 N and every y 2 T ). If            is e¢ cient then for every y 2 T , for t =
                                             1
                                                                                              P
(t1 ; t2 ; t3 ; t4 ; :::) with ti = y , tj = y and tk = 1 for all k 2
                                                                    = fi; j g, we need to have k2N k (tk ) = 0
                                   1
                                         P
and thus i (y ) =               j( y )     k2N fi:j g k (1). By keeping j ...xed and varying i we get that all
players, except possibly j , employ the same strategy up to an additive constant. By varying j
as well, we get that all players use the same strategy up to an additive constant. That is, in an
                                                                                      P
e¢ cient pure BNE a player i uses the strategy i (y ) = (y ) + i , with i2N i = 0 and (1) = 0.
     Notice that if is an e¢ cient equilibrium of the standard 1S1V-D rule characterized by some
  and = ( 1 ; 2 ; ::; n ) such that i 6= 0 for at least one i 2 N , it follows that 0 , characterized by
the same and = (0; 0; :::; 0), is an e¢ cient equilibrium of the 1S1V-D rule v 0 = f(R; R; :::; R); 0g.
Hence, to characterize all e¢ cient equilibria of the standard 1S1V-D rule, it su¢ ces to characterize
all admissible s that lead to full information equivalence when = (0; 0; :::; 0) under rule v 0 . In
the remaining part of the proof, we slightly abuse terminology, and instead of saying "a pure-
strategy e¢ cient equilibrium of v characterized by and            = (0; 0; :::; 0)" we simply say "an
e¢ cient equilibrium ."
                                                                                          P
     In an e¢ cient equilibrium , it must be the case that for every t 2 T n we have sgn( i2N (ti )) =
                                                                                       P
sgn(P( jt) P( jt)). But we know from Lemma 1 that P( jt) P( jt) > 0 , i2N ln(ti ) > 0,
                           P                                                 P
P( jt) P( jt) < 0 , i2N ln(ti ) < 0, and P( jt) P( jt) = 0 , i2N ln(ti ) = 0. In other
                                                  P                    P
words, for every t 2 T n it must hold that sgn( i2N (ti )) = sgn( i2N ln(ti )).
    First, we prove that every e¢ cient equilibrium is monotone (increasing, in particular) and
                             1
symmetric (i.e., (y ) =     (y ) for every y 2 T ), then that it is di¤erentiable on int(T ) = ( ; 1 )
                           1
and continuous on T = [ ; ], and, ...nally, we provide a full characterization by showing that each
e¢ cient equilibrium is equal to the natural logarithm multiplied by some positive constant.
     Monotonicity and symmetry of equilibria: For every ti < 1 there exists a t i 2 T n 1
                                           P
such that P( jt) = P( jt), so that i2N ln(ti ) = 0. Hence, for such a t = (ti ; t i ) and every
                                                                                        P
" 2 (0; 1 ti ], it is true that, P( j(ti + "; t i )) > P( j(ti + "; t i )), so that j 2N fig ln(tj ) +
ln(ti + ") > 0. Since every e¢ cient equilibrium delivers the e¢ cient outcome, it follows that for
                                                                              P
every y < 1 and " 2 (0; 1 y ] there exists a t i 2 T n 1 such that j 2N fig (tj ) + (y ) = 0
      P
and     j 2N fig (tj ) + (y + ") > 0. In other words, (y + ") >                (y ) for every y < 1 and
" 2 (0; 1 y ]; is strictly increasing in the player'       s type. To establish symmetry, consider that
t 2 T n is such that ti = 1 for every i 2 N . In this case the e¢ cient alternative is AB . Therefore,
P                                                                                n
   i2N (ti ) = n (1) = 0, which implies (1) = 0. Now consider a t 2 T               such that t1 = y 2 T ,
      1
                                                       P                                1
t2 = 2 T and ti = 1 for every i > 2. We have i2N f1;2g ln(1) + ln(y ) + ln( y              ) = 0 and hence
P y                              1                                                1
   i2N f1;2g  (1) +   (y ) +  (  y ) = 0 , which implies (n    2)  0 +  (y ) +  ( y ) = 0 , for every y 2 T .
                               1
In other words, (y ) =       ( y ), for every y 2 T .
     Di¤erentiability: By Lebesgue'    s theorem for the di¤erentiability of monotone functions de-
...ned over open intervals we have that every equilibrium : T ! R is di¤erentiable at almost every
y 2 int(T ) = ( ; 1 ). We will now establish that is actually di¤erentiable at every y 2 ( ; 1 ).
                                                                             1
Notice that in all pro...les with t1 = y 2 ( ; 1]; t2 = y 0 2 (1; 1 ), t3 = yy 0 2 ( ;
                                                                                       1
                                                                                         ), and ti = 1 for


                                                      43
                                                     1                                      1
every i > 3, it must hold that (y ) + (y 0 ) + ( yy    0) = 0 ,    (y ) =      (y 0 )    ( yy 0 ) by the fact
                    P
 (1) = 0 and that i2N ln(ti ) = 0. Assume that is not di¤erentiable at a particular y              ~ 2 ( ; 1].
                                    1
Then it follows that        0
                         (y ) ( yy0 ) is not di¤erentiable with respect to y at y  ~, for every y 0 2 (1; 1 ).
But due to the fact that is di¤erentiable at almost every y 2 int(T ), it follows that for every
y 2 ( ; 1], there exists y 0 2 (1; 1 ) such that is di¤erentiable at yy 1
                                                                          0 . This contradicts the claim

that there exists y~ 2 ( ; 1] at which is not di¤erentiable, and, by symmetry it follows that is
di¤erentiable at every y 2 int(T ).
    Continuity at the boundary: We know that is di¤erentiable, and thus continuous, on
int(T ) = ( ; 1 ). Let us show that it is continuous at y = 1 . Suppose by contradiction, that
there is a discontinuity. As is increasing, it must be of the form: (y )               (y ") > ~   " for
every " 2 (0; "], where " and ~ " are positive constants. Then there exists 2 (0; 1          ) such that
(n 2) (1        ) + (y ) + ( y 1 " ) > 0 for every " 2 (0; "]. But for every 2 (0; 1      ) one can ...nd
                                                                     1
" > 0 small enough such that (n 2) ln(1            ) + ln(y ) + ln( y " ) < 0. This contradicts the fact
that leads to the e¢ cient outcome for every possible realization of types. Thus is continuous
at 1 , and for the same reason, it must be continuous at . We conclude that is continuous on
T = [ ; 1 ].
     Characterization: We ...x an e¢ cient equilibrium and an arbitrary pair of values (y 0 ; y                                 ~) 2
      1 2
( ; ) , such that y 0 < 1 and y                 ~ > 1. Consider now a t 2 ( ; 1 )n such that t1 = y 0 , t2 =
~, t3 = y1
y            ~ 2 (y
            0y
                     1 1
                     ~ ; y0 )          ( ; 1 ), and ti = 1 for every i > 3. If we de...ne r = y 0 y                        ~ we get
P                               0            r            1                                 r          1
   i2N f1;2;3g   (1)  +     ( y   )   +    ( y0 ) +    (  r )  =  0 . Since,  ln( y ) + ln( y ) +  ln( r  ) =  0 for every   y in an
                        0                                                   0
open ball around y , and since is di¤erentiable at y , it follows that we can take the derivative of
P                                          r          1                                                          0
   i2N f1;2;3g (1) + (y ) + ( y ) + ( r ) = 0 with respect to y and evaluate it at y . By doing that,
          0 0      0 r            r                                               0    0 0             0
we get, (y ) + ( y0 )( y02 ) = 0. This can be written as y                              (y ) = y ~       (~
                                                                                                          y ). But since this holds
                                  0                      2                0
for any pair of values (y ; y          ~) 2 int(T ) , such that y < 1 and y              ~ > 1, it is true that, for any ...xed
                                    0                  0
~ 2 (1; 1 ), we have y
y                                     (y ) = y  ~        (~y ) for every y 2 ( ; 1). In other words, for every y 2 ( ; 1)
               0
we have y        (y ) = c =) 0 (y ) = y             c
                                                       =) (y ) = c ln y + c      ^, for some c > 0 and c       ^ 2 R. By the fact
that (1) = 0, it follows that c             ^ = 0 and, hence, (y ) = c ln y for every y 2 ( ; 1), with c > 0: By
symmetry of it follows that for every y 2 (1; 1 ), we have (y ) =                                 (y1
                                                                                                      ) = c ln y   1
                                                                                                                     = c ln y . That
                                                  1
is, (y ) = c ln y for every y 2 ( ; ), with c > 0, and by continuity at the boundary, the formula
must hold for every y 2 [ ; 1 ].
                                                                                                                      1
      By the fact that in every equilibrium                of the rule V 1S 1V -D (d), we must have              i(       )   di and
 i(   )     di , and by the above analysis, it follows that in an e¢ cient equilibrium it should hold
                               P
that i (ti ) = c ln ti + i with i2N i = 0 and c 2 (0; mini2N f min(di ln(  i ;di + i )
                                                                              )        g].

Proof of Proposition 3.          Let fX; wg be a continuous voting rule: there exists ( i )i2N 2
                                P
  i2N int(Xi ) such that   i2N i = w . To see why fX; w g admits an e¢ cient equilibrium, notice
that any e¢ cient equilibrium of the voting rule V 1S 1V D (1; : : : ; 1), as characterized in Propo-
sition 2, can be properly re-scaled so that, for each i 2 N , i ...ts within any open set around
  i.

      To understand why only continuous voting rules admit an e¢ cient equilibrium, let v = fX; wg
be a voting rule with an e¢ cient equilibrium                    . Since every strategy that is feasible according
to this rule is also feasible under the rule v 0 = f(R; R; :::; R); wg, it must be the case that                               is an
                                 0
e¢ cient equilibrium of v too. We replicate the reasoning in the proof of Proposition 2, and get

                                                                44
                                                                                               P
the following result: as            is an e¢ cient equilibrium of v 0 , it should hold that      i2N   i (1)   = w and,
for every i 2 N ,         i (y )
                              should be continuous and strictly increasing in an open ball around y = 1.
                                               P
Hence, noting         i   = i (1), we have that i2N i = w and i 2 int(Xi ) for every i 2 N , that is
fX; wg is a continuous voting rule.

Proof of Proposition 4 . In this proof, we denote by NA (resp. NB ) the set of A-partisans
(resp. B -partisans) and by NC the set of common value voters.
    (i) for any distribution d, we may write V (d) = fX; wg and V 0 (d) = fX 0 ; wg with for all i 2 N ,
         0
Xi Xi      . The proof's strategy consists in re-writing the voting games associated to these rules as
voting games taking place among common value shareholders, and to apply Proposition 1.
      For a C-shareholders'vote pro...le x = (xi )i2NC , a proposal passes (for sure) if and only if:
X                         X                    X                    X                X                 X
       (max Xi ) +            (min Xi ) +            xi > w    ,           xi > w          (max Xi )           (min Xi ):
i2NA                   i2NB                   i2NC                  i2NC            i2NA               i2NB

           P                   P
Let w~=w     i2NA (max Xi )      i2NB (min Xi ). We consider the voting rules fXC = (Xi )i2NC ; w
                                                                                                ~g
       0      0
and fXC  = (Xi  )i2NC ; w
                        ~ g. By application of Proposition 1, the ...rst rule dominates the second
one.
      (ii) for any d such that hC > jhA                   hB j, an e¢ cient equilibrium can be constructed under
    1S 1V   D
V               (d), following the same argument as the one described in the main text (re-scaling of the
e¢ cient equilibrium of Proposition 2).

Proof of Proposition 5.         Let fX; wg be a ...nite voting rule. The voting game can then be
re-written as one of common values. In this game, each shareholder i 2 N has utility uC  i (we then
                                                hj C
have common values in the sense that uC   i  =     u
                                                hi j  ). When  she  chooses an  action xi 2 Xi , the
action is recorded with probability pi , while it is transformed into (max Xi ) with probability pA
                                     C
                                                                                                   i
and into (min Xi ) with probability pB
                                     i .

    The existence of a BNE for that game is obtained by the same argument as in the proof of
                                                                                            P
Lemma 2. The only di¤erence arises with the expressions (in the proof of Claim 1) P i ( j 6=i xj >
             1
                    P                                                           P
  x j !) + 2   P i ( j 6=i xj = x j ! ) which should be replaced by P ~ i ( j 6=i xj > x j ! ) +
1
        P
2 P~ i ( j 6=i xj =  x j ! ), where the strategy ~ j is de...ned for each shareholder j by:
                                          8
                                          >
                                          <    j           with probability 1 pA j    pB
                                                                                       j
                                   ~j =       (max Xj )    with probability pA
                                                                             j
                                          >
                                          :
                                              (min Xj )    with probability pB
                                                                             j :


We thus obtain the existence of a BNE under the ...nite rule fX; wg. To conclude, if we have
two ...nite mechanisms V and V 0 that distribute power similarly, then for each d, the common
value games associated to V (d) and V 0 (d) are such that: the action spaces of the second game
are included in the action spaces of the ...rst game (for each shareholder); the payo¤s associated to
any pro...le is the same in the two games (since by assumption they distribute power similarly). As
before, we thus obtain that for any BNE under V 0 (d), there exists a BNE under V such that the
probability of making the correct decision is higher.


                                                               45
Proof of Proposition 6.                  In this proof, we abuse notation and write simply 1S1V-D for
                    1S 1V   D
the voting rule V               (d). A subgame is essentially de...ned by the set of shareholders that
acquire a signal. Let us denote the set of informed shareholders by I . By Proposition 1 and by
the argument of Mc Lennan (1998) we have that, from an ex-ante point of view, the probability
of the ...rm making the correct decision in subgame I under voting rule v , denoted by P(I; v ),
must satisfy P(I; v )       P(I 0 ; v ) when #I > #I 0 for any v , and P(I; 1S1V-D)                P(I; v ) for any I
and any v . We also notice that since we have ...xed a certain BNE in each subgame, the whole
game may be viewed as a single stage game in which the shareholders only decide whether to
draw an informative signal or not. This simpli...ed version of the game is a potential game with
potential function P(I (x); v )     #I (x)       l, where x is the vector of information acquisition decisions
with xi = 1 when shareholder i acquires a signal and xi = 0 otherwise; and #I (x) is the number
of informed shareholders. By the fact that there are ...nitely many alternative vectors x, the
potential function obtains a maximum value for (at least) one of these vectors, which is also a
pure strategy equilibrium of this simpli...ed game (see for instance Monderer and Shapley, 1996).
Moreover, every pure strategy equilibrium of this simpli...ed game must be a maximizer of this
potential function. Assume now, that a pure strategy equilibrium, x1S 1V -D , exists under 1S1V-D
such that P(I (x1S1V -D ); 1S1V-D)             #I (x1S 1V )        l < P(I (xv ); V )   #I (xv )   l, where xv is an
equilibrium of some other rule v . Since P(I; 1S1V-D)                       P(I; v ) for any I and any v , it follows
that P(I (xv ); 1S1V-D)       #I (xv )     l      P(I (xv ); v )      #I (xv )    l, which contradicts the fact that
x1S 1V -D is an equilibrium ­and, thus, a maximizer of the corresponding potential function ­under
1S1V-D. Therefore, there is no rule v that admits a better equilibrium than 1S1V-D.




Appendix B: Proofs of Section 5

Proof of Proposition 7.                  As for Proposition 1, we divide the statement in two lemmas
(Lemma 5 and 6 in this Appendix), focusing respectively on the best and the worst equilibria
under each voting mechanism. Throughout the proof, we treat the game between the manager
and the shareholders as a simultaneous game and we continue to apply the equilibrium notion of a
BNE, as in Section 4. We note however that the same results hold for the equilibrium concept of
weak perfect Bayesian equilibrium in the sequential version of the game when there is no decisive
shareholder.



Lemma 5 For any              2 [0; 1] and any share distribution d, for any BNE under V 1P 1V (d),
there exists a BNE          0 under V 1S 1V D (d) that makes all shareholders (weakly) better o¤

in expectation.

Proof. The strategy of the proof is to construct a two-player common value game between an
aligned manager and an aggregate shareholder (holding all the shareholders'signals). When voting


                                                              46
under 1S1V-D, shareholders can implement (i.e. decentralize) the aggregate shareholder'
                                                                                      s strategy
of the most e¢ cient equilibrium of the two-player game. The corresponding pro...le is then the
most e¢ cient equilibrium of the original game under 1S1V-D. Using the argument of Mc Lennan
(1998), shareholders'welfare at equilibrium cannot improve with 1P1V.
    Two-player game. We consider a game with two players: a manager M and an aggregate
shareholder AS . The manager receives the signal sM , while the aggregate shareholder receives
the signals s1 ; : : : ; sn . After receiving their (private) signals, players simultaneously choose to pass
(xj = P ) or to veto (xj = V ) the proposal. The proposal is accepted with probability 1 if both
players choose P , and it is accepted with probability if the manager vetoes while the aggregate
shareholder passes.44 Both players share the same utility: for all j 2 fM; AS g,

                                       uj (Aj ) = 1; uj (Aj ) =          1;
                                       uj (B j ) = uj (B j ) = 0:

     Claim 1: the two-player game admits a most e¢ cient strategy pro...le, which is also an equi-
librium of that game. The expected utility of each player is at least 0 at this equilibrium.

    We ...rst show the existence of a most e¢ cient equilibrium, and we start by computing players'
best replies. Given a strategy AS for the aggregate shareholder, the expected utility di¤erence
between actions P and V for the manager, uM := E[uM (xM = P; AS ) j sM ] E[uM (xM =
V; AS ) j sM ], can be written as:

                       uM = (1       )P(   AS   = P ) (2P(! =        j   AS   = P; sM )   1) :

Indeed, the only di¤erence between the actions xM = P and xM = V arises when the aggregate
shareholder chooses to pass ( AS = P ) and the manager has control over her own veto (with
probability 1    ). Hence, playing xM = P is a best reply for the manager whenever P(! =
  j AS = P; sM )       1=2, or equivalently P (! = j AS =P;sM )
                                            P(! = j AS =P;sM )  1. Noting tM = f M ( sM j )
                                                                               fM (sM j ) and
t AS = P       ( AS =P j )                P(! = j AS =P;sM )
              P( AS =P j ) , we may write P(! = j AS =P;sM ) = tM t AS . We obtain that there is a cuto¤
tM := t 1 such that xM = P is a best reply whenever tM tM , and that xM = V is a best reply
              AS
otherwise.
                                                                            Qn               Qn
                                                                              =1 fi (si j )
      Similarly, we denote the aggregate shareholder'       s type by tAS = Qi
                                                                             n              = i=1 ti . As for
                                                                             i=1 fi (si j )
the manager, we obtain that uAS := E[uAS ( M ; xAS = P ) j s1 ; : : : ; sn ] E[uAS ( M ; xAS = V ) j
s1 ; : : : ; sn ], can be written as:

         uAS = (P(    M   = P ) + P(   M   = V ))

                             ~(                                P( M = P )
                     2P ! = jP       M   = P) =                                  ; s1 ; : : : ; sn   1 ;
                                                    P(   M    = P ) + P( M = V )

where P ~ denotes the posterior probability once one knows that the manager has passed the reform
(either because she chose to do so, xM = P , or because she tried to veto, xM = V , but the veto
was not registered, which arises with probability ). Hence, as for the manager, there is a cuto¤
tAS , function of the manager'  s strategy M , such that xAS = P is a best reply to M whenever
   44
     In other words, the manager has incomplete control over her own veto: with probability            , she is
"transformed" into a misaligned manager, who automatically passes the proposal.


                                                         47
tAS     tAS , and that xAS = V is a best reply otherwise.
    We have shown that the best reply of each player j 2 fM; AS g is characterized by a cuto¤ tj
above which j plays P , and below which j plays V . Now, observe that the players' type spaces
TM = [ M ; 1M
              ] and TAS = [ n ; 1n ] are compact. Moreover, if one denotes by gj (tj j ! ) the density

according to which player j is of type tj in state ! , we obtain the expected utility of both players
given the cuto¤s (tM ; tAS ) as:
                              Z    1
                                   n
                                              Z   1
                                                  M
        E[uj j tM ; tAS ] =            dtAS           dtM   + (1   )1ftM   tM g
                              tAS                 M

                                  (P(! = )gAS (tAS j )gM (tM j )      P(! = )gAS (tAS j )gM (tM j )) :

As in each state, the conditional distributions of tM and tAS are continuous, the expected utility
is continuous in both players' cuto¤s. It follows that there exists an optimal couple of cuto¤s
(tM ; tAS ) which maximizes the common utility. The corresponding strategy pro...le must thus be
an equilibrium, the most e¢ cient equilibrium, and also the most e¢ cient strategy pro...le. As the
strategy pro...le (xM = V; xAS = V ) yields an expected utility of 0, the expected utility of the most
e¢ cient pro...le must be at least 0.

    Claim 2: The most e¢ cient pro...le of the two-player game is replicable in the original game
under 1S1V-D. In that game, the corresponding pro...le is both the most e¢ cient pro...le such that
the misaligned manager always proposes and the most e¢ cient equilibrium.

    In the original game under 1S1V-D, consider the strategy pro...le   where: the aligned manager
behaves as the manager of the two-player game; the misaligned manager always proposes; the
shareholders decentralize the aggregate shareholder' s strategy of the two-player game by playing
the log-strategy identi...ed in Proposition 2.
     First, observe that    is an equilibrium. Indeed, we know from Claim 1 that the aligned man-
ager and the shareholders are playing optimally (if one individual shareholder could improve her
utility, then the aggregate shareholder could do it as well in the two-player game, a contradiction).
Moreover, passing is always a best reply for the misaligned manager.
   Second,     is the most e¢ cient pro...le among those for which the misaligned manager always
proposes. Indeed, if there was a (strictly) more e¢ cient such pro...le, then there would be a (strictly)
more e¢ cient pro...le than the one identi...ed in the two-player game, a contradiction with Claim 1.
     Third, assume by contradiction that there is a (strictly) more e¢ cient equilibrium. By virtue
of the previous assertion, it must be a strategy pro...le such that the misaligned manager proposes
with probability strictly less than one. For such a strategy to be a best reply, it must be that
shareholders always turn the reform down. Such a pro...le yields an expected utility of 0 for the
shareholders (and the aligned manager), and thus cannot be a strict improvement over , since
    yields at least 0 (applying Claim 1).

   Claim 3: The original game under 1P1V admits equilibria, but none of them is more e¢ cient
than the most e¢ cient pro...le under 1S1V-D.

    First, observe that the pro...le in which every manager's type vetoes and all shareholders vote
against the proposal is an equilibrium, thus an equilibrium exists.
      Second, any pro...le under 1P1V for which the misaligned manager always proposes is replicable


                                                            48
in the game under 1S1V-D, and thus cannot be (strictly) more e¢ cient than (applying Claim 2).
Thus, no equilibrium under 1P1V for which the misaligned manager always proposes can improve
upon .
    Finally, any equilibrium under 1P1V such that the misaligned manager proposes with a prob-
ability strictly less than one must yield an expected utility of 0 for the shareholders and the aligned
manager (same argument as under 1S1V-D ). Therefore, no equilibrium under 1P1V can improve
upon     .



Lemma 6 For any            2 [0; 1] and any share distribution d, for any BNE under V 1S 1V D (d),
there exists a BNE        0 under V 1P 1V (d) that makes all shareholders (weakly) worse o¤ in

expectation.

Proof. First, observe that the pro...le for which any manager vetoes the proposal and all share-
holder vote against it is an equilibrium under 1P1V, with an expected utility of 0 for each share-
holder.
    Second, let = ( M ; 1 ; : : : ; n ) be a BNE under 1S1V-D. We will show that this equilibrium
                                                                   Pn
yields an expected utility of at least 0 to all shareholders. If P( i=1 bi (ti ) 0) = 0, the pro...le
yields an expected utility of 0 (the proposal is never accepted), and the previous statement holds.
                                              Pn
We may thus focus on the case for which P( i=1 bi (ti ) 0) > 0. As is an equilibrium, it must
be that the misaligned manager always proposes. Then, by applying the same argument as in
the proof of Lemma 5 (Claim 1), we obtain that the aligned manager'      s strategy must be weakly
increasing.
     Now, given the (aligned and misaligned) managers' strategies, the game among shareholders
can be seen as a game with an exogenous proposal (as in Section 4), albeit with a possibly biased
prior P(! = ) 1=2. In that game, we can apply the same reasoning as in the proof of Lemma
2 (Claim 1), and we obtain that there exists a strategy pro...le 0 for the shareholders, such that
each 0                                                                                 0         0
       i is pure, weakly increasing and: 8i 2 N; ui ( M ; 1 ; : : : ; n ) = ui ( M ; 1 ; : : : ; n ). As each
player's strategy under the pro...le ( M ; 0           0
                                           1 ; : : : ; n ) is weakly increasing, a similar argument as the
one used in Lemma 3 (Claim 1) shows that this pro...le yields an expected utility of at least 0 to
all shareholders. Therefore, 8i 2 N; ui ( ) 0. This concludes the proof.
      The dominance statement in Proposition 7 is obtained by conjunction of Lemmas 5 and 6.
To establish strict dominance, consider an instance for which, when the proposal is exogenous,
the best BNE under 1S1V-D, 1S 1V , implements the correct outcome with a probability p1S 1V
strictly higher than p1P 1V , attained at the best BNE under 1P1V, 1P 1V . We may further assume
                       1
p1 S 1 V > p 1 P 1 V > 2 . We will establish the strict dominance of 1S1V-D over 1P1V when the
proposal is endogenous by taking M su¢ ciently close to 1.
    First, observe that for M close enough to 1, the pro...le where the manager (either aligned or
misaligned) always proposes and the shareholders play a BNE of the exogenous proposal game,
such that p > 1=2, must be an equilibrium. Indeed, on the shareholders' side, the game is the
same as the one with an exogenous proposal since the manager always proposes. On the aligned
manager'  s side, the utility of vetoing is 0, while the utility of proposing can be made arbitrarily
close to 2p     1 > 0 (for M close to 1), in which case proposing is indeed a best reply. Finally,

                                                     49
as the probability of accepting the reform is always positive (since p     > 1=2), the misaligned
manager' s best reply is also to propose.
    Second, assume that there is a BNE under 1P1V which implements the correct outcome with
a probability p > p1P 1V . As p > 1=2, the misaligned manager always proposes (for M close
enough to 1) . As p1P 1V is the highest probability to implement the correct outcome under 1P1V
when the proposal is exogenous, it must be that the aligned manager sometimes vetoes the proposal,
                                                                                                  1
for some type tM 2 TM . It must thus be that P( jtM )P(O = Aj ) + P( jtM )P(O = B j )             2,
where P(Oj! ) denotes the probability of alternative O passing in state ! when the proposal is
passed to the shareholders. By choosing M su¢ ciently close to 1, we can make P( jtM ) and
P( jtM ) arbitrarily close to 1=2 for all tM 2 [ M ; 1
                                                     M
                                                       ], and, as p1P 1V > 1
                                                                           2 , we can thus make sure
that

                                                                  1
     9tM 2 TM ;     P( jtM )P(O = Aj ) + P( jtM )P(O = B j )
                                                                  2
                        )     8tM 2 TM ;    P( jtM )P(O = Aj ) + P( jtM )P(O = B j ) < p1P 1V :

If   M   denotes the aligned manager' s strategy, we obtain:
                Z
           p = ( + (1         ) M (tM )(P ))

                         (P( jtM )P(O = Aj ) + P( jtM )P(O = B j )) gM (tM )dtM < p1P 1V :

Hence a contradiction. We have shown that for       M   close enough to 1, the dominance of 1S1V-D
over 1P1V can be strict.




                                                  50
References

 [1] Adams, R. and D. Ferreira (2008). One Share, One Vote: The Empirical Evidence,
     Review of Finance, 12: 51-91.

 [2] Aggarwal, R., S. Dahiya, and N. Prabhala (2019). The Power of Shareholder Votes:
     Evidence from Uncontested Director Elections, Journal of Financial Economics, 133:
     134-153.

 [3] Ahn, David S., and Santiago Oliveros (2016). Approval voting and scoring rules with
     common values, Journal of Economic Theory, 166: 304-310.

 [4] Alissa W. 2015. Boards' Response to Shareholders' Dissatisfaction: The Case of
     Shareholders'Say on Pay in the UK, Europen Accounting Review, 24(4): 727-52.

 [5] Almeida, H., V. Fos, and M. Kronlund (2016). The Real E¤ects of Share Repur-
     chases. Journal of Financial Economics, 119: 168-185.

 [6] Andrade,G.,M.Mitchell, and E. Sta¤ord (2001). New Evidence and Perspectives on
     Mergers. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15: 103­20.

 [7] Appel, I., T. Gormley, and D. Keim (2016). Passive Investors, Not Passive Owners.
     Journal of Financial Economics, 121: 111-141.

 [8] Austen-Smith, D. and J. Banks (1996). Information Aggregation, Rationality, and
     the Condorcet Jury Theorem, American Political Science Review, 90: 34­45.

 [9] Babenko, I., G. Choi, and R. Sen (2019). Management (of) Proposals. mimeo.

[10] Bach, L. and D. Metzger (2019). How Close Are Shareholder Votes? Review of
     Financial Studies, 32(8): 3183-3214.

[11] Baker, K. and P. Gallagher (1980). Management's View of Stock Splits. Financial
     Management, 9(2): 73-77.

[12] Barelli, P., S. Bhattacharya, and L. Siga (2019). Full Information Equivalence in
     Large Elections. mimeo.

[13] Bar-Isaac, H. and J. Shapiro (2019). Blockholder Voting. Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics, forthcoming.

[14] Becht, M., A. Polo, and S. Rossi (2017). Does Mandatory Shareholder Voting Prevent
     Bad Acquisitions?, Review of Financial Studies, 29(11): 3035-67.

[15] Bhattacharya, S. (2013). Preference Monotonicity and Information Aggregation in
     Elections, Econometrica, 81(3), 1229-1247.

                                          51
[16] Bolton, P., Li, T., Ravina, E., & Rosenthal, H. (2020). Investor ideology. Journal of
     Financial Economics.

[17] Bond, P. and H. Eraslan (2009). Strategic Voting over Strategic Proposals, Review
     of Economic Studies, 77(2): 459-490.

[18] Bouton, L., and M. Castanheira (2012). One Person, Many Votes: Divided Majority
     and Information Aggregation, Econometrica, 80(1): 43-87.

[19] Bouton, L., A. Llorente-Saguer, and F. Malherbe (2018). Get Rid of Unanimity:
     The Superiority of Majority Rules with Veto Power, Journal of Political Economy,
     126(1): 107-149.

[20] Bouwman, C. H. S.,K. Fuller, andA. S. Nain (2009). Market Valuation and Acqui-
     sition Quality: Empirical Evidence. Review of Financial Studies, 22: 633­79.

[21] Brav, A., J. Graham, C. Harvey, and R. Michaely (2005). Payout Policy in the 21st
     Century. Journal of Financial Economics, 77: 483-527.

[22] Brav, A., D. Cain, and J. Zytnick (2019). Retail Shareholder Participation in the
     Proxy Process: Monitoring, Engagement, and Voting, ECGI Working Paper Series
     in Finance, 637/2019.

[23] Brennan, M. and T. Copeland (1988). Stock Splits, Stock Prices, and Transaction
     Costs. Journal of Financial Economics, 22(1): 83-101.

[24] Brennan, M. and P. Hughes (1991). Stock Prices and the Supply of Information.
     Journal of Finance, 46(5): 1665-1691.

[25] Brown, L.D. and J. Han (1992). The Impact of Annual Earnings Announcements on
     Convergence of Beliefs. Accounting Review, 67: 862-875.

[26] Burkart, M. and S. Lee (2008). One Share-One Vote: the Theory, Review of Finance,
     12: 1-49.

[27] Cai, J., J. Garner, and R. Walking (2009). Electing Directors, Journal of Finance,
     64(5): 2389-2421

[28] Calluzzo, P. and E. Dudley (2019). The Real E¤ects of Proxy Advisors on the Firm.
     Financial Management, 48: 917-943.

[29] Chen, Xia, Harford, Jarrad, Li, Kai, 2007. Monitoring: which institutions matter?
     Journal of Financial Economics, 86, 279­ 305.

[30] Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison (1999). Career concerns of mutual fund man-
     agers, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 389-432.

                                           52
[31] Christo¤ersen, S. E., Geczy, C. C., Musto, D. K. and Reed, A. V. (2007), Vote
     Trading and Information Aggregation. Journal of Finance, 62: 2897-2929

[32] Cohen, Lauren, and Breno Schmidt (2009). Attracting ows by attracting big clients,
     Journal of Finance, 64, 2125-2151.

[33] Conyon M. and G. Sadler (2010). Shareholder Voting and Directors'Remuneration
     Report Legislation: Say on Pay in the UK. Corporate Governance: An International
     Review, 18: 296-312.

[34] Copeland, T. (1979). Liquidity Changes Following Stock Splits. Journal of Finance,
     34(1): 115-141.

[35] Coughlan, P. (2001). In Defense of Unanimous Jury Verdicts: Mistrials, Communi-
     cation and Strategic Voting. American Political Science Review, 94: 375-93.

[36] Cunat, V., M. Gine, and M. Guadalupe (2016). Say Pays! Shareholder Voice and
     Firm Performance. Review of Finance, 1799-1834.

[37] Cvijanovic, D., Dasgupta, A., and Zachariadis, K.E. (2016). Ties that Bind: How
     Business Connections A¤ect Mutual Fund Activism, Journal of Finance, 71(6): 2933-
     2966.

[38] Cvijanovic, D., Dasgupta, A., and Zachariadis, K.E. (2019). Free-riders and Under-
     dogs: Participation in Corporate Voting, mimeo.

[39] Datta, Sudip, Mai Iskandar-Datta, and Kartik Raman (2001). Executive Compen-
     sation and Corporate Acquisition Decisions, Journal of Finance, 56: 2299­2336.

[40] Davis, Gerald F., and E. Han Kim (2007). Business ties and proxy voting by mutual
     funds, Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 552-570.

[41] Dittmar, A. (2000). Why Do Firms Repurchase Stock. Journal of Business, 73(3):
     331-355.

[42] Easley, D., M. O'Hara, and G. Saar (2001). How Stock Splits A¤ect Trading: A
     Microstructure Approach. Journal of Financial Quantitative Analysis, 36(1): 25-51.

[43] Edmans, A., and C. Holderness (2017). Blockholders: A Survey of Theory and
     Evidence, Handbook of the Economics of Corporate Governance, Volume 1.

[44] Eso, P., S. Hansen, L. White (2015). A Theory of Vote Trading and Information
     Aggregation. mimeo.

[45] Feddersen, T. and W. Pesendorfer (1996). The Swing Voter'
                                                             s Curse, American Eco-
     nomic Review, 86: 408-424.

                                         53
[46] Feddersen, T. and W. Pesendorfer (1997). Voting Behavior and Information Aggre-
     gation in Elections with Private Information, Econometrica, 65: 1029-1058.

[47] Feddersen, T. and W. Pesendorfer (1998). Convicting the Innocent: the Inferiority
     of Unanimous Jury Verdicts, American Political Science Review, 92: 23-35.

[48] Ferri, F. and D. Maber, Say on Pay Votes and CEO Compensation: Evidence from
     the UK, Review of Finance, 17(2): 527­563.

[49] Fich, E., Harford, J., and A. Tran (2015). Motivated Monitors: The Importance
     of Institutional Investors' Portfolio Weights. Journal of Financial Economics, 118:
     21­ 48.

[50] Fos, V., K. Li, M. Tsoutsoura (2018). Do Director Elections Matter?, Review of
     Financial Studies, 31(4): 1499-1531

[51] Frankenreiter, J., C. Hwang, Y. Nili, and E. Talley (2021). Cleaning Corporate
     Governance. University of Penn Law Review, forthcoming.

[52] Fu, F., L. Lin, and M. O¢ cer (2013). Acquisitions Driven by Stock Overvaluation:
     Are They Good Deals? Journal of Financial Economics, 109: 24-39.

[53] Gantchev, N. and M. Giannetti (2020). The Costs and Bene...ts of Shareholder
     Democracy: Gad   ies and Low-Cost Activism. ECGI Finance Working Paper,
     586/2018.

[54] Gerardi, D. and L. Yariv (2007). Deliberative Voting. Journal of Economic Theory,
     114: 357-394.

[55] Gershkov, A. and B. Szentes (2009). Optimal Voting Schemes with Costly Informa-
     tion Acquisition. Journal of Economic Theory, 144(1): 36-68.

[56] Gillan, S. and L. Starks (2000). Corporate Governance Proposals and Shareholder
     Activism: The Role of Institutional Investors, Journal of Financial Economics, 57:
     275-305.

[57] Glosten, L. and P. Milgrom (1985). Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices in a Specialist
     Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders. Journal of Financial Economics,
     14(1): 71-100.

[58] Gompers, P., J. Ishii, and A. Metrick (2003). Corporate Governance and Equity
     Prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 107-55.

[59] Gray, S., T. Smith, and R. Whaley (2003). Stock Splits: Implications for Investor
     Trading Costs. Journal of Empirical Finance, 10: 271-303.


                                          54
[60] Grinblatt, M., R. Masulis, and S. Titman (1984). The Valuation E¤ects of Stock
     Splits and Stock Dividends. Journal of Financial Economics. 13(4): 461-490.

[61] Grinstein, Y. and P. Hribar (2004). CEO Compensation and Incentives: Evidence
     from M&A Bonuses. Journal of Financial Economics, 73: 119-143.

[62] Grullon, G. and R. Michaely (2004). The Information Content of Share Repurchase
     Programs. Journal of Finance, 59(2): 651-680.

[63] Hansmann, H. and Pargendler, M., 2013. The evolution of shareholder voting rights:
     Separation of ownership and consumption. Yale Law Journal, 123, p.948.

[64] Harford, J., M. Humphery-Jenner, and R. Powell. 2012. The Sources of Value De-
     struction in Acquisitions by Entrenched Managers. Journal of Financial Economics,
     106: 247­ 61.

[65] Harford, J., Kecskes, A., and M. Mansi (2018). Do long-term investors improve
     corporate decision making? (Working Paper).

[66] Harford, J., and K. Li (2007). Decoupling CEO Wealth and Firm Performance: The
     Case of Acquiring CEOs. Journal of Finance, LXII(2): 917-949.

[67] Hayden, G. and M. Bodie (2008). The False Promise of One Share, One Vote. Legal
     Studies Research Paper Series, 08-01.

[68] Healy, P., K. Palepu, and A. Sweeney (1995). Causes and Consequences of Expanded
     Voluntary Disclosure. Working paper Harvard Business School.

[69] Henry, E. (2008). The Informational Role of Supermajorities. Journal of Public Eco-
     nomics, 92: 2225-2239.

[70] Herrera, H., Llorente-Saguer, A., and McMurray, J. (2018). The Marginal Voter'
                                                                                  s
     Curse. Economic Journal, forthcoming.

[71] Hirschman, A. (1981). Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms,
     Organizations, and States, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[72] Holderness, C.G. (2009). The Myth of Di¤use Ownership in the United States. Re-
     view of Financial Studies, 22 (4), 1377-1408.

[73] Hribar, P., N. Thorne Jenkins, and B. Johnson (2006). Stock Repurchases as an
     Earnings Management Device. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 41: 3-27.

[74] Iliev, P., J. Kalodimos, and M. Lowry (2019). Investors' Attention to Corporate
     Governance, mimeo.


                                          55
[75] Iliev, P. and M. Lowry (2015). Are Mutual Funds Active Voters? Review of Financial
     Studies, 28(2): 446-485.

[76] Kandel, E., M. Massa, and A. Simonov (2011). Do Small Shareholders Count? Jour-
     nal of Financial Economics, 101: 641-665.

[77] Kim, O., and Verrecchia, R. (1991b). Trading volume and price reactions to public
     announcements. Journal of Accounting Research, 29, 302­321.

[78] Knyazeva, A., D. Knyazeva, and L. Kostovetsky (2018). Investor Heterogeneity and
     Trading. European Financial Managerment, 24: 680-718.

[79] Levit, D. and N. Malenko (2011). Nonbinding Voting for Shareholder Proposals.
     Journal of Finance, LXVI(5): 1579-1614.

[80] Levit, D., N. Malenko, and E. Maug (2021a). The Voting Premium. ECGI Finance
     Working Paper, 720/2021.

[81] Levit, D., N. Malenko, and E. Maug (2021b). Trading and Shareholder Democracy.
     ECGI Finance Working Paper, 631/2019.

[82] Li, K. T. Liu, J. Wu (2018). Vote Avoidance and Shareholder Voting in Mergers and
     Acquisitions, Review of Financial Studies, 31(8): 3176­3211.

[83] Li, S., E. Maug, and M. Schwartz-Ziv (2021). When Shareholders Disagree: Trading
     after Shareholder Meetings. ECGI Finance Working Paper, 594/2019.

[84] Ma, S., and Y. Xiong (2020). Information Bias in the Proxy Advisory Market, Review
     of Corporate Finance Studies, 10(1): 82-135.

[85] Malenko, A. and N. Malenko (2019). Proxy Advisory Firms: The Economics of
     Selling Information to Voters. Journal of Finance, 74(5): 2441-2490.

[86] Mandler, M. (2012), The Fragility of Information Aggregation in Large Elections,
     Games and Economic Behavior, 74(1): 257-268

[87] Marquez, R. and B. Yilmaz (2008). Information and E¢ ciency in Tender O¤ers.
     Econometrica, 76(5): 1075-1101.

[88] Martinelli, C. (2006). Would Rational Voters Acquire Costly Information?, Journal
     of Economic Theory, 129: 225-251.

[89] Maskin E, Dasgupta P (1986). The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontinuous Eco-
     nomic Games, Part I (Theory). Review of Economic Studies, 53(1) :1-26.

[90] Maug, E. and K. Rydqvist (2009). Do Shareholders Vote Strategically? Voting Be-
     havior, Proposal Screening, and Majority Rules, Review of Finance, 13 47-79.

                                         56
 [91] Maug, E. and B. Yilmaz (2002). Two-Class Voting: A Mechanism for Conict Res-
      olution. American Economic Review, 92(5): 1448-1471.

 [92] McLennan, A. (1998). Consequences of the Condorcet Jury Theorem for Bene...cial
      Information Aggregation by Rational Agents, American Political Science Review,
      92: 413-418.

 [93] McMurray, J. (2013). Aggregating Information by Voting: The Wisdom of the Ex-
      perts versus the Wisdom of the Masses, Review of Economic Studies, 80(1): 277-312.

 [94] Meirowitz, A. and S. Pi (2020). Voting and Trading: The Shareholder's Dilemma.
      mimeo.

 [95] Monderer, D., and Shapley, L. S. (1996). Potential games. Games and Economic
      Behavior, 14(1), 124-143.

 [96] Myers, S. and N. Majluf (1984). Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions
      When Firms Have Information the Investors Do Not Have. NBER Working Paper,
      1396.

 [97] Myerson, R. (1998). Population Uncertainty and Poisson Games, International Jour-
      nal of Game Theory, 27: 375-392.

 [98] Nitzan, S. and J. Paroush (1982). Optimal decision rules in uncertain dichotomous
      choice situations. International Economic Review, 289-297.

 [99] Nunez, M. and J.-F. Laslier (2014). Preference Intensity Representation: Strategic
      Overstating in Large Elections. Social Choice and Welfare, 42: 313-340.

[100] Persico, N. (2004). Committee Design with Endogenous Information, Review of Eco-
      nomic Studies, 71: 165-191.

[101] Powell, G. and H. Baker (1993). The E¤ecs of Stock Splits on the Ownership Mix
      of a Firm, Review of Financial Economics, 3(1): 70-88.

[102] Richardson, V. (2000). Information Asymmetry and Earnings Management: Some
      Evidence, Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, 15: 325-347.

[103] Sias, R., Starks, L., & Titman, S. (2006). Changes in institutional ownership and
      stock returns: Assessment and methodology. Journal of Business, 79, 2869­ 2910.

[104] Schultz, P. (2000). Stock Splits, Tick Size and Sponsorship. Journal of Finance, 55:
      429-450.

[105] Schwartz-Ziv, M. and E. Volkova (2020). Is Blockholder Diversity Detrimental.
      mimeo.

                                           57
[106] Tirole, J. (2005). The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton, New Jersey :Prince-
      ton University Press.

[107] Welker, M. (1995). Disclosure Policy, Information Asymmetry and Liquidity in Eq-
      uity Markets. Contemporary Accounting Research, 11: 801-827.

[108] Woidtke, T. (2002). Agents Watching Agents? Evidence from Pension Fund Own-
      ership and Firm Value, Journal of Financial Economics, 63: 99-131.

[109] Yermack, D. (2010). Shareholder Voting and Corporate Governance. Annual Review
      of Financial Economics, 2:103-125.




                                          58
