                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      A DENIAL A DAY KEEPS THE DOCTOR AWAY

                                           Abe Dunn
                                       Joshua D. Gottlieb
                                         Adam Shapiro
                                      Daniel J. Sonnenstuhl
                                         Pietro Tebaldi

                                      Working Paper 29010
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29010


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




The views expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. A previous draft of this article circulated
under the title "The Costs of Payment Uncertainty in Healthcare Markets." Gottlieb and Tebaldi
thank the Becker-Friedman Institute for Economics. Gottlieb also thanks the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada for supporting this work, and acknowledges hospitality
from Brown University and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. We are deeply indebted
to Finn McLaughlin, Oscar Chan, Hyong-gu Hwang, and Yiqing Zheng for exceptional research
assistance. We thank Matt Backus, David Cutler, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Dan Ly, Neale
Mahoney, Carolin Pflueger, Maria Polyakova, Jesse Shapiro, Jon Skinner, and seminar audiences
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Abe Dunn, Joshua D. Gottlieb, Adam Shapiro, Daniel J. Sonnenstuhl, and Pietro
Tebaldi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Denial a Day Keeps the Doctor Away
Abe Dunn, Joshua D. Gottlieb, Adam Shapiro, Daniel J. Sonnenstuhl, and Pietro Tebaldi
NBER Working Paper No. 29010
July 2021
JEL No. H52,H75,I11,I13,I14,I18,L14,L33,L88

                                         ABSTRACT

Who bears the consequences of administrative problems in healthcare? We use data on repeated
interactions between a large sample of U.S. physicians and many different insurers to document
the complexity of healthcare billing, and estimate its economic costs for doctors and
consequences for patients. Observing the back-and-forth sequences of claims' denials and
resubmissions for past visits, we can estimate physicians' costs of haggling with insurers to
collect payments. Combining these costs with the revenue never collected, we estimate that
physicians lose 17% of Medicaid revenue to billing problems, compared with 5% for Medicare
and 3% for commercial payers. Identifying off of physician movers and practices that span state
boundaries, we find that physicians respond to billing problems by refusing to accept Medicaid
patients in states with more severe billing hurdles. These hurdles are just as quantitatively
important as payment rates for explaining variation in physicians' willing to treat Medicaid
patients. We conclude that administrative frictions have first-order costs for doctors, patients,
and equality of access to healthcare.

Abe Dunn                                        Daniel J. Sonnenstuhl
Bureau of Economic Analysis                     University of Chicago
7204 Willow Avenue                              Harris School of Public Policy
Takoma Park, MD 20912                           1307 East 60th Street
Abe.Dunn@bea.gov                                Chicago, IL 60637
                                                d.sonnenstuhl@uchicago.edu
Joshua D. Gottlieb
University of Chicago                           Pietro Tebaldi
Harris School of Public Policy                  Department of Economics
1307 E. 60th St.                                Columbia University
Chicago, IL 60637                               IAB, MC 3308
and NBER                                        New York, NY 10027
jgottlieb@uchicago.edu                          and NBER
                                                pt2571@columbia.edu
Adam Shapiro
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street, MS 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105
adam.shapiro@sf.frb.org
1       Introduction

Health insurance features an intricate system of contracts involving many private and public
entities. These contracts control 13 percent of U.S. GDP,1 and impose many different admin-
istrative burdens on physicians, payers, and patients. We measure one key administrative
burden and ask whether it distorts physicians' behavior and harms patients.
    While COVID-19 has highlighted administrative dysfunction in many aspects of the
U.S. healthcare system,2 administrative problems have been flagged as a reason for high costs
and inefficiency since long before the pandemic (Cutler and Ly, 2011). Measuring adminis-
trative dysfunction is inherently difficult since measurement requires data, and data require
administrative capacity. So past evidence on the size and impact of administrative costs in
healthcare markets has generally been limited to surveys (Cunningham and O'Malley, 2008;
Casalino et al., 2009; Morra et al., 2011; Long, 2013) and accounting exercises (Pozen and
Cutler, 2010; Tseng et al., 2018).
    We examine whether administrative frictions stemming from complex, incomplete con-
tracts between healthcare providers and payers consume healthcare resources, and conse-
quently distort the availability of care. Doctors and insurers often have trouble determining
what care a patient's insurance covers, and at what prices, until after the physician pro-
vides treatment. This ambiguity leads to costly billing and bargaining processes after care
is provided--what we call the costs of incomplete payments (CIP). We estimate these costs
across insurers and states. We then show that CIP have a major impact on Medicaid pa-
tients' access to medical care--quantitatively as potent as physician payment rates.
    Our study employs a novel type of healthcare data, called "remittance data", which
    1
     Health insurance covers 13 percent of GDP; total healthcare spending is almost 18 percent.
    2
     Cook (2020) describes administrative hurdles impeding COVID-19 patient care. Early problems with
the regulatory regime for licensing tests (Sharfstein, Becker and Mello, 2020), confusion over insurance
coverage for those tests (Taylor and Slabodkin, 2020), and failure to conduct basic case tracking (Meyer and
Madrigal, 2021) are some of many additional administrative failures. Simple measures to protect the most
vulnerable residents and staff in nursing homes were disregarded (Chen, Chevalier and Long, 2021). Even
when it was clear that vaccines would soon be approved, there was little planning for how to distribute them
(Reuters, 2021), widespread confusion about eligibility rules (Hamel et al., 2021), and even the system for
tracking distribution failed (Bajak and Heath, 2021).


                                                     1
track the billing processes following 90 million visits between 2013-2015. Gottlieb, Shapiro
and Dunn (2018) briefly introduced and summarized these data. The data allow us to
observe multiple rounds of interactions between payers and physicians, along with detailed
information about the medical provider, the patient, the visit, and the reasons payments are
denied. These data provide far more detail about the billing and collection process than the
claims data that have become widely used to study healthcare markets.3 As a result, we are
able to estimate the costs of haggling between the physician's practice and the payer.
   Raw data show that payment frictions are particularly large in the context of Medicaid--
a key part of the U.S. social safety net, but which rarely provides an equal quality of care as
other insurance. In particular, Medicaid patients often have trouble finding physicians willing
to treat them (Polsky et al., 2015; Candon et al., 2018; Oostrom, Einav and Finkelstein,
2017). We find that 25% of Medicaid claims have payment denied for at least one service
upon doctors' initial claim submission. Denials are less frequent for Medicare (7.3%) and
commercial insurers (4.8%). Following a denial, the physician has two choices. She can
accept that the claim won't be paid, foregoing the potential revenue. Or she can commence
a costly back-and-forth process to try to convince the insurer to pay.
   To estimate CIP we adopt a simple economic model in which providers' dynamic billing
behavior following a visit is optimal. Doctors (or their billing offices) maximize expected
revenues considering their own administrative costs, and with rational expectations about
payers' payment processes. When an insurer denies (even partially) the claim after a visit, the
provider faces an optimal stopping problem resembling that considered in Hotz and Miller
(1993). We identify billing costs from observed differences in expected revenues between
visits for which physicians resubmit claims and visits for which they stop attempting to
collect payments, after conditioning nonparametrically on the denial reason and many visit
   3
     Recent uses of claims data--distinct from our remittance data--include the widely used Medicare
and Medicaid claims data, MarketScan (Dunn, Liebman, Pack and Shapiro, 2013; Clemens and Gottlieb,
2017), the Health Care Cost Institute (Cooper et al., 2018), individual firm data (Einav, Finkelstein and
Cullen, 2010; Brot-Goldberg, Chandra, Handel and Kolstad, 2017) and even many so-called All-Payer Claims
Databases (Ericson and Starc, 2016); the latter were kneecapped when the Supreme Court in Gobeille v.
Liberty Mutual (2016) prevented states from requiring self-insured firms to include their claims.


                                                   2
characteristics. The CIP we estimate thus incorporate two concepts: foregone revenues,
directly measured in the remittance data, plus the estimated billing costs that providers
accumulate during the back-and-forth negotiations with payers.
   We estimate that CIP average 17.4% of the contractual value of a typical visit in Medicaid,
5% in Medicare, and 2.8% in commercial insurance. These are significant losses--especially
for Medicaid, which offers physicians much lower reimbursement rates than other insurers in
the first place.
   These high costs raise a natural question: do they affect physicians' supply of care?
Standard economics suggests that doctors' willingness to treat patients should respond not
only to the level of prices, but also to the difficulty and administrative burdens necessary to
collect revenues. So higher CIP should reduce their incentives to treat patients just as lower
prices do.
   We test this using the federalist structure of Medicaid. Medicaid is a joint federal-state
program that insures lower-income adults, pregnant women, and children. While it is largely
federally financed, and subject to certain federal regulations, it is administered separately
by each state--often via contracts to managed care organizations. This means physician
payment rates and processes vary dramatically across states.
   We examine how doctors react to differences in these rates and CIP across states. To
ensure we capture state administrative decisions, rather than differences in patient composi-
tion or physician billing skill, we adjust our model results for these confounds and estimate
state-by-insurer price and CIP indices. We then combine these indices with administrative
data on all physicians' locations, and survey data on the near-universe of physicians' Med-
icaid participation decisions from 2009­2015. Our key outcome is whether the physician
accepts Medicaid patients when practicing in a given state, in a given year.
   We use two identification strategies to isolate exogenous variation in Medicaid prices
and CIP. The first strategy exploits providers who move across states across different years.
(Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis, 1999; Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams, 2016; Hull, 2018;


                                              3
Molitor, 2018). Second, we compare the Medicaid acceptance probability across clinic loca-
tions that operate in different states but are managed by the same physician group. The first
strategy controls for any differences in individual physicians' specialization or preferences,
such as the level of altruism towards Medicaid patients. The second strategy addresses
the concern that patient acceptance may depend on a group's managerial competence or
organizational structure (Bloom et al., 2017).
   These two strategies also obtain economically different objects. The response of an
individual physician moving between two states in a particular year ought to be lower than
the cross-sectional response of a physician group adjusting its strategy across different clinic
locations. Conceptually, the first can be interpreted as a short run elasticity of supply to
price and CIP. The second allows for adjustments over a longer time horizon, and aggregates
to the organization level across multiple physicians.
   If we think of CIP as an implicit tax on doctors' revenues, a ten percentage point increase
in CIP--approximately one cross-state standard deviation--is analogous to a tax increase of
ten percentage points. Examining physicians who move across states, we estimate that an
implicit tax increase of this magnitude reduces physicians' probability of accepting Medicaid
patients by 1 percentage point. This is almost equivalent to the effect of a one standard
deviation increase in Medicaid reimbursement rates.
   Looking across states within physician group, we estimate that the long-run effects are
larger. Each standard deviation increase in CIP reduces Medicaid acceptance by 2 per-
centage points. To understand physicians' decision-making, we rescale the estimates into
semi-elasticities of Medicaid acceptance with respect to revenue. Across both strategies,
the semi-elasticity of Medicaid acceptance with respect to net-of-CIP revenue is statistically
indistinguishable from that with respect to fees. So physicians appear to act consistently
across these two domains--they treat a given revenue increase similarly whether it comes
from higher reimbursements or lower CIP. Measuring providers' incentives ignoring CIP--as
one would do looking at reimbursement rates alone--misses a critical aspect of physicians'


                                               4
behavior and healthcare policy.
    These results introduce and quantify a new form of policy leverage that regulators and
insurers implicitly use to control access to care, particularly in Medicaid. Previous work
highlighted the effect of prices on physicians' acceptance of Medicaid patients (Polsky et al.,
2015; Oostrom et al., 2017; Candon et al., 2018; Alexander and Schnell, 2019), and on the
supply of care more broadly (Gruber, Kim and Mayzlin, 1999; Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014;
Dunn and Shapiro, 2018; Gottlieb et al., 2021). We show that a reduction in administrative
hassle is just as significant.4
    Physicians base their supply decisions not only on the pre-determined contractual terms
agreed upon with a specific payer, but also on the administrative costs necessary to collect
revenues after providing care. So if policymakers want to reduce inequality in healthcare
access, this paper points to a new tool: without expanding eligibility, or raising reimburse-
ments, improving Medicaid claims administration could help make healthcare for low-income
Americans more similar to Medicare or employer-sponsored healthcare.
    The fact that insurers' claim denials shrink the market is related to a prediction of
Gennaioli et al. (2020). In their model, markets with more claim denials have less insurance
sold. Here we identify a distinct, novel channel by which administrative burdens shrink the
market: deterring the physicians needed to make health insurance an attractive product.
    Our results have two limitations, which raise important issues that should motivate fu-
ture work. First, we only explore one dimension of administrative hassle in healthcare.
Physicians' other administrative burdens include licensure and registration with insurers,
establishing payment contracts, and obtaining preauthorization for care (Clemens, Gottlieb
and Moln´
        ar, 2017). Patients face their own burdens, including signing up for insurance and
finding providers whose care their insurer covers (Handel and Kolstad, 2015; Brot-Goldberg,
   4
     The relationship between billing hassle and physician behavior has only been explored in small descrip-
tive surveys (Sloan, Mitchell and Cromwell, 1978; Cunningham and O'Malley, 2008; Long, 2013; Ly and
Glied, 2014). In the hospital inpatient context, Gowrisankaran, Joiner and Lin (2019) show that electronic
health records and Medicare payment policies interact in subtle ways to drive how hospitals code and bill for
the care they provide. Zwick (2021) makes a similar point in a very different setting (corporate taxation):
accountants' sophistication influences the tax deductions that firms claim.


                                                     5
Layton, Vabson and Wang, 2021). Identifying a broader concept of administrative dysfunc-
tion may yield opportunities to make healthcare markets more efficient.Beyond the payment
process we study, other forms of administrative hassle across (Cutler, 2020) and within
(Bloom et al., 2015) healthcare institutions could also contribute to missed opportunities to
make healthcare more efficient.
   Second, we don't necessarily capture the full economic incidence of CIP--and, although
they impose costs on physicians, they could conceivably be efficient for the aggregate market.
Claim denials may be part of a process to direct providers' treatment decisions towards
appropriate or cost-effective care. They may help target programs towards more appropriate
providers, if (unlike in recent evidence on beneficiary targeting) those physicians more able
to bear the administrative burdens are better at caring for Medicaid patients. They may
deter or detect fraud, as Crocker and Morgan (1998); Crocker and Tennyson (2002); Dionne,
Giuliano and Picard (2009) consider. While all of these effects may exist, they seem unlikely
to dominate the costs: if they did, physicians in high-CIP states would have no reason to
avoid Medicaid. There could be a compositional effect, in which CIP drive some physicians
from the market, and those who remain might recoup their costs through higher prices or
higher patient volumes. But even if this leaves the remaining physicians no worse off, the
market-shrinking effect of patients losing access to care that we document and measure would
remain.
   This effect represents a new angle to the public finance literature that considers ad-
ministrative ordeals facing potential program beneficiaries. These ordeals may (or may not)
improve program targeting (Nichols, Smolensky and Tideman, 1971; Nichols and Zeckhauser,
1982; Besley and Coate, 1992; Finkelstein and Notowidigdo, 2019; Deshpande and Li, 2019).
In other contexts, program complexity deters beneficiaries' participation in SSI (Bound and
Burkhauser, 1999), food stamps (Currie, Grogger, Burtless and Schoeni, 2001), and student
aid (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2006).
   Instead of focusing on the beneficiary-program relationship, we highlight the importance


                                              6
of ongoing administrative hassles in a business relationship between providers and payers.
This has a direct effect on the costs of supplying healthcare, as these costs must account
for the billing processes necessary to collect revenues. Administrative hassles then impact
beneficiaries and program targeting through a sizable indirect effect, by which higher costs
limit the supply of care to Medicaid patients.
      Our work speaks directly to the empirical literature on sequential bargaining and nego-
tiated price settings (Keniston, 2011; Larsen, 2014; Jindal and Newberry, 2015; Hernandez-
Arenaz and Iriberri, 2018; Bagwell, Staiger and Yurukoglu, 2020; Backus, Blake and Tadelis,
2019; Backus et al., 2020), and relates to rationality and transaction costs in presence of
incomplete contracts (Tirole, 1999). Backus et al. (2020) provide an extensive review of this
empirical literature, which Fudenberg, Levine and Tirole (1985) inspired.
      As in Backus et al. (2020), we are in the rare position to observe a large dataset that, for
a key industry such as healthcare, contains the entire sequences of communications and pro-
posed trades between parties. We therefore are not limited by observing only final trades,
as in Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012), and our empirical model relies on fairly weak as-
sumptions of optimality and consistent beliefs. Although we focus only on the physician's
side of the bargaining process, we move beyond testing theories (Morton, Silva-Risso and
Zettelmeyer, 2011; Backus et al., 2020; Grennan and Swanson, 2020): we estimate economic
costs of submitting claims, and document how costly bargaining over payments shrinks the
availability of care.


2      Institutional Background and Data

2.1     Billing in the U.S. Healthcare System

Institutional details of the U.S. health insurance system are critical to understanding our
data and analysis, so we begin with an overview of the insurance billing process.
      When patients covered by health insurance visit physicians, they rarely make up-front
payments. Instead, the medical practice submits a bill to the patient's insurer after the

                                                 7
visit. This process is similar for commercial insurers--such as insurance plans sponsored by
employers (Einav et al., 2010; Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney, 2012) or purchased in a health
insurance marketplace (Ericson and Starc, 2015; Shepard, 2016; Tebaldi, 2017)--and public
insurers, such as Medicare (Curto, Einav, Levin and Bhattacharya, 2021) for the elderly and
Medicaid (Dranove, Ody and Starc, 2021) for lower-income beneficiaries.
   The first step in billing is to determine exactly what care the physician provided. The
physician describes this care in detail using the "Healthcare Common Procedure Coding
System" (HCPCS), which defines approximately 13,000 medical services. These codes range
from an outpatient visit for a new patient (codes 99201­99205, depending on visit complexity)
to an influenza test (code 87804) to a fetal ultrasound (generally code 76801 in the first
trimester and 76811 thereafter, but with different codes depending on the thoroughness,
method, and for multiple pregnancies). A claim may contain one or more line items, each
containing one HCPCS code. The physician or biller must also classify the patient's diagnosis
using International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes. She also needs to collect and
report the patient's personal details and insurance coverage.
   Once the information is prepared, the biller submits a claim to the patient's insurer.
The information required and method of submission are standardized for the initial claim.5
Using a specific format established by the federal government, the physician provides the
insurer with identifying information for the patient and his insurance plan, the treatment
provided (using HCPCS codes), the diagnosis (ICD) codes that justify that treatment, and
the amount she would like to be paid (the "billed charge").6
   The insurer receives the claim from the biller, analyzes, and processes it. At the initial
stage, this processing and decision may be handled by a third-party contractor acting on be-
half of the insurer, primarily using an automated system containing payment and audit rules.
   5
      The standard CMS Form 1500 has been supplanted by its electronic version EDI 837 (established by
HIPAA), and insurers respond with Electronic Remittance Advice EDI 835 described in detail below.
    6
      These billed amounts are infamously outrageous and, with one minor exception described on page 11,
we do not use them in our analysis. (Though they may sometimes provide a baseline for the negotiated rates
we use. In the hospital payment context, Reinhardt (2006) describes these list charges and Cooper et al.
(2018) find that they still form an important part of many hospitals' payment contracts.)


                                                    8
This system determines whether the patient has eligible insurance, whether the insurance
covers the service provided, and whether the medical care was appropriate.7
    When this evaluation is complete, the insurer makes a payment decision regarding the
claim. When the insurer decides to pay, its system must determine the relevant contrac-
tual payment for each line item. This amount should follow from an existing regulation or
contract: for public insurance, the (state or federal) government establishes the rates by
legislation and regulation. For commercial insurance, the insurer and physician will have
agreed on a set of payment rules in advance.8
    The insurer transmits its decision to the physician using a standardized electronic format,
called Electronic Data Interchange 835, "Electronic Remittance Advice," which we refer to
as simply a "remittance." These remittances tell the physician whether the insurer has
approved the claim, how much money to expect from the insurer (the "paid amount"), and
how much they are authorized to collect from the patient--the patient owes any deductible,
copayment, or coinsurance directly to the physician. Depending on the physician's exact
billing arrangement, the remittances may be sent straight to the physician's office or to a
clearinghouse--an intermediary whom the physician has engaged to process her claims.
    If the process goes smoothly, the only remaining step is to collect payment. The insurer
should transmit its part of the payment directly to the practice. Based on the information
in the remittance, the physician can bill the patient for any amount they owe.
    But the process is not always this smooth. Instead of approving the claim, the insurer
may deny it, fully or in part, refusing payments for specific line items. The insurer may
question the validity of the patient's insurance coverage, the medical justification for a specific
procedure, or whether the insurance contract covers the care provided. It may question
whether the physician has submitted the correct codes, or authorize less payment than the
doctor was expecting under the payment contract. In fact, the organization that manages
   7
      The insurer can also use this opportunity to look for any fraudulent claims, although there are questions
about how thoughtfully they do this (Allen, 2019) and whether they even have incentives to do so (Cicala,
Lieber and Marone, 2019).
    8
      See Clemens and Gottlieb (2017) for more details.


                                                      9
the Electronic Data Interchange standards maintains a list of around 350 codes for different
reasons claims may be adjusted or denied.9
      When a claim (or parts of it) is denied, the process can continue in a few different ways.
The physician can give up on the claim and write off the lost revenue. If she has not signed
a payment contract with the insurer (i.e., she is "out-of-network") she may be able to bill
the patient directly for any missing revenue. But in the more common situation where the
physician has a contract with the insurer ("in-network"), that contract likely forbids her
from asking the patient to pay for amounts the insurer has not authorized. So in most cases
the physician's only option is to deal with the insurer directly.
      Her next steps depend on why the claim was denied. If the insurer questions the medical
necessity of the treatment, the physician may have to provide additional documentation
about the patient's condition, either through an online submission form or by fax. If there is
an administrative error, such as a typo in the patient's name or insurance details, the practice
may need to submit a corrected claim. If the physician thinks that the claim adjudication
does not comply with her contract, she may have to submit a formal appeal to the insurer,
requiring manual intervention and a decision by someone higher in the insurer's hierarchy.
Each time the insurer processes the claim, it generates a remittance to convey the decision
to the physician or her agent.
      All of the processing and adjudication in this system absorb considerable resources. It
also generates massive amounts of rich data, which allow us to investigate the interactions
between physicians and insurers, and the implications of this process for physicians' decisions.


2.2     Remittance Data

Our primary data source is IQVIA Real World Data--Remittance Claims. IQVIA obtains
these data from clearinghouses that receive the remittances on physicians' behalf. Since
the physician practice chooses which clearinghouse to work with, our sample is effectively


   9
       http://www.x12.org/codes/claim%2Dadjustment%2Dreason%2Dcodes/


                                                10
drawn at the physician level.10 For the 108,531 unique physician covered in the sample, we
observe their interactions with the full range of payers, including Medicaid, Medicare, and
commercial insurance.
    We see the remittances generated each time the insurer responds to a physician's submis-
sion or resubmission--including those remittances indicating claim denial, nonpayment, or
other complexity. This is a key difference from claims datasets used in much other research,
which generally have exhaustive data from an insurer or set of insurers, but don't see the full
breadth of any physician's business and often can't link the same physician across insurers.
    For each remittance, the data tell us the providing physician (including the National
Provider Identification number), the practice submitting the bill, its zip code, and the payer
providing the remittance. We see the detailed procedure (HCPCS) codes indicating what
care was provided, ICD diagnosis codes, and key dates: when the service was provided,
when the claim was submitted, and when the payer made its decision. We then see how the
payer handled the claim, including the summary of its decision for each procedure (paid,
denied, etc.), justification for any adjustments to individual service lines, and how much it
is paying. At the patient level, a de-identified code allows us to link the same patient across
remittances, and we observe the patient's age.


Inferring the Payer-Physician Contract. An inherent challenge in data of this form is
that we naturally do not observe the allowed amounts for line items that are denied payment
within a claim. For the line items for which these amounts are not observed, we use a three-
step algorithm to impute the contractual amounts that would have been collected by the
provider, had the claim been approved and processed smoothly, according to the payer's
contract with the physician.
    Step 1: Whenever possible we impute the contractual amount as the average allowed
  10
     Since the data provider includes remittance data from whichever clearinghouses it contracts with, rather
than a systematic random sample, one may naturally worry about the samples representativeness. Upon
introducing our data, (Gottlieb et al., 2018, online appendix) showed that physicians appear very represen-
tative of the covered specialties nationwide. This gives us a higher level of confidence on the nationwide
representativeness of our results.


                                                     11
amount for claims processed smoothly by same insurer, when paying the same physician
for the exact same procedure (HCPCS code). Step 2: When there are no claims available
matching the criteria required for step 1, we impute the claim value based on the average
markup between the payer's allowed amounts to the provider and standard fee-for-service
Medicare rates across all other HCPCS codes. We compute this markup and then impute
the contractual amount to be the fee-for-service Medicare rate for the specific line item,
multiplied by this payer-provider-specific markup. Step 3: In the few instances in which
we lack the data required for either step 1 or 2, we compute the average discount from the
billed charges to the allowed amounts specific to the payer-provider pair. Then, we impute
the contractual amount by applying this payer-physician-specific discount to the observed
billed charges for the specific line item.


Note on Terminology. In what follows, line item value refers to the contractual amount
for a specific procedure for which the physician bills. This is the the allowed amount for all
claims that are processed smoothly, and is otherwise the result of our imputation. The line
item value is the amount that the provider would receive if there were no denials. We use
the term claim value when referring to the total of line item values for a claim. The initial
claim value is the claim value for the first claim submitted for a visit. This is the revenue
that the provider would collect absent denials.


Summary Statistics. Table 1 offers a first look at our remittance data. Across the 88.8
million visits11 we observe over the 2013-2015 period, the average initial claim value is $154.
For the bottom ten percent of visits this amount is lower than $24, while for the top ten
percent it exceeds $238. Visits differ along several dimensions, including the number of line
items included. On average, a visit contains 1.9 line items; ten percent of visits contain over
four.

  11
    We drop Medigap and other secondary payers, claims with values of < $0 or > $1, 000, 000, the bottom
and top one percent of line item values for CPT codes-payer-year combinations, and line items valued at
< $0.01.


                                                  12
   A key variable for our analysis is the denial of a payment for at least one line item in
a claim for a given visit. Table 1 shows that, on average, across all payers and all years in
our sample, 7.5% of visits contain at least one line item for which payment is denied. Since
providers can resubmit claims for the same visit after denials, the average number of claims
submitted for each visit is 1.047. Patients are covered by different payers: 7.6% of visits in
our sample are billed to Medicaid, 46.4% to Medicare, and 46% to commercial insurers.
   The three types of payers differ across three dimensions: the amounts that would be
paid if there were no denials, the frequency of denials, and providers' ability to collect
payments after denials. Table 2 summarizes these differences. The initial Medicaid claim
value averages $98.57, but one quarter of visits have at least one line item denied upon initial
submission. After the sequence of resubmissions and denials that follows, providers receive
$84 on average. Medicare and commercial insurers have, on average, higher initial claim
values ($136 and $179, respectively), and lower denial rates (7.3% and 4.8%). Accounting
for resubmissions, the total revenue collected for Medicare patients averages $131 per visit,
and $175 for patients covered by commercial plans.
   Figure 2 summarizes the visit-level revenue graphically. The overall length of each bar
represents the average claim value for each insurance type. We separate that length into the
amount paid on initially submission and the amount initially denied. Some of that denied
share is ultimately paid; this part is labeled "recovered" in the chart. This recovered plus
the initially paid amount represent the physician's total gross revenue. But this overstates
the net revenue: the office had to expend resources to collect that recovered amount. This
piece is not directly observable in the data, but is the result of our estimation in section 3
below. We illustrate these collection costs as coming out of the recovered amount. These
costs, plus the amount never recovered, combine to make up the total CIP shown on each
bar. The figure illustrates the stark difference in Medicaid revenue compared with Medicare
and commercial insurance--not only is the visit value lower, but a much larger share is
dissipated in the costs of incomplete payments.


                                              13
   When a line item is denied payment, we observe a code capturing the denial reason.
Since there are hundreds of reason codes, our analysis aggregates them into five mutually
exclusive categories: administrative, contractual, coverage, duplicate, and information. Ad-
ministrative problems include exceeding the time limit for filing a claim; the negotiated rate
is not on file or has expired; or prior claim adjudication. The contractual category indicates
denials specified in the insurer contract, such as "procedure has a relative value of zero in
the jurisdiction fee schedule, therefore no payment is due," or "this procedure is not paid
separately." Coverage problems indicate claim denial because the patient isn't insured ("Ex-
penses incurred prior to coverage" or "Expenses incurred after coverage terminated"), the
plan doesn't cover the service in question, or the provider is ineligible. Duplicate claims
are straightforward: "Exact duplicate claim/service." We use the "information" category to
describe denials when the insurer reports insufficient information to pay--such as a lack of
medical justification, preauthorization, or referral. Appendix Figure A.1 uses word clouds
to summarize the explanations for all the denial reasons within each category.
   In Table 3 we delve into the line item level rather than the visit. This allows us to
illustrate in richer detail the differences in billing processes across payers, and how denial
reasons relate to payment outcomes. We see remarkable differences across payers in reasons
for denials. Administrative reasons comprise one quarter of denials in Medicaid, 16% in
Medicare, and 14% in commercial insurance. Contractual reasons drive 30% of denials in
Medicaid, 41% in Medicare, and 55% in commercial insurance.
   Differences in reasons are associated with different resubmission decisions and ability
to recover revenues. When a line item is denied for administrative reasons, we observe a
second claim for the same visit 39% of the time in Medicaid, 62% in Medicare, and 40% in
commercial insurance. After these billing processes end, providers ultimately recover 60% of
revenues in Medicaid, 95% in Medicare, and 79% in commercial insurance.
   Other reasons for denials lead to different outcomes. For example, coverage issues imply
a 37% recovery rate in Medicaid, 69% in Medicare, and 88% in commercial insurance. When


                                             14
the insurer requires additional information before authorizing a payment for a line item, only
29% of Medicaid revenue is recovered, compared to more than 60% for both Medicare and
commercial insurance.
      Prices and billing processes vary not only across payers, but also across states. We will
leverage these differences to study how providers respond to the financial incentives provided
by both payment rates and the administrative burden of collecting payments. Figure 1
summarizes the variation across payers and states in initial claim values and share of these
amounts that are ultimately collected (after accounting for denials and resubmissions). For
Medicaid, the data show much lower values, and more variation across states, in both claim
values and collection rates. This suggests that Medicaid is a relevant setting in which to
consider whether providers respond not only to prices, but also to the difficulty and costs of
collecting payments after care is provided.


2.3     Additional Data Sources

We complement our data with two additional sources, which are summarized in Table 4. The
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services provides a dataset that it regularly updates with
information on physicians' specialty, location, and practices. We use this file, called Medi-
care Data on Provider Practice and Specialty (MD-PPAS), to identify where physicians are
located and when they move. We also use the tax identifiers it provides to identify those who
work in the same practice. Since MD-PPAS has the same physician identification number as
the remittance data, merging the two to obtain physician characteristics is straightforward.
      Finally, we augment the administrative physician characteristics from MD-PPAS with
SK&A survey data also purchased from IQVIA. These data, primarily collected by the
firm for marketing purposes, come from administrative records and a major manual phone
survey of most practicing U.S. physicians. Among the key questions for our purposes, SK&A
asks whether each physician accepts Medicare patients and Medicaid patients. SK&A also
provides the National Provider Identification number that allows us to merge all of these



                                               15
sources.
      The resulting dataset contains 3.7 million provider-year observations over the 2009-2015
period. Physicians report accepting Medicaid patients 72.1% of the time, and accepting
Medicare patients 84.1% of the time. In the same period, 1.5% of doctors move across
different states and 27.3% of them work in a group that has locations in more than one
state.


3      Estimating Costs of Incomplete Payments

3.1      A Model of the Provider Problem

The remittance data introduced above allow us to document and understand the incomplete
payments that pervade medical billing. They imply that a physician's gain from providing
care is smaller than in a complete-payments world. We can think of the physician's net
revenue as the claim value minus two elements: the lost revenues and the billing costs
necessary to recover payments after a claim is denied. This net revenue enters the physician's
profit and any decision-making problem.
      We directly measure lost revenues. To estimate billing costs, we rely on a simple intu-
ition: if billing were costless, providers would always resubmit a denied claim hoping for a
better outcome. This resubmission would have the potential to recover the missing revenue
from the visit, or at least a part, at no cost. At the other extreme, if the cost of resubmitting
a claim were higher than the maximum amount a provider could possibly recover, we would
observe no resubmissions.
      Expanding on this intuition, we use the following model in which risk neutral providers
make optimal resubmission decisions when facing initial denials or incomplete payments from
the insurer. This model allows us to estimate billing costs by rationalizing the observed
variation in resubmissions and denials in the remittance data.
      Periods are discrete, and indexed by t = 0, 1, ..., and L is the set of line items contained
in the initial claim for which the provider bills an insurer for the care provided. If payment

                                                 16
were complete, the visit revenues would be equal to the initial claim value equal to  (L).
Whenever we consider a (sub)set A of line items,  (A) is the total contractual amount for
the items in A.
   Now consider the problem the provider (or billing office) faces when the payer denies
payment for one or more line items on the initial claim. That is, instead of reimbursing all
items in L, the payer denies payments for a set of items D1  L. The reason for denial is
summarized by a reason code category : administrative, contractual, coverage, duplicate, or
information. As Figure 3 illustrates, the provider can stop the billing process at no additional
cost, and forego any further payment for the visit. In this case, adopting the notation that
L - D1 means the subset of L excluding the items in D1 , the visit revenue (or payoff) is
 (L - D1 ).
   Alternatively, the provider can pay an administrative cost to resubmit all or some of the
denied line items. In our notation, the provider can choose any set R1  D1 , and submit a
second claim requesting the payer to reimburse these line items that have been previously
denied. Let the cost of this resubmission be C (R1 , )  0, equal to zero whenever R1 = 
(no resubmission). Our goal is to estimate these costs, as they are the unobserved part of
the broader costs of incomplete payment (CIP).
   After resubmitting the line items in R1 , the provider may receive the corresponding
payments. This would lead to a visit payoff of  (L - D1 ) +  (R1 ) - C (R1 , ), where  < 1
is the intertemporal discount factor. Alternatively, as Figure 3 shows, payments for a subset
of items D2  R1 may be denied again. In this case, the provider must again choose whether
to stop (R2 = , with payoff  (L - D1 ) +  (R1 - D2 ) - C (R1 , )), or resubmit again a
nonempty set of line items R2  D2 at a cost C (R2 , ). The process continues recursively.
   In this model, the provider faces an optimal stopping, dynamic discrete choice problem
under uncertainty. While the costs of resubmitting any subset of a line items Rt in any given
period t are known to be C (Rt , ), the returns from the resubmission are uncertain. These
returns depend on the provider's expectations about the insurer's future denials and her own


                                              17
future resubmissions. Crucially, the provider always has the option to stop and forego any
further revenues for the visit.
   Assuming providers have rational expectations about future payment probabilities and
their own resubmission behavior, we can characterize the solution of the provider problem.
We use   (Dt , ) to denote the optimal (stationary) strategy, i.e. the set of resubmitted items
in period t when the items in Dt are denied for reason . This solves:


                (Dt , ) = arg max V (Rt , ),                                                       (1)
                            R t D t

               V (Rt , ) = -C (Rt , ) +  E  (Rt - Dt+1 ) + V  (Dt+1 , ) Rt ,  ,                    (2)
                           Resubmission            Expected future payoff after resubmission
                               cost

              V  (Dt , ) = V (  (Dt , ), ).                                                        (3)


The expectation in (2) is taken with respect to Dt+1 . The distribution of (Dt+1 |Rt , ) is a
key ingredient to solve (1)­(3), and it can be estimated using our remittance data.
   We can now formally define the costs of incomplete payment, CIP, as the expected
reduction in net revenues for a visit relative to the complete-payment counterfactual. Absent
denials, the provider would collect  (L). Incorporating denials and resubmission costs, CIP
comprises two parts: lost revenues and resubmission costs. The following definition captures
both parts:


              CIP   (L) - E                      Pr[D1 , ]  (L - D1 ) + V  (D1 , )             ,   (4)
                                          D1 L



where Pr[D1 , ] is the probability that the line items in D1 are denied for reason . If there
are no denials, CIP = 0, and the expected profitability of a patient after the first claim is
submitted is  (L). When denials are more common, CIP increases, which means expected
profitability of a visit declines. This increase can occur through lost revenues, if the provider
chooses not to resubmit denied claims, or resubmission costs if she chooses to resubmit.



                                                    18
      We think of CIP as imposing an implicit tax  CIP on providers' revenues, defined as

                                                            CIP
                                                CIP              .                                     (5)
                                                             (L)

The provider expects net revenue of 1 -  CIP  (L) rather than  (L) for a visit. Our goals
are to estimate CIP, and to study how physicians respond to both parts of expected revenue:
 (L) and  CIP .


3.2     Econometric Specification

To estimate our model, we augment our notation to account for observable differences across
visits, and make a number of functional form and distributional assumptions.
      Let j index visits and t the period in the dynamic billing process (i.e. the claim number
for the same visit). Visit j includes a set of line items Lj in the initial claim, each indexed
by      Lj . Visit characteristics include the payer kj (Medicaid, Medicare, or commercial),
the denial reason category j (null if there are no denials), and the state sj . Each line item
has an initial value  . For any set of line items A, we define  (A) =                   A    . For every
                         1    1    2    2    3
visit j we observe Lj , Dj , Rj , Dj , Rj , Dj , ..., and so on until the process ends. The denial
and resubmission sets can be empty.
                                                                                           t
      To estimate resubmission costs, we impose that, after the provider observes denials Dj ,
                                  t
she makes her resubmssion choice Rj according to equations (1)­(3):


         t
        Rj =   (Dj
                 t
                   , kj , j , sj ) = arg max V (Rt , kj , j , sj ),                                    (6)
                                           t
                                       Rt Dj


               V (Rt , kj , j , sj ) = -Cj (Rt , j )

                                    +  E  (Rt - Dt+1 ) + V  (Dt+1 , kj , j , sj ) Rt , kj , j , sj ,


where the expectation is taken with respect to Dt+1 , conditional on Rt , kj , j , sj . That is,
her resubmission strategy maximizes profit (revenue net of resubmission costs), accounting



                                                       19
for her expectations of how the insurer will respond to any given resubmission.
   The conditional choice probability method introduced in Hotz and Miller (1993), and re-
viewed in Arcidiacono and Ellickson (2011), allows us to derive an estimate of V  analytically--
with no need to solve (6) numerically. This approach is possible because the provider problem
features a stopping option, or terminal choice: it is always possible to choose Rt = , and
doing so ends the billing process for the visit with no further uncertainty in payoffs.
   To follow Hotz and Miller (1993), we make the following assumption about resubmission
costs:

Assumption T1EV. The resubmission costs Cj (R, ) of a set of line items R for visit j
are stochastic, with mean µ(R, kj , , sj ), and such that Cj (R, ) = µ(R, kj , , sj ) + , where
 is iid across j , t, , and R, following a Type 1 Extreme Value distribution. If R = ,
µ(R, k, , s) = 0 for all k, , s.

Assumption T1EV has two important implications. First, a consistent estimate of V  is


                      V  (Dt+1 , k, , s) = - ln Pr[Rt+1 = |Dt+1 , Rt , k, , s] + ,                             (7)


where   0.5772 is Euler's constant. This expression relies on Pr[Rt+1 = |Dt+1 , Rt , k, , s],
the probability the physician will not submit any further claim--ending the billing process
for the visit--if the line items Dt+1  Rt are denied after resubmitting Rt . We can estimate
this probability directly from the remittance data.
                                                                          t
   The second implication of Assumption T1EV is that the likelihood that Rj solves (6) is

                                                       t                           t
          t            t
                                               exp -µ(Rj , kj , j , sj ) +  × ECV(Rj , kj , j , sj )
   Pr    Rj   =      (Dj , kj , j , sj )   =                                                               ,   (8)
                                                     exp [-µ(R, kj , j , sj ) +  × ECV(R, kj , j , sj )]
                                                 t
                                               RDj




                                                           20
where ECV(R, k, , s) is the expected continuation value from resubmitting R, defined by


          ECV(R, k, , s)               Pr[Dt+1 |R, k, , s]  (R - Dt+1 ) + V  (Dt+1 , k, , s) .           (9)
                              Dt+1 R



Equations (7)­(9) show that, after fixing  (which we set to 0.99),12 the remittance data
reveal empirical counterparts for almost all of the elements characterizing the likelihood of
a resubmission. The only missing piece is the function µ, our estimand.


3.3     Maximum Likelihood Estimation

We impose two additional assumptions to avoid computational problems due to the curse of
dimensionality. These assumptions allow us to obtain robust estimates of Pr[Dt+1 |R, k, , s]
and Pr[Rt+1 = |Dt+1 , Rt , k, , s] in our sample, and therefore derive the likelihood for the
observed resubmissions via (7)­(9) under Assumption T1EV.
      Let d(, k, , s) be a function describing the empirical probability that a previously-denied
line item , worth  =  (discretized in $25-wide bins) is denied by payer k , for reason ,
in state s, after being resubmitted.13 We then make the following two assumptions.

Assumption IND. Denials of line items within a claim are conditionally independent, so


             Pr[Dt+1 |Rt , k, , s] =                 d( , k, , s) ×              (1 - d( , k, , s)) .
                                         Dt+1                         Rt -Dt+1


Assumption IND simplifies the way in which providers can form beliefs about future denial

  12
       Although the calendar time between one denial and the next is variable, we disregard these differences
and simply treat each submission as one time period. Typical periods observed in the sequences of remittances
following a visit are shorter than three months; we set  = 0.99 following Ahmed, Haider and Iqbal (2012).
Gottlieb et al. (2018) show that the actual response time varies across insurers, so a richer analysis could
incorporate differences in discounting due to the variation in delays.
    13
       We estimate this with our data as
                                       t+1     t
                    d(, k, , s)  Pr[  Dj   |  Rj ,  = , kj = k, j = , sj = s]
                                     j   1         t
                                                  Rj   t+1
                                                      Dj   ;  =  ; kj = k ; j = ; sj = s
                                =                                                            .
                                             j   1      t ;  =  ; k = k ;  = ; s = s
                                                       Rj          j      j     j




                                                           21
probabilities for subsets of line items. For this they treat each line item as independent from
the rest of the claim.
      Another simplification makes the number of line items and their total amount, jointly,
a sufficient statistic for the expected stopping probability in future periods. That is, the
provider's beliefs about future resubmission decisions depend only on these two parameters.
Formally this is

Assumption SUF. If Dt+1 and Dt+1 are such that |Dt+1 | = Dt+1 and  (Dt+1 ) =  (Dt+1 ),
then Pr[Rt+1 = |Dt+1 , k, , s] = Pr[Rt+1 = |Dt+1 , k, , s].

If two sets of line items that could be denied in the future have the same size and total value,
the beliefs about future resubmissions are the same.
      The last step to derive the likelihood for µ(R, kj , , sj ) is to parametrize it as


                        µ(R, k, , s) = 1 [R = ] × µ1       2
                                                   k,,s + µk, (|R| - 1) .                   (10)


That is, the mean resubmission cost includes a payer-reason-state-specific effect and a linear
term--with payer-reason-specific slope--in the number of resubmitted line items.
      We estimate µ1         2
                   k,,s and µk, solving




                                 max                 t
                                                 Pr Rj =   (Dj
                                                             t
                                                               , kj , j , sj )
                               µ1      2
                                k,,s ,µk,   jt



after replacing (10) in (8), and computing the ECV terms via (7) and (9). The resulting
likelihood is analogous to that of a standard multinomial logit model, where each provider
must choose which (sub)set of declined line items to resubmit, or to stop billing for the visit.

3.4     Identification of Resubmission Costs

To identify the parameters µ(R, k, , s) governing resubmission costs, we exploit the joint
variation in resubmission decisions, denied amounts, and expected repayment probabilities
across visits, conditional on payer, state, and reason code category.

                                                        22
   Ignoring the resubmissions in later periods, the payoff from resubmitting a claim is in-
creasing in the product of the claim value and the expected recovery rate (i.e. the fraction
of the resubmitted claim value that the insurer will pay). Figure 4 illustrates this intuition.
The top left panel shows the relationship between simulated resubmission decisions, claim
value, and expected recovery rate conditional on state, diagnosis, and Charlson comorbidity
index, when the resubmission cost is $10 per claim; the top right panel when it increases
to $30. In each panel, the downward-sloping lines are level curves of constant resubmission
probability; darker colors indicate areas of lower resubmission probability. The level curves
are steeper and the darker areas more prevalent in Panel (b) because a claim of a given value
requires a larger increase in collection probability to overcome the higher resubmission cost.
The difference between Panels (a) and (b) highlights the mapping from the (unobserved)
resubmission cost to the observed joint distribution of resubmissions, claim values, and re-
covery rates. The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows this joint distribution as observed in the
actual remittance data.
   Our approach to identify the parameters in µ(R, k, , s) refines this intuition. In particu-
lar, we calculate the continuation values assuming that providers solve the dynamic discrete
choice problem in (6). Figure 5 shows the empirical relationship between the probability that
a set of denied line items is resubmitted, and the expected continuation value as defined in
(9), estimated with the remittance data. This continuation value accounts not only for the
next period's denials, but also for future resubmissions and potentially further denials. The
extent to which providers make decisions consistent with revenue-maximizing behavior is
striking. The sharp monotonic relationship between continuation values and probability of
resubmission provides information about resubmission costs.
   Note that physicians' decisions are not binary: they choose not only whether or not to
resubmit a claim, but also which line items to include in the resubmission. The observable
variables in the remittance data and our assumptions identify expected continuation values
from resubmissions of any subset of (denied) lined items. We are then able to identify


                                              23
resbumission costs varying by payer, state, reason for denial, and size of the claim, by
analyzing how providers' discrete choices between viable resubmission options vary with the
corresponding continuation values.
      We illustrate this variation in Table 5, emphasizing differences across payers. In the top
panel, we compare the maximum continuation value from resubmission of a claim between in-
stances in which we observe a resubmission and instances in which we do not. The maximum
is taken over all possible resubmission decisions available to the provider. When providers
forego future visit revenues by deciding not to resubmit a claim, we estimate that the maxi-
mum continuation value from resubmitting would be, on average, $10.10 in Medicaid, $12.94
in Medicare, and $12.21 in commercial insurance. Intuitively, providers' administrative costs
for resubmitting claims must be higher than these amounts. When instead providers decide
to resubmit, we estimate that the maximum continuation value from resubmitting would be
$21.43 in Medicaid, $20.88 in Medicare, and $34.90 in commercial insurance. Administrative
costs for resubmitting a claim must be, on average, lower than these amounts.
      Finally, the difference in resubmission costs for alternative sets of resubmitted line items
is identified by comparing the estimated continuation value of the chosen options to the
alternatives. The bottom panel of Table 5 focuses on instances in which we do observe a
resubmission. It shows that the continuation values for the set of line items the physician
resubmits are significantly higher than for the non-chosen alternatives.


3.5     Estimates of Resubmission Costs

Figure 6 provides a first look at our maximum-likelihood estimates of resubmission costs.
For each payer we plot histograms of these costs, where the variation in each panel is across
states and reason code categories. Since resubmission costs vary with the number of line-
items in the claim, we show two different distributions for each insurer: one for claims with
a single line item, and one for claims with three line items.
      When haggling with Medicaid, providers face an average administrative cost of $14 to



                                                 24
resubmit a claim with one line item, which increases to $33 for claims with three line items.
Medicare's distribution is lower, with average resubmission costs of $10 and $26 for one-
line and three-line claims, respectively. Commercial insurance costs slightly more, at $17
on average to resubmit a one-line claim and $37 to resubmit a three-line claim. All of
these costs are quite sizable relative to average claim value--especially in Medicaid, where
the claim value is lowest. Crucially, the frequency with which claims are denied and enter
this haggling process is quite different across insurers. As the summary statistics showed,
the doctors incur these higher commercial resubmission costs only one-fifth as often as for
Medicaid.
      In Table 6 we report point estimates of the average (across states) cost of resubmitting
one claim for different payers and reason categories. For the 66 percent of denials in the
administrative, coverage, and information categories (Table 3), the cost of resubmitting a
single-item claim to Medicaid is in the range of $13 to $15. When the claim is flagged
as a duplicate, resubmission costs are higher, at $21. When the reason is is contractual,
resubmitting a claim appears to require less administrative hassle, costing an estimated $9.
      There are meaningful differences in resubmission costs across payers and categories.
Within each category, we estimate the lowest resubmission costs for Medicare. Adminis-
trative issues and duplicate claims denied by commercial payers have average resubmission
costs of $21 per claim, twice as large as for Medicare.


3.6     Estimates of the Costs of Incomplete Payments

With these estimates of resubmission costs, we now have estimates for all of the elements
needed to compute the costs of incomplete payment (CIP), as defined in (4). We put these
together to measure expected CIP and the implicit tax  CIP for each visit. These estimates do
not follow directly from the resubmission costs summarized in Table 6, since the CIP depend
also on the frequency of denials, composition of denials, likelihood of resubmission (which
determines how often the resubmission costs occur), and recovery from those resubmissions.



                                               25
   Table 7 Panel (a) reports our estimated costs of incomplete payments. The first row
shows that physicians can expect to lose 17.4 percent of Medicaid claim value to the incom-
plete payments tax, compared with 4.9 percent for Medicare and 2.8 percent for commercial
insurance. These estimates include the amounts lost due to denials, and the resubmission
costs necessary to recover revenues after denials. The second row shows the dollar values
behind these implicit tax estimates. When treating a Medicaid patient, providers expect
average CIP of $12.09. The average for Medicare is $4.07 per visit. Billing commercial
insurers entails the lowest administrative burden, with an average CIP of $2.69. Since Med-
icaid's contractual amounts are lower than other insurers', these differences get amplified
when computing the implicit tax in row 1.
   We can think of the CIP as comprising two parts: the revenues providers fail to collect,
plus the costs of resubmission efforts. Figure 2 illustrates this decomposition. The former
part--revenues never collected--is a raw (model-free) measure of the administrative burden
imposed by payment denials. That is, we can ignore the resubmission costs, and simply
calculate the lost revenues for a given visit, expressed as a share of the initial claim value
(this is similar to the summary statistic presented in Gottlieb et al., 2018).
   Panel (b) of Table 7 shows this estimate. Out of our estimated $12.09 lost by providers
due to payment uncertainty in Medicaid, $9.36 (77 percent) is due to lost revenues, while the
remaining $2.73 is resubmission costs the physician incurs. For Medicare and Commercial
payers, revenue losses account for around two-thirds of CIP.
   We find a meaningful variation in CIP and  CIP across states, particularly in Medicaid.
Figure 7 shows this. Expected CIP ranges from less than $5 to more than $30, while the
implicit CIP tax  CIP is higher than 0.25 in California, Texas, Georgia, Illinois, and Penn-
sylvania, and lower than 0.1 in Colorado, Idaho, Washington, and Minnesota. In contrast,
except for Medicare in Alaska, no state's  CIP exceeds 0.1 for either commercial insurance
or Medicare.




                                              26
4        Do Billing Hurdles Keep Physicians Away from Medicaid?

We now ask whether these costs of incomplete payments affect physicians' behavior. The
logic for such a response is a simple application of upward-sloping supply curves. An exten-
sive literature has examined how physicians respond to reimbursement rates for the care they
receive, along a variety of margins. This work has used differences in the official reimburse-
ment rates that insurers purport to offer physicians for their care--whether obtained from
administrative documentation (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014; Gottlieb et al., 2021), primary
data collection (Alexander and Schnell, 2019), or secondary surveys (Gruber et al., 1999).
These sources can all be thought of as measures of  in our framework,14 and the litera-
ture has shown that  affects intensity of care, investment decisions, and extensive margin
participation decisions.
     But we have seen that  overstates the net revenue physicians should actually expect to
receive--in particular when caring for Medicaid patients. A visit that is purportedly worth 
actually yields the physician only 1 -  CIP  in expectation, after accounting for collection
costs and foregone revenue. So the standard economic logic that explains upward-sloping
supply curves would predict that physicians should respond to 1 -  CIP  rather than  .
In fact, canonical models would predict the same supply elasticity with respect to 1 -  CIP
as with respect to  . The importance of this implicit tax varies across settings, since  CIP
differs across insurers.
     While physicians may respond to this net reimbursement along a variety of margins, we
focus on one of the simplest and most extreme: the choice of whether to treat Medicaid
patients. We focus on Medicaid because it has the highest costs of incomplete payment,
and physicians' low participation rates in Medicaid are notorious. The extensive margin is
a natural focus because of the uncertainty inherent in the costs of incomplete payment. By
its very nature, CIP is the mean over a risky distribution: physicians know that Medicaid
will deny many payments, and billing will be costly, but may not know exactly which claims
    14
         Henceforth we keep notation lighter, using  for  (L) whenever there is no risk of confusion.


                                                        27
will be denied. Even if they did know, it may be difficult to supply care selectively to
Medicaid patients at low risk for claim denial, while refusing those with higher risk. A
blanket decision--to accept Medicaid patients or not--may be the easiest margin to adjust.
      We next describe how we summarize fees and CIP to analyze their impacts on physician
behavior (section 4.1). Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 then describe two empirical strategies to
estimate the consequences of fees and CIP for physicians' participation decisions. Section
4.3 presents the results.


4.1     Indices of Fees and CIP Across States

The fee measure is conceptually simple: we would like to know how much more one state's
Medicaid program would pay for identical care compared with another state's. Because care
is so heterogeneous, we cannot simply compare average prices for all treatments. Other
research on Medicaid fees, such as Alexander and Schnell (2019), has had to hand-collect
data from each state. This has limited most studies to considering a few specific services,
such as primary care. In order to account for the broader set of care included in our sample,
we estimate the following regression to compute price indices that account for the plethora
of treatments included:


      ln(j ) = s,k · 1s × 1k + h · 1h + i · 1i + 1 patient age + 2 comorbidities + ui .    (11)


Each observation in this regression is one service line and j is the allowed amount for
service     in visit j . The key coefficients the regression estimates are the insurer-by-state
fixed effects ^s,k . These fixed effects represent the contribution of the state and insurer to

explaining the variation in payment level, and they serve as our state-insurer fee index. Since
the dependent variable is in logs, we can interpret a 0.01 change in ^s,k as approximately a

1 percent change in the insurer/state's fee.
      In computing this index, the regression adjusts the raw value, j , for the characteristics
of that service and its claim. Most significantly, we control for fixed effects for the specific

                                                28
procedure code 1h and for the physician 1i . These controls ensure that our indices reflect
differences between comparable medical care and don't reflect differences in physician com-
position, though our results are robust to excluding physician effects. In order to identify
the state-by-insurer indices while controlling for physician, our data must have physicians
who practice across multiple insurers, as well as some physicians who practice in multiple
states. We treat commercial insurance as a single category and omit its indicator, so our in-
dex ^s,k is estimated relative to the national commercial average. We also control for patient

characteristics, such as age and other diseases they have, in case these influence the cost of
the service.
   We estimate a similar index for CIP. Since visits are quite heterogeneous (as the wide
variation in CIP seen in Figure 6 demonstrates), and we want to isolate the insurer's contri-
bution, we again adjust the visit-level estimates for potential confounds. We follow the same
logic as in equation (11), but replace the dependent variable with jCIP , the implicit tax from
incomplete payments for visit j . We compute this following equation (4) using expected lost
revenues and expected resubmission costs, conditional on that visit's characteristics. We
then estimate:


               jCIP = s,k · 1s × 1k + i · 1i + 1 patient age + 2 comorbidities + ui .      (12)


This regression also controls for the individual physician 1i and other visit characteristics
that could affect payment difficulty. We weight it by the claim value so it reflects the average
value of a physician's output, rather than the average visit. The estimated ^s,k coefficients

serve as our index of the incomplete payments net-of-tax rate for each state-by-insurer.
Unlike with fees, jCIP ranges from zero to one so we do not apply a log transformation.
The resulting index ^s,k can be interpreted as capturing differences in implicit tax rates,

with a 0.01 higher value representing a 1 percentage point higher implicit tax rate for the
insurer-state pair.



                                                29
   Figure 8 shows the estimated Medicare and Medicaid indices across U.S. states, and
Table 8 summarizes these distributions. Panel 8(a) shows the Medicaid fee index. Medicaid
generally pays higher fees in the upper Midwest and northern Great Plains states, and lower
fees in the Rust Belt and south. Panel 8(b) shows the implicit CIP tax, ^s,Medicaid . Among

high-fee states, such as the Dakotas, North Dakota has one of the highest index values while
South Dakota is much lower. Among low-fee states, such as the lower Midwest, Illinois
and Pennsylvania have relatively high implicit taxes while Wisconsin and Ohio are lower.
These reflect each state's significant leeway in how to administer Medicaid. Helpfully for our
purposes, it means that we have meaningful independent variation in both variables.
   Panels 8(c) and (d) show the corresponding indices for Medicare. The Medicare fee
index is overwhelmingly higher than for Medicaid, and its distribution more closely matches
U.S. economic activity. Figure 9 shows a scatterplot relating the recovery rate index ^s,k

and fee index ^s,k across states and across insurers. We show Medicare observations with red

circles, and Medicaid observations with state abbreviations. The pattern across insurers is
striking: with a few exceptions such as North Dakota, which pays Medicaid physicians quite
well, Medicaid generally has lower fees and much higher CIP than Medicare. Medicaid is
also notable for the tremendous variance in both dimensions, while Medicare observations are
concentrated in the high-fee, low-CIP corner of the graph. This is consistent with Medicare
being a centralized program, reducing geographic differences in administration.
   The indices shown here reflect certain detailed choices about how to handle various data
problems. When we present our empirical results in section 4.3, we also show robustness to
other choices about data and index construction, such as which controls to include, whether
to omit imputed contractual amounts, and whether to weight observations.15




  15
     Appendix Table A.1 shows summary statistics for the weighted and unweighted indices, and for the
indices that include and exclude the imputed contractual amounts.


                                                 30
4.2     Empirical Strategies

We are interested in the relationship between each physician's reported willingness to treat
Medicaid patients and her state's Medicaid billing hassle and reimbursement rates. For
numerous reasons, the observational relationship between these variables need not be causal;
for example, physicians who want to treat Medicaid patients may differ from others, or they
may select into states with different Medicaid policies.
      We use two empirical strategies to address these concerns. Our first strategy uses a
physician movers design to address concerns about physician-level characteristics, such as
unobservable desire to treat Medicaid patients. In our second strategy, we use physicians in
groups that span state boundaries. By controlling for group fixed effects, we eliminate vari-
ation due to practice characteristics, such as investment in billing technology, other aspects
of billing skill, the group's experience with a particular part of the market, or altruism.

4.2.1    Movers

Following Molitor (2018), who uses physician movers, and other mover designs in labor and
health economics (Abowd et al., 1999; Finkelstein et al., 2016; Hull, 2018), we examine the im-
pact of a physician's move between states with different payment rates and billing difficulty.
Consider physician i who moves from state s to s . We define  ln Feei = ^s ,Medicaid -^s,Medicaid

as the difference between the fee indices estimated using equation (11) in the pre-move and
post-move states' Medicaid programs. Similarly, iCIP = ^s ,Medicaid - ^s,Medicaid is the dif-

ference in the log net-of-tax recovery rate that the physician can expect from Medicaid after
moving, computed based on the estimates from (12).
      Under the usual assumption that the timing of a physician's cross-state move is inde-
pendent of other shocks affecting her willingness to treat Medicaid patients, we use these
changes to estimate the supply curve with respect to both fees and CIP, while controling for
time-invariant physician unobservables. For each mover, we use data starting up to 4 years
prior to the move, through 4 years after the move, and estimate the following regression at


                                               31
the physician-year level:


               Medicaid acceptancei,t =  +   ln Feei × Post-Movet

                                          +  iCIP × Post-Movet

                                          + i · 1i +  Various controlsi,t + i,t         (13)


   The dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether the physician reports accepting
Medicaid patients. The critical controls here are individual physician fixed effects i . This
strategy identifies the supply parameters  and  exclusively based on physicians who move.
The key moment is the difference in those physicians' pre-move Medicaid acceptance and
their post-move Medicaid acceptance, and how that difference varies with differences in the
states' policies.
   To visualize the time trends in these results, we begin by estimating a dynamic event
study version of equation (13), namely:


               Medicaid acceptancei,t =  +            ln Feei × Year
                                               =0

                                          +           ln iCIP × Year
                                               =0

                                          + i · 1i +  Various controlsi,t + i,t         (14)


where  denotes the year relative to that in which the physician moved. In both equations
(13) and (14), we cluster standard errors by state.

4.2.2   Cross-State Groups

The movers strategy is appropriate if the key unobservables are physician-level, such as
an individual doctors's preference for serving low-income patients or individual costs of
dealing with bureaucratic hassle. But physicians increasingly operate in larger practices or
major medical systems, which may have centralized billing that controls these costs. To

                                              32
account for differences in groups' decision-making or billing efficiency, we introduce a second
identification strategy to estimate states' impacts of Medicaid acceptance.
   This strategy uses physician groups that span state boundaries. The idea is to identify
the impact of state policies based on differences in acceptance decisions among physicians
within the same practice, but facing different state policies. This eliminates any differences
due to the practice, such as its skill at dealing with billing complexity, its history with a
particular part of the market, or its altruism.
   This strategy estimates a slightly different economic object than the movers approach.
While movers yield a short-run physician-level estimate, this approach yields a long-run
supply elasticity for a physician group in a given state. This strategy allows for longer-term
decisions that a practice makes, such as specific location choice, hiring appropriate staff, and
marketing to the target population. So these estimates can be thought of as longer-run and
the movers estimates as short-run.
   Using the sample of cross-state groups, we introduce practice group fixed effects into a
physician-level regression of Medicaid acceptance on Medicaid fee and CIP indices:


             Medicaid acceptancei,t =  +  ^s(i),Medicaid +  ^s(i),Medicaid

                                          + g · 1g(i) +  Various controlsi,t +   i,t       (15)


The dependent variable is the same as in regression (13), a binary indicator for whether
the physician reports accepting Medicaid patients. The state-level fee and CIP indices are
the estimates from equations (11) and (12). The key controls are fixed effects 1g(i) for each
physician group or system, defined based on the practice's tax identifier reported in MD-
PPAS and health system reported by AHRQ. Given these fixed effects, we identify  and
 off of differences in Medicaid acceptance among physicians within the same practice. We
again cluster standard errors by state.
   This strategy's limitation is that it controls for unobservables at the group level but not



                                              33
for the individual physician, as equation (13) does. Even within a group, physicians with a
stronger preference for treating Medicaid patients could sort across states in ways correlated
with their Medicaid policies.
      Both of these strategies account for unobservable differences on the supply side of the
market, i.e. among physicians and their practices. Other differences among states could
confound the estimates of  and  if they are correlated with Medicaid fees and CIP. To
address this concern, we study selection on observables using Oster's (2019) assumption of
proportional selection. We report the variants of equations (13) and (15) starting from raw
correlations without controls, and then adding controls for local characteristics intended to
capture other demand factors. We use the software provided by Oster (2019)16 to evaluate
the changes in coefficients and predictive power observed as we add controls, and determine
the likely extent of bias remaining in our estimates.


4.3     The Effect of Billing Hurdles on Medicaid Acceptance

Figure 10 shows our initial results from the movers strategy. Panel 10(a) shows the response
to moving to a state with higher fees, while Panel 10(b) shows the response to moving to a
state with higher costs of incomplete payments. Although the panels are shown separately,
all coefficients in this figure come from the same regression, equation (14).
      Note first that the pre-move trends in both panels are flat and close to zero. Prior
to the physician's move, we see no relationship between the upcoming changes in fees or
incomplete payments and physicians' Medicaid acceptance decisions. After the move, we
see clear positive coefficients for fees and negative for CIP. Higher fees lead to increased
probability of Medicaid acceptance, while a higher implicit tax reduces the probability. We
discuss the magnitudes below, but for now simply note that the response is prompt and
significant. The point estimates for fees increase over time, but are not precise enough to
rule out a constant effect in years 1 through 4 after the move.


  16
       Available online at https://emilyoster.net/s/psacalc_0.zip


                                                 34
   Table 9 shows the estimates of equation (13), which pools the pre-move and post-move
years and estimates a single coefficient for each index. Column 1 shows the estimates without
any additional controls; column 2 adds controls for insurance market conditions in the physi-
cian's county; column 3 adds controls for the physician's own demographics, and column 4
controls for local socioeconomic characteristics. Each column reports coefficients on both
fee and CIP indices. The coefficient on log fees shows the effect of a 1 log point change in
physicians' net revenue on the probability of accepting Medicaid patients. For instance, the
fee coefficient in column 1 means that a 0.1 increase in log fees (approximately 10 percent)
leads to a half percentage point increase in physicians' propensity to accept Medicaid. The
coefficient on  CIP can be thought of as the coefficient on a tax rate, so a 10 percentage
point increase in  CIP reduces the probability of accepting Medicaid patients by 1 percentage
point.
   To put these magnitudes in context, we note from Table 8 that the fee index has a cross-
state standard deviation of 0.21, while the CIP index has a standard deviation of 0.11. So,
according to column 1, moving to a state with one standard deviation higher fees increases
the probability of accepting Medicaid patients by 1.2 percentage points, while moving to a
state with one standard deviation higher implicit tax reduces the probability by the same
amount. Based on this calculation, CIP is almost exactly as important for understanding
the variation in physicians' willingness to treat Medicaid patients as reimbursement rates
are.
   From a physician's perspective, a 10 percent increase in revenue has the same impact
whether it comes from 10 percent higher fees or an equivalent reduction in implicit taxes. So
it would be natural if they respond comparably to these two sorts of changes. The p-values
below the coefficients in Table 9 test this. Since one coefficient is in logs, while the other is
in percentage points, we must multiply the coefficient on  CIP by one minus the average
implicit tax rate to make the two comparable. We perform this scaling and then report a
test for equality of the fee and scaled implicit tax coefficients. We fail to reject equality with


                                               35
p > 0.1 in all columns.
   The next rows report the results of Oster's (2019) test for coefficient stability. We re-
                                              ~ (within physician), i.e. the amount of
port Oster's  using the recommended Rmax = 1.3R
unobservable selection relative to observed selection that would be necessary to drive our
estimates to zero. We find estimates ranging from  = 1 to  = 2 across the columns. This
is close to the "appropriate upper bound" of  = 1 that (Oster, 2019, p. 188) recommends,
implying the coefficients are reasonably stable.
   Table 10 reports the results from our second strategy, which aims to capture long-run
responses using groups that cross state boundaries. We obtain slightly higher coefficients, as
might be expected from longer-run, more static responses. Indeed, the coefficients around
0.1 on log fees in columns 2­5 are very similar to the point estimate for year 4 after the move
from Figure 10(a). This coefficient implies that physicians in a state with one standard
deviation higher Medicaid reimbursements are around 2 percentage points more likely to
accept Medicaid patients. Physicians in a state with one standard deviation higher CIP are
1.1 (column 4) to 3.9 percentage points (column 1) less likely to accept Medicaid patients.
CIP is again just as important as reimbursements.
   Except for column 1, we again find no statistical difference between the scaled coefficient
on  CIP and the coefficient on log fees. Physicians appear to respond similarly to increased
expect revenue from the two channels. Oster's coefficient stability test is somewhat less
reassuring with this approach than for movers, with  = 1.4 for fees and  = 0.6 for CIP.
   The appendix reports robustness to many different choices of how to compute our indices.
The columns of Appendix Table A.2 vary the sample of visits used to compute the CIP index.
Across the horizontal panels, we vary details of how we calculate the fee index. In the top
panel, the fee index is unchanged, and column 1 uses the same CIP index as in our main
results. Column 2 computes CIP indices by looking only at the first visit in our data of any
physician/patient pair, to avoid concerns that subsequent visits may be selected depending
on the billing success of the first visit. Column 3 is the complement: it excludes the first visit,


                                                36
instead focusing on visits where the physician has already had an opportunity to resolve any
patient-specific billing problems. Column 4 includes a control for local income in the index-
calculation regressions. Column 5 adds diagnosis fixed effects to those regressions. Column
6 estimates the index only off of pregnant patients, as pregnant women have more similar
eligibility for Medicaid across states. The last column removes physician fixed effects from
these index regressions. In all cases, the results remain quantitatively similar and statistically
significant.
   The subsequent panels show these same various CIP indices but with alternative ap-
proaches to the estimation of the fee index. The second panel eliminates the regression
weights. The third panel adds to the regression sample observations for which we have to
impute the claim value. We eliminate those from the baseline index calculation, but this
panel shows that the results are stable when including them. The fourth panel includes the
imputations and removes the regression weights. Table A.3 repeats the same exercise for
the cross-state group strategy. Once again, results are robust and stable across the various
choices.
   Appendix Tables A.4 and A.5 measure the CIP as simply the revenue providers are
unable to collect; that is, the difference between the claim value and the amount ultimately
collected. The results in this table thus neglect the costs of resubmission, costs which enable
providers to recover some of the revenue initially denied. Even so, we find similar and robust
estimates.
   To summarize, these results demonstate the profound importance of administrative has-
sles for Medicaid patients' access to care. Physicians appear to treat the implicit tax
from incomplete payments just like they do lower fees: a loss in expected revenue that
makes them reluctant to treat lower-income Americans. This is true both qualitatively and
quantitatively--their behavioral responses to a given percentage change in net revenue are
similar whether the change comes through fees or implicit taxes. This suggests an important
new dimension of health insurance that has been largely overlooked in policy discussions.


                                               37
While billing hassles could have benefits we don't measure, they clearly deter physicians from
participating in Medicaid. The quality of administrative processes should be a first-order
concern for anyone interested in the quality of Medicaid or equity in healthcare access.


5    Conclusion

This paper examines the economics of one of the largest sources of administrative problems
in healthcare: how physicians and insurers haggle over payments for medical care. We find
evidence that these payments are frequently incomplete, and we estimate that physicians
incur large costs from this incompleteness--especially when submitting bills to Medicaid.
    We show that these costs depress doctors' supply of care to Medicaid patients. Their
willingness to participate in Medicaid responds just as much to billing difficulty as to the
reimbursement rate. This result is robust to two identification strategies, and the impact
appears larger in the long run than in the short run.
    Our findings demonstrate the importance of well functioning business operations in the
healthcare setting. Difficulty with payment collection has meaningful impacts on firms'
willingness to engage in markets. In the case of a major government healthcare program,
this hassle compounds the effect of low payment rates to deter physicians from treating
publicly insured patients.




                                             38
References
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis, "High Wage Workers
 and High Wage Firms," Econometrica, 1999, 67 (2), 251­333.

Ahmed, Waqas, Adnan Haider, and Javed Iqbal, "Estimation of discount factor (beta)
 and coefficient of relative risk aversion (gamma) in selected countries," 2012.

Alexander, Diane and Molly Schnell, "The impacts of physician payments on patient
 access, use, and health," Working Paper 26095, National Bureau of Economic Research
 July 2019.

Allen,  Marshall,   "We Asked Prosecutors if Health Insurance Compa-
 nies Care About Fraud. They Laughed at Us.," ProPublica, Septem-
 ber 10 2019.      Available online at https://www.propublica.org/article/
 we-asked-prosecutors-if-health-insurance-companies-care-about-fraud-they-laughed-at-u

Arcidiacono, Peter and Paul B Ellickson, "Practical methods for estimation of dynamic
 discrete choice models," Annu. Rev. Econ., 2011, 3 (1), 363­394.

Backus, Matthew, Thomas Blake, and Steven Tadelis, "On the empirical content of
 cheap-talk signaling: An application to bargaining," Journal of Political Economy, 2019,
 127 (4), 1599­1628.

  , , Brad Larsen, and Steven Tadelis, "Sequential bargaining in the field: Evidence
  from millions of online bargaining interactions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020,
  135 (3), 1319­1361.

Bagwell, Kyle, Robert W Staiger, and Ali Yurukoglu, "Multilateral trade bargaining:
 A first look at the GATT bargaining records," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 2020, 12 (3), 72­105.

Bajak, Aleszu and David Heath, "A national system to prioritize COVID-19 vaccines has
 largely failed as states rely on their own systems," USA TODAY, March 3 2021. Availale
 online at https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/investigations/2021/03/03/
 covid-19-vaccine-distribution-system-fails-live-up-promise/6878303002/.

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, "Workfare versus Welfare: Incentive Arguments
 for Work Requirements in Poverty-Alleviation Programs," American Economic Review,
 1992, 82 (1), 249­261.

Bloom, Nicholas, Carol Propper, Stephan Seiler, and John Van Reenen, "The im-
  pact of competition on management quality: evidence from public hospitals," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (2), 457­489.

  , Raffaella Sadun, Renata Lemos, and John Van Reenen, "Healthy business?
  Managerial education and management in healthcare," Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 2017, pp. 1­45.


                                           39
Bound, John and Richard V. Burkhauser, "Economic analysis of transfer programs
 targeted on people with disabilities," in "Handbook of Labor Economics," Vol. 3 of Hand-
 book of Labor Economics, Elsevier, 1999, chapter 51, pp. 3417 ­ 3528.

Brot-Goldberg, Zarek C., Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin R. Handel, and
 Jonathan T. Kolstad, "What does a Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost-Sharing
 on Health Care Prices, Quantities, and Spending Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 04 2017, 132 (3), 1261­1318.

Brot-Goldberg, Zarek C, Timothy Layton, Boris Vabson, and Adelina Yanyue
 Wang, "The Behavioral Foundations of Default Effects: Theory and Evidence from Medi-
 care Part D," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2021.

Bundorf, M Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney, "Pricing and welfare in
 health plan choice," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3214­48.

Candon, Molly, Stephen Zuckerman, Douglas Wissoker, Brendan Saloner,
 Genevieve M. Kenney, Karin Rhodes, and Daniel Polsky, "Declining Medicaid
 Fees and Primary Care Appointment Availability for New Medicaid Patients," JAMA
 Internal Medicine, 01 2018, 178 (1), 145­146.

Casalino, Lawrence P, Sean Nicholson, David N Gans, Terry Hammons, Dante
 Morra, Theodore Karrison, and Wendy Levinson, "What Does It Cost Physician
 Practices To Interact With Health Insurance Plans? A new way of looking at admin-
 istrative costsone key point of comparison in debating public and private health reform
 approaches.," Health Affairs, 2009, 28 (Suppl1), w533­w543.

Chen, M Keith, Judith A Chevalier, and Elisa F Long, "Nursing home staff networks
 and COVID-19," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2021, 118 (1).

Cicala, Steve, Ethan MJ Lieber, and Victoria Marone, "Regulating Markups in
  US Health Insurance," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11 (4),
  71­104.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua D. Gottlieb, "Do Physicians' Financial Incentives Affect
  Treatment Patterns and Patient Health?," American Economic Review, April 2014, 104
  (4), 1320­1349.

   and , "In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare's Influence on Private Payment Systems,"
  Journal of Political Economy, February 2017, 125 (1), 1­39.

  , , and T´ imea Laura Moln´  ar, "Do Health Insurers Innovate? Evidence From the
  Anatomy of Physician Payments," Journal of Health Economics, September 2017, 55,
  153­167.

Cook, Perry, "We Have a Lifesaving Treatment for Covid-19. Why Is It So Hard to Get?,"
 New York Times, March 31 2020. Available online at https://www.nytimes.com/2021/
 03/31/opinion/covid-monoclonal-antibodies-treatment.html?smid=tw-share.


                                           40
Cooper, Zack, Stuart V Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen, "The Price
 Ain't Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the Privately Insured," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 09 2018, 134 (1), 51­107.

Crawford, Gregory S and Ali Yurukoglu, "The welfare effects of bundling in multi-
 channel television markets," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 643­85.

Crocker, Keith J and John Morgan, "Is honesty the best policy? Curtailing insurance
 fraud through optimal incentive contracts," Journal of Political Economy, 1998, 106 (2),
 355­375.

   and Sharon Tennyson, "Insurance fraud and optimal claims settlement strategies,"
  The Journal of Law and Economics, 2002, 45 (2), 469­507.

Cunningham, Peter J. and Ann S. O'Malley, "Do Reimbursement Delays Discourage
 Medicaid Participation By Physicians?," Health Affairs, 2008, 27 (Supplement 1), w17­
 w28.

Currie, Janet, Jeffrey Grogger, Gary Burtless, and Robert F. Schoeni, "Explaining
 Recent Declines in Food Stamp Program Participation," Brookings-Wharton Papers on
 Urban Affairs, 2001, pp. 203­244.

Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya, "Can Health
 Insurance Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage," Journal of Political
 Economy, 2021, 129 (2), 570­606.

Cutler, David M., "Reducing Administrative Costs in U.S. Health Care," The Hamilton
 Project Policy Proposal 2020-09, Brookings Institution March 2020. Available online at
 https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Cutler_PP_LO.pdf.

   and Dan P. Ly, "The (Paper)Work of Medicine: Understanding International Medical
  Costs," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (2), 3­25.

Deshpande, Manasi and Yue Li, "Who is screened out? application costs and the
 targeting of disability programs," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019,
 11 (4), 213­48.

Dionne, Georges, Florence Giuliano, and Pierre Picard, "Optimal auditing with
 scoring: Theory and application to insurance fraud," Management Science, 2009, 55 (1),
 58­70.

Dranove, David, Christopher Ody, and Amanda Starc, "A Dose of Managed Care:
 Controlling Drug Spending in Medicaid," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 2021, 13 (1), 170­97.

Dunn, Abe and Adam Hale Shapiro, "Physician competition and the provision of care:
 evidence from heart attacks," American Journal of Health Economics, 2018, 4 (2), 226­
 261.


                                           41
  , Eli Liebman, Sarah Pack, and Adam Hale Shapiro, "Medical Care Price Indexes
  for Patients with Employer-Provided Insurance: Nationally Representative Estimates from
  MarketScan Data," Health Services Research, 2013, 48 (3), 1173­1190.

Dynarski, Susan and Judith E. Scott-Clayton, "The Cost of Complexity in Federal
 Student Aid: Lessons From Optimal Tax Theory and Behavioral Economics," National
 Tax Journal, 2006, 59 (2), 319­56.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R Cullen, "Estimating welfare in insurance
  markets using variation in prices," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (3), 877­
  921.

Ericson, Keith M Marzilli and Amanda Starc, "Pricing regulation and imperfect
  competition on the massachusetts health insurance exchange," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2015, 97 (3), 667­682.

Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli and Amanda Starc, "How product standardization affects
  choice: Evidence from the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange," Journal of Health
  Economics, 2016, 50, 71 ­ 85.

Finkelstein, Amy and Matthew J Notowidigdo, "Take-Up and Targeting: Experimen-
  tal Evidence from SNAP," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2019, 134 (3), 1505­1556.

  , Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams, "Sources of Geographic Variation in
  Health Care: Evidence From Patient Migration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 07
  2016, 131 (4), 1681­1726.

Fudenberg, Drew, David K Levine, and Jean Tirole, "Sequential bargaining with
  many buyers," 1985.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei
 Shleifer, "Trust and Insurance Contracts," Working Paper 27189, National Bureau of
 Economic Research May 2020.

Gottlieb, Joshua D., Adam Hale Shapiro, and Abe Dunn, "The Complexity Of
 Billing And Paying For Physician Care," Health Affairs, April 2018, 37 (4), 619­626.

  , Maria Polyakova, Kevin Rinz, Hugh Shiplett, and Victoria Udalova, "Who Val-
  ues Human Capitalists' Human Capital? The Earnings and Labor Supply of U.S. Physi-
  cians," June 2021. University of Chicago, mimeo.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Keith A Joiner, and Jianjing Lin, "How Do Hospitals
 Respond to Payment Incentives?," Working Paper 26455, National Bureau of Economic
 Research November 2019.

Grennan, Matthew and Ashley Swanson, "Transparency and negotiated prices: The
 value of information in hospital-supplier bargaining," Journal of Political Economy, 2020,
 128 (4), 1234­1268.


                                            42
Gruber, Jon, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlin, "Physician Fees and Procedure Intensity:
 the Case of Cesarean Delivery," Journal of Health Economics, August 1999, 18 (4), 473­
 490.

Hamel, Liz, Lunna Lopes, Audrey Kearney, and Mollyann Brodie,
 "KFF COVID-19 Vaccine Monitor:      March 2021," March 30 2021.      Kaiser
 Family Foundation. Available online at https://www.kff.org/report-section/
 kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-march-2021-findings/.

Handel, Benjamin R and Jonathan T Kolstad, "Health insurance for" humans": Infor-
 mation frictions, plan choice, and consumer welfare," American Economic Review, 2015,
 105 (8), 2449­2500.

Hernandez-Arenaz, I~ nigo and Nagore Iriberri, "Women ask for less (only from men):
 Evidence from bargaining in the field," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
 2018, 152, 192­214.

Hotz, V Joseph and Robert A Miller, "Conditional choice probabilities and the esti-
 mation of dynamic models," The Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 497­529.

Hull, Peter, "Estimating Treatment Effects in Mover Designs," Technical Report
 1804.06721, arXiv.org April 2018.

Jindal, Pranav and Peter Newberry, "Price negotiations and bargaining
  costs," Technical Report, Mimeo, Pennsylvania State University. Available online
  at https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.709.2075&rep=
  rep1&type=pdf. April 2015.

Keniston, Daniel, "Bargaining and welfare: A dynamic structural analysis of the autorick-
 shaw market," Unpublished manuscript, Yale University, 2011.

Larsen, Bradley, "The efficiency of real-world bargaining: Evidence from wholesale used-
  auto auctions," Working Paper No. 20431, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.

Long, Sharon K., "Physicians May Need More Than Higher Reimbursements To Expand
  Medicaid Participation: Findings From Washington State," Health Affairs, 2013, 32 (9),
  1560­1567. PMID: 24019360.

Ly, Dan P and Sherry A Glied, "The impact of managed care contracting on physicians,"
  Journal of General Internal Medicine, 2014, 29 (1), 237­242.

Meyer, Robinson and Alexis C. Madrigal, "Why the Pandemic Experts Failed," The
 Atlantic, March 15 2021. Available online at https://www.theatlantic.com/science/
 archive/2021/03/americas-coronavirus-catastrophe-began-with-data/618287/.

Molitor, David, "The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardiologist
 Migration," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2018, 10 (1), 326­
 56.


                                           43
Morra, Dante, Sean Nicholson, Wendy Levinson, David N Gans, Terry Ham-
 mons, and Lawrence P Casalino, "US physician practices versus Canadians: spending
 nearly four times as much money interacting with payers," Health Affairs, 2011, 30 (8),
 1443­1450.

Morton, Fiona Scott, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Florian Zettelmeyer, "What matters in
 a price negotiation: Evidence from the US auto retailing industry," Quantitative Marketing
 and Economics, 2011, 9 (4), 365­402.

Nichols, Albert L. and Richard J. Zeckhauser, "Targeting Transfers through Restric-
 tions on Recipients," American Economic Review, 1982, 72 (2), 372­377.

Nichols, Donald A., Eugene Smolensky, and Thorwald N. Tideman, "Discrim-
 ination by Waiting Time in Merit Goods," American Economic Review, 1971, 61 (3),
 312­323.

Oostrom, Tamar, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein, "Outpatient office wait times
 and quality of care for Medicaid patients," Health Affairs, 2017, 36 (5), 826­832.

Oster, Emily, "Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence,"
 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2019, 37 (2), 187­204.

Polsky, Daniel, Michael Richards, Simon Basseyn, Douglas Wissoker,
 Genevieve M. Kenney, Stephen Zuckerman, and Karin V. Rhodes, "Appoint-
 ment Availability after Increases in Medicaid Payments for Primary Care," New England
 Journal of Medicine, 2015, 372 (6), 537­545.

Pozen, Alexis and David M Cutler, "Medical spending differences in the United States
 and Canada: the role of prices, procedures, and administrative expenses," INQUIRY: The
 Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 2010, 47 (2), 124­134.

Reinhardt, Uwe E., "The Pricing Of U.S. Hospital Services: Chaos Behind A Veil Of
 Secrecy," Health Affairs, 2006, 25 (1), 57­69. PMID: 16403745.

Reuters, "Trump administration had no coronavirus vaccine distribution plan: White
 House," Reuters, January 24 2021. Available online at https://www.reuters.com/
 article/us-health-coronavirus-usa-klain-idUSKBN29T0FY.

Sharfstein, Joshua M, Scott J Becker, and Michelle M Mello, "Diagnostic testing
  for the novel coronavirus," JAMA, 2020, 323 (15), 1437­1438.

Shepard, Mark, "Hospital network competition and adverse selection: evidence from the
  Massachusetts health insurance exchange," Technical Report, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research 2016.

Sloan, Frank, Janet Mitchell, and Jerry Cromwell, "Physician participation in state
  Medicaid programs," Journal of Human Resources, 1978, pp. 211­245.



                                            44
Taylor, Nick Paul and Greg Slabodkin, "Health insurers, labs point
  fingers over COVID-19 test coverage and prices," MedTechDive, Novem-
  ber 19 2020.        Available online at https://www.medtechdive.com/news/
  hold-health-insurers-labs-squabble-over-covid-19-test-prices/589263/.

Tebaldi, Pietro, "Estimating equilibrium in health insurance exchanges: Price competition
  and subsidy design under the aca," Working Paper 2017-05, Becker Friedman Institute for
  Research in Economics 2017.

Tirole, Jean, "Incomplete contracts: Where do we stand?," Econometrica, 1999, 67 (4),
  741­781.

Tseng, Phillip, Robert S. Kaplan, Barak D. Richman, Mahek A. Shah, and
 Kevin A. Schulman, "Administrative Costs Associated With Physician Billing and
 Insurance-Related Activities at an Academic Health Care System," JAMA, 02 2018, 319
 (7), 691­697.

Zwick, Eric, "The costs of corporate tax complexity," American Economic Journal: Eco-
 nomic Policy, 2021, 13 (2), 467­500.




                                           45
    Figure 1: Initial Claim Values and Collection Rates across States and Payers

              (a) Medicaid, Initial Claim Value                     (b) Medicaid, Collection Rate




                                                  > 200                                             > 0.97
                                                  190 - 200                                         0.94 - 0.97
                                                  180 - 190                                         0.91 - 0.94
                                                  170 - 180                                         0.88 - 0.91
                                                  160 - 170                                         0.85 - 0.88
                                                  150 - 160                                         0.82 - 0.85
                                                  140 - 150                                         0.79 - 0.82
                                                  130 - 140                                         0.76 - 0.79
                                                  120 - 130                                         0.73 - 0.76
                                                  110 - 120                                         0.70 - 0.73
                                                  100 - 110                                         < 0.70
                                                  < 100                                             No data




              (c) Medicare, Initial Claim Value                     (d) Medicare, Collection Rate




                                                  > 200
                                                  190 - 200                                         > 0.97
                                                  180 - 190                                         0.94 - 0.97
                                                  170 - 180                                         0.91 - 0.94
                                                  160 - 170                                         0.88 - 0.91
                                                  150 - 160                                         0.85 - 0.88
                                                  140 - 150                                         0.82 - 0.85
                                                  130 - 140                                         0.79 - 0.82
                                                  120 - 130                                         0.76 - 0.79
                                                  110 - 120                                         0.73 - 0.76
                                                  100 - 110                                         0.70 - 0.73
                                                  < 100                                             < 0.70




            (e) Commercial, Initial Claim Value                    (f) Commercial, Collection Rate




                                                  > 200
                                                  190 - 200                                         > 0.97
                                                  180 - 190                                         0.94 - 0.97
                                                  170 - 180                                         0.91 - 0.94
                                                  160 - 170                                         0.88 - 0.91
                                                  150 - 160                                         0.85 - 0.88
                                                  140 - 150                                         0.82 - 0.85
                                                  130 - 140                                         0.79 - 0.82
                                                  120 - 130                                         0.76 - 0.79
                                                  110 - 120                                         0.73 - 0.76
                                                  100 - 110                                         0.70 - 0.73
                                                  < 100                                             < 0.70



Note: The left column illustrates the variation across states and payers in the initial claim value
visits observed in the IQVIA sample. The right column illustrates the variation across states and
payers in the share of initial claim value that is ultimately collected by the provider after accounting
for denials and resubmissions.




                                                              46
                     Figure 2: Decomposition of Average Claim Values




                            Total Claim Value ($98.57)


                                                                           $5.00
           Medicaid                                                        $2.73
                                                                           $14.25

               $79.32   Final Net Revenue ($81.59)   CIP ($16.98)



                                    Total Claim Value ($136.05)


                                                                                     $3.90
          Medicare                                                                   $2.42
                                                                                     $5.48

              $126.67           Final Net Revenue ($128.15)           CIP ($7.90)



                                             Total Claim Value ($179.40)


                                                                                                      $3.91
        Commercial                                                                                    $0.88
                                                                                                      $4.81

              $170.60                     Final Net Revenue ($173.71)               CIP ($5.69)


             Initially Allowed           Recovered                  Resubmission Cost             Denied




Note: The figure illustrates the how value of the average claim for Medicaid, Medicare and com-
mercial insurers is allocated. The length of each bar shows the total value of the average claim,
computed based on the contracts we infer according to the method in section 2.2. The leftmost
region (green, with diagonal lines sloping up) shows the average payment upon initial submission.
The remainder is initially not paid. The blue region is ultimately paid following subsequent sub-
missions, while region marked in red cross-hatches is not ever paid. The part of the blue region
covered with diagonal red lines sloping down represents the part of recovered revenue that is spent
on the recovery process, according to our estimation in section 3. The costs of incomplete payment
(CIP) include the red region indicating denied amounts never recovered plus the part of recovered
revenue that is spent on the recovery.




                                                     47
        Figure 3: Provider Resubmission Problem Following the Initial Denial


                             Payoff =  (L - D1 )                      Payoff =  L - D1 +
                                                                           R1 - D2 - C R1 , 
        No more                                    No more
        resubmissions                              resubmissions
                        R1 =                                       R2 = 

      Set D1  L                            Set D2  R1 of                               ...
      of line items     Resubmit           line items denied,        Resubmit
      denied            items in R1 = ,    R1 - D2 paid              items in R2 = ,
      for reason        R1  D 1                                      R2  D 2


Note: The figure provides a schematic of the decision tree for the provider dynamic discrete choice
problem following a denied claim.




                                                    48
                                    Figure 4: Intuition for Identification of Resubmission Costs

      (a) Simulation: Resubmission Cost = $10                                                                  (b) Simulation: Resubmission Cost = $30
                       1.0                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                             0.96                                                                                           0.83

                       0.8                                                          0.83                                         0.8                                                0.70


                                                                           0.70                                                                                              0.57
                       0.6                                                                                                       0.6
       Recovery Rate




                                                                                                                 Recovery Rate
                                                                                                                                                                     0.44
                                                                0.57

                       0.4                                                                                                       0.4                        0.31
                                                 0.44
                                                                                                                                                     0.18
                       0.2                0.31                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                  0.18
                       0.0                                                                                                       0.0
                             $0          $20       $40         $60                    $80           $100                               $0           $20         $40         $60       $80          $100
                                                     Claim Value                                                                                                  Claim Value



                                                                                  (c) Observed Resubmission Decisions

                                                                    1.0

                                                                                                                                                                 0.96
                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                     0.83

                                                                    0.6                                                                     0.70
                                                    Recovery Rate




                                                                                                                0.57
                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                       0.44

                                                                    0.2                     0.31

                                                                               0.18
                                                                    0.0
                                                                          $0               $20             $40         $60                                $80            $100
                                                                                                             Claim Value


Note: The figure illustrates the intuition for identification of resubmission costs. In each panel,
for any given combination of recovery rate for a resubmitted claim (vertical axis) and claim value
(horizontal axis) the color corresponds to the fitted probability of claim resubmission, fitted with
a linear model. (We regress resubmissions on a constant, the claim value, and the recovery rate.)
Panel (a) is drawn using simulated resubmissions imposing a resubmission cost of $10 per claim
and a normal error term with mean zero and standard deviation $10, and Panel (b) is drawn using
simulated resubmission imposing a resubmission cost of $30 per-claim, with the same error term.
Different resubmission costs imply a different joint distribution of claim value, recovery rate, and
resubmissions. Panel (c) is drawn using this joint distribution as observed in our remittance data.
The shape of this distribution, conditional on reason code, payer, and state, is the main source of
identification of the parameters governing resubmission costs.



                                                                                                               49
             Figure 5: Probability of Resubmission and Continuation Value

                                                                 (a) Conditional on Payer


                                   .5          .4
                     Probability of Resubmission
                    .1        .2   0   .3




                                                      0              50                    100         150
                                                                          Continuation Value


                                                          (b) Conditional on Payer and Diagnosis
                                   .6
                    Probability of Resubmission
                        .2         0     .4




                                                    -50          0               50              100         150
                                                                          Continuation Value


Note: The figure shows a binscatter of the probability that a set of line items is resubmitted
(vertical axis) plotted against the continuation value estimated with the remittance data, accounting
for future payments, denials, and the probability of submitting further claims. The top panel is
plotted conditional on payer, the bottom panel conditional on payer and diagnosis (ICD) code.




                                                                             50
                                                       Figure 6: Estimated Resubmission Costs

                                            (a) Medicaid                                                                                                  (b) Medicare
                                                                                                                              .08
                                  .05
                                                                             Claims with one line item
                                                                             (mean = $ 14.45)                                                                               Claims with one line item
                                                                                                                                                                            (mean = $ 10.29)

                                                                             Claims with three line items
                                  .04                                        (mean = $ 33.36)                                 .06

                                                                                                                                                                                         Claims with three line items
                                                                                                                                                                                         (mean = $ 25.98)
                                  .03
                        Density




                                                                                                                    Density
                                                                                                                              .04

                                  .02


                                                                                                                              .02
                                  .01



                                   0                                                                                           0
                                        0   20                  40                                 60                               0                      20                           40                              60
                                                 Resubmission Cost                                                                                                  Resubmission Cost



                                                                                                (c) Commercial
51




                                                                   .05
                                                                                                                                        Claims with one line item
                                                                                                                                        (mean = $ 17.03)


                                                                                                                                        Claims with three line items
                                                                   .04                                                                  (mean = $ 36.73)




                                                                   .03
                                                         Density




                                                                   .02



                                                                   .01



                                                                    0
                                                                         0                 20                     40                      60                        80
                                                                                                            Resubmission Cost



     Note: The figure plots histograms across state-by-reason code categories of our estimates of the billing cost providers have to pay to
     resubmit a claim. Since we estimate resubmission costs varying with the number of line items in a claim, we illustrate the estimates for
     two examples. The shaded bars correspond to the resubmission costs for claims with one line item (the vast majority in our data), the
     blue hollow bars to resubmission costs for claims with three line items.
    Figure 7: Costs of Incomplete Payments Estimated Across States and Payers

                   (a) Medicaid, CIP                          (b) Medicaid,  CIP




                                        > 30.00                                     > 0.25
                                        25.00 - 30.00                               0.20 - 0.25
                                        20.00 - 25.00                               0.15 - 0.20
                                        15.00 - 20.00                               0.10 - 0.15
                                        10.00 - 15.00                               0.05 - 0.10
                                        5.00 - 10.00                                < 0.05
                                        < 5.00                                      No data




                   (c) Medicare, CIP                          (d) Medicare,  CIP




                                        > 30.00
                                        25.00 - 30.00                               > 0.30
                                        20.00 - 25.00                               0.20 - 0.25
                                        15.00 - 20.00                               0.15 - 0.20
                                        10.00 - 15.00                               0.10 - 0.15
                                        5.00 - 10.00                                0.05 - 0.10
                                        < 5.00                                      < 0.05




                  (e) Commercial, CIP                        (f) Commercial,  CIP




                                        > 30.00
                                        25.00 - 30.00                               > 0.25
                                        20.00 - 25.00                               0.20 - 0.25
                                        15.00 - 20.00                               0.15 - 0.20
                                        10.00 - 15.00                               0.10 - 0.15
                                        5.00 - 10.00                                0.05 - 0.10
                                        < 5.00                                      < 0.05



Note: The left column shows the mean estimated costs of incomplete payments (CIP) by state and
payer. The right column show the mean implicit tax (CIP as a share of visit value) by state and
payer.




                                                        52
        Figure 8: Estimated Indices for Medicaid and Medicare across States

                (a) Medicaid, ln fee index                      (b) Medicaid,  CIP index




                                             > 3.90
                                             3.80 - 3.90
                                             3.70 - 3.80                                   > 0.28
                                             3.60 - 3.70                                   0.25 - 0.28
                                             3.50 - 3.60                                   0.22 - 0.25
                                             3.40 - 3.50                                   0.19 - 0.22
                                             3.30 - 3.40                                   0.16 - 0.19
                                             3.20 - 3.30                                   0.13 - 0.16
                                             3.10 - 3.20                                   0.10 - 0.13
                                             3.00 - 3.10                                   0.07 - 0.10
                                             2.90 - 3.00                                   0.04 - 0.07
                                             < 2.90                                        < 0.04




                (c) Medicare, ln fee index                      (d) Medicare,  CIP index




                                             > 3.90
                                             3.80 - 3.90
                                             3.70 - 3.80                                   > 0.28
                                             3.60 - 3.70                                   0.25 - 0.28
                                             3.50 - 3.60                                   0.22 - 0.25
                                             3.40 - 3.50                                   0.19 - 0.22
                                             3.30 - 3.40                                   0.16 - 0.19
                                             3.20 - 3.30                                   0.13 - 0.16
                                             3.10 - 3.20                                   0.10 - 0.13
                                             3.00 - 3.10                                   0.07 - 0.10
                                             2.90 - 3.00                                   0.04 - 0.07
                                             < 2.90                                        < 0.04



Note: The top two maps show the estimated indices for Medicaid by state. The bottom two show
the estimated indices for Medicare by state. The fee and CIP indices are estimated according to
equations (11) and (12).




                                                           53
                                 Figure 9: Variation in Fee and CIP-Tax Indexes

                                                                                    ND
                                +40%
                                           AK           OK                                                 WY
                                                  SD

                                +20%
                                                           DE


                                                   MD           IA
                                                    MN MSUTMT
                                                    ME                NC
                                   0
                Log Fee Index




                                                      MA         NE
                                                ID           KS KY
                                                    WV OR
                                                   TN   AZCT
                                                    RI
                                                         LA NYVT              GA
                                                 CO
                                                       NV SC
                                                       VA
                                -20%                      AL
                                                   HI
                                                             IN    CA                    DC
                                                                              TX
                                                                               PA
                                                                NH
                                                                 FL
                                                                NM

                                -40%            WA       OH
                                                         WI
                                                          AR
                                                                 MI
                                -60%                                                NJ
                                                         MO
                                                                        IL

                                       0                        .2                   .4               .6        .8
                                                                     Cost of Incomplete Payment Index

Note: The scatter plot shows the variation across states in the ln fee index (vertical axis) and
 CIP index (horizontal axis), as estimated via equations (11) and (12). Blue state abbreviations
correspond to the respective's state Medicaid program, while red circles correspond to Medicare.




                                                                              54
                                                                   Figure 10: Movers Event Studies

                                                                         (a) Event Study: Fee Index

                                                 .15

                 Impact on Medicaid Acceptance


                                                   .1




                                                 .05




                                                   0




                                                 -.05
                                                              -2        -1        0           1        2       3   4
                                                                                      Years Since Move


                                                                        (b) Event Study:  CIP Index
                                                        .1
                 Impact on Medicaid Acceptance




                                                         0




                                                        -.1




                                                        -.2




                                                        -.3
                                                                   -2        -1       0           1        2   3   4
                                                                                          Years Since Move


Note: The figure plots the coefficients of the movers event study as specified in equtation (14). The
top panel shows the coefficients  , capturing the effect of the fee index on the probability to accept
Medicaid patients, where  (year relative to move) varies on the horizontal axis. The bottom panel
shows the corresponding plot for the coefficient  , capturing the effect of the implicit tax due to
the cost of incomplete payments.



                                                                                          55
                                               Table 1: Remittance Data Summary, Visit Level

                                                        Mean    SD         10th Percentile     90th Percentile     Observations
                     Initial claim value                153.17 433.09           23.90              237.92           88827331
                     Number of line items               1.888   1.61             1.00               4.00            88827331
                     Some items denied (=1)             0.075   0.26             0.00               0.00            88827331
                     Denied value in initial claim      9.863 122.37             0.00               0.00            88827331
                     Total denied amount                5.837 89.08              0.00               0.00            88827331
                     Total claims submitted             1.047   0.26             1.00               1.00            88827331
                     Medicaid patient (=1)              0.076   0.26             0.00               0.00            88827331
56




                     Medicare patient (=1)              0.464   0.50             0.00               1.00            88827331
                     Private patient (=1)               0.460   0.50            0.00                1.00            88827331
                     Year                                2014   0.79            2013                2015            88827331
     Note: The table summarizes the IQVIA remittance data at the visit level. Initial claim value is the total amount the provider would
     receive if all line items in the first claim after the visit were paid. Line items in initial claim is the total number of line items for which
     the provider requests a payment after the visit. Some items denied is an indicator for claims in which at least one item is not paid.
     Denied value in initial claim is the sum of the line item values for line items not paid after the initial claim submission. Total denied
     amount is the sum of the line item values that are ultimately not paid for the visit. The difference between denied claim value in initial
     claim and total denied amount is the amount recovered by the provider through resubmissions of claims for the same visit. The bottom
     rows summarize indicators for the patient's primary payer and the year in which the visit took place.
                 Table 2: Claim Values and Denials by Payer, Visit Level

                                           Medicaid          Medicare     Commercial
             Initial claim value            98.57             136.05        179.40
             Some items denied (=1)         0.250              0.073        0.048
             Denied value in initial claim  19.26              9.38          8.80
             Total denied amount            14.25               5.48         4.81
             Collected visit revenue        84.32             130.57        174.59
Note: The table summarizes initial claim values and the outcome of the billing processes across
payers, as observed in the IQVIA remittance data. For each payer, the initial claim value is the
total amount the provider would receive if all line items in the first claim after the visit are paid.
Some items are denied is an indicator taking value one if at least one item is not paid. Denied
value in initial claim is the sum of the line item values for line items not paid after the initial claim
is submitted. Total denied amount is the sum of the line item values that are ultimately not paid
for the visit. Collected visit revenue is the total amount collected by the provider for the visit.




                                                   57
      Table 3: Summary of Remittance Data Following Denials, Line Item Level

 Reason Code        Share of          Mean            Mean Pr. of   Mean # of        Mean
  Category          Denials      Line Item Value      Resubmission Resubmissions Recovery Rate
                                        Panel (a): Medicaid
 Administrative       0.251           53.61          0.39                   0.51               0.60
 Contractual          0.297           44.29          0.35                   0.42               0.92
 Coverage             0.251           56.54          0.25                   0.34               0.37
 Duplicate            0.041           60.74          0.19                   0.24               0.15
 Information          0.160           63.53          0.41                   0.57               0.29
                                        Panel (b): Medicare
 Administrative       0.163           91.57          0.62                   0.72               0.95
 Contractual          0.406           84.02          0.80                   0.87               0.98
 Coverage             0.231           81.37          0.49                   0.60               0.69
 Duplicate            0.102           82.57          0.47                   0.60               0.50
 Information          0.098           89.14          0.61                   0.79               0.61
                                       Panel (c): Commercial
 Administrative       0.139           104.03         0.40                   0.49               0.79
 Contractual          0.550           102.33         0.80                   0.87               0.99
 Coverage             0.127           110.60         0.70                   0.83               0.88
 Duplicate            0.087           104.25         0.24                   0.29               0.27
 Information          0.097           146.44         0.61                   0.76               0.63
Note: The table summarizes the remittance data for line items that are denied after the first
submission. Each panel corresponds to a different payer, while rows indicate the reason code
category used to justify the denial in response to the initial claim. The first column shows the
share of line items denied for a specific reason, relative to all denied line items. The second column
shows the average line item value. The third column shows the average probability that the line
item is resubmitted in a second claim following the initial denial. The fourth column shows the
average number of times that a line item is resubmitted following the initial denial. The last column
shows the average probability that the line item value is ultimately paid.



                              Table 4: Physicians Survey Summary

                                      Mean    SD 10th Percentile 90th Percentile Observations
   Accepts Medicaid (0,1)             0.721   0.45    0.00            1.00         3688970
   Accepts Medicare (0,1)             0.841   0.37    0.00            1.00         3688970
   Cross-State Mover (0,1)            0.015   0.12    0.00            0.00         2528500
   Cross-State Group (Tax    ID; 0,1) 0.273   0.45    0.00            1.00         3688970
   Year                               2012    1.93    2009            2015         3688970
Note: The table summarizes the physician-year level data from MD-PPAS augmented with the
SK&A survey.



                                                 58
 Table 5: Estimated Value of Resubmissions and Observed Resubmission Decisions

                                                                   Medicaid     Medicare   Commercial
                Panel (a): Maximum Continuation Value of Claims
 Instances in which providers do not resubmit claims 10.10 12.94                             12.21
 Instances in which providers resubmit claims        21.43 20.88                             34.90
                  Panel (b): Continuation Value of Resubmission
 Not resubmitted set of line items                 5.16     7.57                              10.82
 Resubmitted set of line items                     20.25   19.77                              33.47
Note: The table summarizes the variation in continuation values from resubmission across observed
and counterfactual resubmission decisions. It highlights that the remittance data are consistent with
providers being forward-looking and profit-maximizing, and it showcases the variation we leverage
to identify resubmission costs. Panel (a) shows the maximum continuation value across all viable
resubmission options, which includes the option not to resubmit. That is, Panel (a) compares the
maximum continuation value from resubmission between instances in which the provider chooses
to resubmit a set of denied line items, and instances in which the provider chooses to forego visit
revenues for the denied items. Panel (b) shown the continuation value conditional on instances
in which providers resubmit claims. That is, Panel (b) compares the sets of line items that are
resubmitted to their feasible alternatives for instances in which a resubmission is observed.




          Table 6: Estimated Resubmission Costs by Reason Code Categories

                    Reason Code
                    Category           Medicaid         Medicare     Commercial
                    Administrative        15.39          10.01          21.18
                                         (0.558)         (0.145)        (0.334)
                    Contractual           9.19            7.43           8.40
                                         (0.191)         (0.108)        (0.146)
                    Coverage              14.66          12.14          18.33
                                         (0.261)         (0.177)        (0.329)
                    Duplicate             21.00          11.40          20.62
                                         (0.604)         (0.640)        (0.534)
                    Information           13.24          10.49          17.36
                                         (0.381)         (0.272)        (0.615)
Note: The table reports the average across states of the parameter µ1
                                                                    k,,s for a given k,  pair. This
is equal to the resubmission cost for a claim with one line item, denied by payer k for reason .
Standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                   59
                     Table 7: Estimates of CIP and Implicit CIP Tax

                                            Medicaid     Medicare    Commercial
                     Panel (a): Estimates including Resubmission Costs
                CIP                           0.174        0.050         0.028
               Average CIP                    12.09        4.07          2.69
                     Panel (b): Estimates excluding Resubmission Costs
                Share Lost                    0.139        0.033         0.019
               Average Denied Amount          9.36         2.59           1.81
Note: The table reports our estimates of average costs of incomplete payments (CIP) and implicit
CIP tax for each payer. These estimates are computed by taking the average across visits. The
first panel computes CIP and  CIP following equations (4) and (5). These calculations include
both lost revenues due to denials and resubmission costs. The second panel shows the amount of
lost revenues, and the corresponding implicit tax, as calculated directly from the remittance data,
ignoring the estimated resubmission costs. All statistics are computed using the entire sample for
each payer, after excluding the visits in the top 1 percentile of CIP values. Omitting these visits
yields smaller average CIP values for each payer and lower estimates of  CIP .




                          Table 8: Summary of Medicaid Indices

                        Mean       SD    10th Percentile     90th Percentile     Observations
                     Panel (a): Medicaid Indices Across States
   ln(fee) Index      3.3121 0.21       3.06           3.57                           51
    CIP Index         0.1836 0.11       0.08           0.34                           51
             Panel (b): Changes in Medicaid Indices for Movers
    ln(fee) Index 0.0090 0.25       0.01           0.31        23953
     CIP
         Index     -0.0023 0.13     -0.17          0.17        23953
Note: These tables summarize the Medicaid fee and CIP indices. Panel (a) summarizes the cross-
state variation of the indices estimated via equations (11) and (12). Panel (b) summarizes the
differences of the same indices across physician movers. For each physician we observe moving
across state borders between 2009 and 2015, the difference is simply the index value in the post-
move state minus the index value in the pre-move state.




                                                60
                                                         Table 9: Movers Regression

                        Dependent Variable                                    Accepting Medicaid Patients?
                                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
                        Post-Move × ln Fee                            0.0560***    0.0427**   0.0298** 0.0277**
                                                                       (0.0159)    (0.0172)    (0.0137)    (0.0127)
                        Post-Move × CIP                              -0.1056***    -0.1033***    -0.0587**    -0.0542**
                                                                      (0.0282)      (0.0261)      (0.0237)    (0.0234)

                         s.t. ^=0                                       1.914         1.403         0.970       0.966
                         s.t. ^=0                                       1.853         2.616         0.912       0.913
                         2
                        R Within Physician                              0.008         0.010         0.014       0.017
                         2
                        Rmax                                            0.010         0.012         0.018       0.022
                        N                                               56886         56886        56886        56886
                        R2                                              0.600         0.600        0.602        0.603
61




                        p-value for adjusted coefficient equality       0.282         0.116        0.459        0.487
                        Phys. FE                                         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
                        Group FE                                         No            No           No           No
                        Number of Physicians                            23953         23953        23953        23953
                        Provider Controls                                No            Yes          Yes          Yes
                        Insurance Market Controls                        No            No           Yes          Yes
                        Socioeconomic Controls                           No            No           No           Yes
     Note: The table reports OLS estimates of  (coefficient on  ln fee index) and  (coefficient on  CIP index) from equation (13),
     estimated over the subset of physicians who move across states between 2009-2015, as recorded in the MD-PPAS data (section 2.3).
     Insurance market controls are: average Medicare HCC risk score (at county-year level); Medicare Advantage penetration, number of
     people eligible for Medicaid, number of people eligible for Medicare, share of uninsured among those younger than 65, share of dually
     eligible for Medicaid and Medicare, people enrolled in Medicare (at county level); fraction of people covered by Medicare, fraction of
     people covered by Medicaid, fraction of people uninsured (at state-year level). Provider controls are: number of practicing physicians,
     physicians per capita (at county-year level). Socioeconomic controls are: median household income, share of people living in poverty,
     population, share of people identifying as white (at county-year level). Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the state level.
     The table also reports the p-value of the test again the null hypothesis that  = - × (1 -     ¯CIP ), where ¯CIP = 0.174, from Table 7,
     and the  values corresponding to Oster's (2019) test for coefficient stability.
                                                        Table 10: Cross-State Regression

                   Dependent Variable                                            Accepting Medicaid Patients?
                                                                     (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)               (5)
                   ln Fee                                         0.1036*      0.1021*** 0.0965** 0.1049***             0.0923***
                                                                  (0.0563)      (0.0361)   (0.0364)   (0.0275)           (0.0238)
                    CIP                                          ­0.3082**     -0.1697**     -0.1634**     -0.1208*     -0.0977*
                                                                  (0.1252)      (0.0662)      (0.0661)     (0.0660)     (0.0579)

                    s.t. ^=0                                          /           0.136        0.185         0.703        1.354
                    s.t. ^=0                                          /           0.141        0.161         0.341        0.570
                    2
                   R Within Group                                     /           0.008        0.008         0.008        0.009
                    2
                   Rmax                                               /           0.010        0.010         0.011        0.012
                   N                                              1,472,527    1,472,527 1,472,527 1,472,527            1,472,527
                   R2                                               0.010        0.323     0.323     0.326                0.328
62




                   p-value for adjusted coefficient equality        0.220        0.577     0.568     0.928                0.823
                   Group                                                              AHRQ and Tax ID
                   Phys. FE                                          No           No        No        No                   No
                   Group FE                                          No           Yes       Yes       Yes                  Yes
                   Number of Physicians                            521,030      521,030   521,030   521,030              521,030
                   Provider Controls                                 No           No        Yes       Yes                  Yes
                   Insurance Market Controls                         No           No        No        Yes                  Yes
                   Socioeconomic Controls                            No           No        No        No                   Yes
     Note: The table reports OLS estimates of  (coefficient on ln fee index) and  (coefficient on  CIP index) from equation (15), estimated
     over the subset of physicians who work in physician groups operating in multiple states between 2009-2015, as recorded in the MD-
     PPAS data (described in section 2.3). Insurance market controls are: average Medicare HCC risk score (at county-year level); Medicare
     Advantage penetration, number of people eligible for Medicaid, number of people eligible for Medicare, share of uninsured among those
     younger than 65, share of dually eligible for Medicaid and Medicare, people enrolled in Medicare (at county level); fraction of people
     covered by Medicare, fraction of people covered by Medicaid, fraction of people uninsured (at state-year level). Provider controls are:
     number of practicing physicians, physicians per-capita (at county-year level). Socioeconomic controls are: median household income,
     share of people living in poverty, population, share of people identifying as white (at county-year level). Standard errors are in parentheses,
     clustered at the state level. The table also reports the p-value of the test again the null hypothesis that  = - × (1 -           ¯CIP ), where
     ¯
      CIP  corresponds to 0.174 as per Table 7 and the values of  's corresponding to Oster's (2019) test for coefficients stability.
A   Appendix: Additional Tables and Figures




                              63
         Figure A.1: Frequent Words in the Reasons for Denial, by Category

         (a) Administrative                   (b) Contractual                     (c) Coverage




                              (d) Duplicate                     (e) Information




Note: Each word cloud summarizes the text description of the reasons for denials observed in the
IQVIA remittance data. We observe over 350 different reason codes, each associated with a brief
description of the issue raised by the payer. After grouping these codes in the five categories that
we use for our analysis, we count the frequency of each (non elementary) word in the corresponding
descriptions. The word clouds weight each such word by the frequency in which it appears in the
descriptions of the corresponding category.




                                                    64
                          Table A.1: Summary of Medicaid Indices

                                         Mean     SD   10th Percentile   90th Percentile Observations
                                Panel (a): Medicaid Indices Across States
   ln(fee) Index (baseline)                 3.3121 0.21      3.06             3.57           51
   ln(fee) Index (full sample)              3.3029 0.20      3.07             3.56           51
   ln(fee) Index (full sample, weighted)    4.5759 0.24      4.30             4.85           51
   ln(fee) Index (weighted)                 4.5805 0.24      4.30             4.87           51
    CIP Index (baseline)                    0.1836 0.11      0.08             0.34           51
    CIP Index (weighted)                    0.1505 0.09      0.07             0.26           51
                         Panel (b): Changes in Medicaid Indices for Movers
    ln(fee) Index (baseline)              0.0090 0.25     -0.29          0.31               23953
    ln(fee) Index (full sample)           0.0078 0.24     -0.29          0.30               23953
    ln(fee) Index (full sample, weighted) 0.0049 0.28     -0.36          0.38               23953
    ln(fee) Index (weighted)              0.0051 0.29     -0.38          0.38               23953
    CIP Index (baseline)                  -0.0023 0.13    -0.17          0.17               23953
    CIP Index (weighted)                  -0.0023 0.11    -0.13          0.13               23953
Note: These tables summarize Medicaid indices. Panel (a) summarizes the cross-state variation of
the indices estimated via equations (11) and (12). The baseline fee index is estimated using only
non-imputed fee values. The baseline fee index is estimated using only non-imputed fee values.
We estimate a second fee index using the entire sample. Summary statistics are shown for indices
estimated without regression weights and using the claim value  as a regression weight for the CIP
index and the visit's Medicare RVUs as a regression weight for the fee index. Panel (b) summarizes
the differences of the same indices across physician movers. For each physician we observe moving
across state borders between 2009 and 2015, the difference is simply the index value in the post-move
state minus the index value in the pre-move state.




                                                 65
                                          Table A.2: Robustness of Mover Regression Results

                                 Standard    First Visit   First Visit   Local Income      Index w/         Pregnant     Index w/o
                                   Index        Only       Excluded        Control       Diagnosis FE     Patients Only Physician FE
                                          Panel (a): Fee index without imputations, unweighted regressions
       Post-Move × log Fee       0.0277**  0.0295**   0.0265**     0.0277**    0.0255**     0.0325**       0.0253*
                                 (0.0127)  (0.0126)    (0.0128)    (0.0127)     (0.0126)     (0.0122)      (0.0126)
       Post-Move × CIP           -0.0542**    -0.0577**    -0.0506**       -0.0541**       -0.0577***       -0.0565**        -0.0576***
                                  (0.0234)     (0.0247)     (0.0219)        (0.0233)        (0.0209)         (0.0218)         (0.0207)
                                              Panel (a): Fee index without imputations, weighted regressions
       Post-Move × log Fee        0.0207*     0.0217**    0.0196*     0.0207*     0.0188*       0.0248**     0.0191*
                                  (0.0106)    (0.0104)    (0.0107)    (0.0106)    (0.0105)      (0.0102)     (0.0105)
       Post-Move × CIP            -0.0544*     -0.0530*     -0.0545*       -0.0544*        -0.0595**         -0.0693*        -0.0558**
                                  (0.0294)     (0.0301)     (0.0271)       (0.0294)         (0.0232)         (0.0388)         (0.0229)
66




                                              Panel (a): Fee index with imputations, unweighted regressions
       Post-Move × log Fee       0.0287**     0.0303**   0.0280**    0.0287**     0.0275**    0.0346***                       0.0273**
                                 (0.0130)     (0.0129)   (0.0132)    (0.0130)     (0.0130)     (0.0126)                       (0.0130)
       Post-Move × CIP           -0.0566**    -0.0596**    -0.0530**       -0.0564**       -0.0606***       -0.0604***       -0.0605***
                                  (0.0240)     (0.0252)     (0.0223)        (0.0238)        (0.0210)         (0.0224)         (0.0208)
                                                Panel (a): Fee index with imputations, weighted regressions
       Post-Move × log Fee        0.0210*     0.0217**    0.0203*     0.0210*      0.0199*      0.0257**                      0.0201*
                                  (0.0107)    (0.0106)    (0.0108)    (0.0107)     (0.0106)      (0.0105)                     (0.0107)
       Post-Move × CIP            -0.0569*     -0.0552*    -0.0570**       -0.0569*        -0.0621**         -0.0743*        -0.0585**
                                  (0.0301)     (0.0308)     (0.0275)       (0.0301)         (0.0235)         (0.0400)         (0.0233)
     Note: The table shows robustness to different versions of the estimates in Table 9--exploiting physicians moving across states--of the
     effect of the ln fee index and  CIP index on Medicaid acceptance, resulting from alternative ways to calculate these indexes. Different
     row panels correspond to alternative fee indices, while different columns correspond to alternative CIP indices. Standard errors are in
     parentheses, clustered at the state level.
                                        Table A.3: Robustness of Cross-State Regressions Results

                             Standard     First Visit   First Visit   Local Income       Index w/          Pregnant     Index w/o
                               Index         Only       Excluded        Control        Diagnosis FE      Patients Only Physician FE
                                      Panel (a): Fee index without imputations, unweighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0923*** 0.0960*** 0.0902***     0.0922***    0.0928***    0.1005***      0.0926***
                             (0.0238)  (0.0243)    (0.0236)    (0.0238)     (0.0243)     (0.0254)       (0.0242)

          CIP                -0.0977*       -0.0747      -0.0980*        -0.0983*          -0.0760           -0.0593          -0.0769
                             (0.0579)      (0.0626)      (0.0494)        (0.0578)         (0.0555)          (0.0627)         (0.0557)
                                          Panel (b): Fee index without imputations, weighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0645***     0.0678*** 0.0630***    0.0722***   0.0634***     0.0729***     0.0631***
                             (0.0199)      (0.0203)   (0.0196)    (0.0205)    (0.0198)      (0.0213)      (0.0197)

          CIP                -0.1372*       -0.0836     -0.1504**        -0.1372*         -0.1270*           -0.0465         -0.1272*
67




                             (0.0736)      (0.0738)      (0.0648)        (0.0736)         (0.0665)          (0.1150)         (0.0661)
                                          Panel (c): Fee index with imputations, unweighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0977***     0.1008*** 0.0963***   0.0976***    0.0984***     0.1064***    0.0982***
                             (0.0235)      (0.0365)  (0.0234)    (0.0235)     (0.0240)      (0.0252)     (0.0240)

          CIP                -0.1029*       -0.0778     -0.1040**        -0.1034*          -0.0841           -0.0694          -0.0851
                             (0.0584)      (0.0627)      (0.0501)        (0.0583)         (0.0566)          (0.0645)         (0.0569)
                                            Panel (d): Fee index with imputations, weighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0676***     0.0703*** 0.0668***    0.0676***    0.0670***     0.0758***                       0.0668***
                             (0.0196)      (0.0201)   (0.0193)    (0.0196)     (0.0195)      (0.0213)                        (0.0194)

          CIP                -0.1420*       -0.0875     -0.1555**        -0.1420*         -0.1335*           -0.0595         -0.1337*
                             (0.0753)      (0.0752)      (0.0665)        (0.0753)         (0.0683)          (0.1181)         (0.0679)
     Note: The table shows robustness to different versions of the estimates in Table 10--exploiting physician groups operating in multiple
     states--of the effect of the ln fee index and  CIP index on Medicaid acceptance, resulting from alternative ways to calculate these indexes.
     Different row panels correspond to alternative fee indices, while different columns correspond to alternative CIP indices. Standard errors
     are in parentheses, clustered at the state level.
                   Table A.4: Effect of Fees and CIP Measured as Uncollected Revenue Only (Mover Strategy)

                                  Standard     First Visit   First Visit   Local Income        Index w/         Pregnant     Index w/o
                                    Index         Only       Excluded        Control         Diagnosis FE     Patients Only Physician FE
                                           Panel (a): Fee index without imputations, unweighted regressions
      Post-Move × log Fee         0.0248*   0.0263**     0.0240*    0.0248*      0.0226*      0.0302**      0.0224*
                                  (0.0128)   (0.0126)   (0.0130)    (0.0128)     (0.0129)     (0.0120)      (0.0129)
      Post-Move × CIP            -0.0623***    -0.0685***     -0.0566**      -0.0620***       -0.0675***        -0.0792***       -0.0676***
                                  (0.0229)      (0.0246)       (0.0212)       (0.0228)         (0.0207)          (0.0247)         (0.0206)
                                               Panel (b): Fee index without imputations, weighted regressions
      Post-Move × log Fee         0.0194*       0.0202*    0.0186*     0.0194*      0.0179*      0.0231**                          0.0181*
                                  (0.0107)      (0.0105)   (0.0107)    (0.0107)     (0.0106)     (0.0102)                          (0.0106)
      Post-Move × CIP             -0.0596*      -0.0603*      -0.0584**       -0.0596*        -0.0637***        -0.1156***        -0.0609**
                                  (0.0304)      (0.0320)       (0.0267)       (0.0304)         (0.0237)          (0.0383)          (0.0234)
68




                                                Panel (c): Fee index with imputations, unweighted regressions
      Post-Move × log Fee         0.0262*       0.0273**    0.0260*     0.0262*      0.0251*      0.0330**                         0.0249*
                                  (0.0132)      (0.0130)    (0.0134)    (0.0132)     (0.0132)     (0.0124)                         (0.0132)
      Post-Move × CIP            -0.0651***    -0.0713***    -0.0593***      -0.0648***       -0.0705***        -0.0838***       -0.0705***
                                  (0.0234)      (0.0252)      (0.0214)        (0.0233)         (0.0205)          (0.0251)         (0.0203)
                                                 Panel (d): Fee index with imputations, weighted regressions
      Post-Move × log Fee         0.0200*       0.0205*     0.0196*    0.0200*      0.0191*       0.0247**                         0.0192*
                                  (0.0108)      (0.0107)   (0.0108)    (0.0108)     (0.0107)      (0.0104)                         (0.0107)
      Post-Move × CIP             -0.0628**     -0.0635*      -0.0612**       -0.0628**       -0.0666***        -0.1216***       -0.0639***
                                   (0.0309)     (0.0326)       (0.0270)        (0.0309)        (0.0239)          (0.0391)         (0.0236)
     Note: The table shows robustness to different versions of the estimates in Table 9--exploiting physicians moving across states--of the
     effect of the ln fee index and  CIP index on Medicaid acceptance, when measuring the latter as simply the share of revenue not collected.
     That is, the definition of CIP in this table does not include the estimated cost of the resubmission process. The table shows estimates
     resulting from various ways to calculate these indexes. Different row panels correspond to alternative fee indices, while different columns
     correspond to alternative CIP indices. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the state level.
                Table A.5: Effect of Fees and CIP Measured as Uncollected Revenue Only (Cross-State Strategy)

                            Standard     First Visit   First Visit   Local Income      Index w/         Pregnant     Index w/o
                              Index         Only       Excluded        Control       Diagnosis FE     Patients Only Physician FE
                                      Panel (a): Fee Index without imputations, unweighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0879*** 0.0920*** 0.0870***     0.0879***   0.0897***     0.0992***     0.0894***
                             (0.0229)  (0.0234)    (0.0230)    (0.0229)    (0.0236)      (0.0250)      (0.0236)
          CIP                -0.1124*      -0.0922     -0.1068**       -0.1124*          -0.0897          -0.0725           -0.0911
                             (0.0610)     (0.0689)      (0.0504)       (0.0606)         (0.0600)         (0.0671)          (0.0601)
                                         Panel (b): Fee Index without imputations, weighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0613***    0.0648*** 0.0614***    0.0612***   0.0609***     0.0725***     0.0607***
                             (0.0190)     (0.0196)   (0.0190)    (0.0190)    (0.0189)      (0.0210)      (0.0189)
          CIP               -0.1618**      -0.1099     -0.1627**       -0.1613**        -0.1471**         -0.0875         -0.1481**
                             (0.0794)     (0.0852)      (0.0660)        (0.0785)         (0.0729)        (0.1241)          (0.0725)
69




                                         Panel (c): Fee Index with imputations, unweighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0936***    0.0969*** 0.0936***   0.0936***    0.0954***     0.1052***    0.0951***
                             (0.0226)     (0.0231)   (0.0227)   (0.0226)     (0.0233)      (0.0247)     (0.0233)
          CIP                -0.1194*      -0.0974     -0.1144**       -0.1193*          -0.0998          -0.0850           -0.1012
                             (0.0616)     (0.0692)      (0.0511)       (0.0613)         (0.0613)         (0.0699)          (0.0613)
                                           Panel (d): Fee Index with imputations, weighted regressions
         Index of ln Fee    0.0649***    0.0675*** 0.0658***    0.0649***    0.0650***    0.0757***                       0.0648***
                             (0.0187)     (0.0194)   (0.0186)    (0.0186)     (0.0185)     (0.0210)                        (0.0185)
          CIP               -0.1685**      -0.1162     -0.1694**       -0.1679**        -0.1549**         -0.1039         -0.1558**
                             (0.0813)     (0.0868)      (0.0677)        (0.0803)         (0.0747)        (0.1288)          (0.0743)
     Note: The table shows robustness to different versions of the estimates in Table 10--exploiting physician groups operating in multiple
     states--of the effect of the ln fee index and  CIP index on Medicaid acceptance, when measuring the latter as simply the share of revenue
     not collected. That is, the definition of CIP in this table does not include the estimated cost of the resubmission process. The table
     shows estimates resulting from various ways to calculate these indexes. Different row panels correspond to alternative fee indices, while
     different columns correspond to alternative CIP indices. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the state level.
