                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PLAYLISTING FAVORITES:
                MEASURING PLATFORM BIAS IN THE MUSIC INDUSTRY

                                             Luis Aguiar
                                           Joel Waldfogel
                                         Sarah B. Waldfogel

                                        Working Paper 29017
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w29017


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2021




This research had no external support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29017.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Luis Aguiar, Joel Waldfogel, and Sarah B. Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Playlisting Favorites: Measuring Platform Bias in the Music Industry
Luis Aguiar, Joel Waldfogel, and Sarah B. Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 29017
July 2021
JEL No. K21,L12,L82

                                          ABSTRACT

Platforms are growing increasingly powerful, raising questions about whether their power might
be exercised with bias. While bias is inherently difficult to measure, we identify a context within
the music industry that is amenable to bias testing. Our approach requires ex ante platform
assessments of commercial promise - such as the rank order in which products are presented -
along with information on eventual product success. A platform is biased against a product type if
the type attains greater success, conditional on ex ante assessment. Theoretical considerations and
voiced industry concerns suggest the possibility of platform biases in favor of major record
labels, and industry participants also point to bias against women. Using data on Spotify curators'
rank of songs on New Music Friday playlists in 2017, we find that Spotify's New Music Friday
rankings favor independent-label music, along with some evidence of bias in favor of music by
women. Despite challenges that independent-label artists and women face in the music industry,
Spotify's New Music curation appears to favor them.

Luis Aguiar                                      Sarah B. Waldfogel
Department of Business Administration            Department of Economics
University of Zurich                             University of Wisconsin­Madison
Plattenstrasse 14                                swaldfogel@wisc.edu
8032 Zurich
Switzerland
luis.aguiar@business.uzh.ch

Joel Waldfogel
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics
3-177 Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
jwaldfog@umn.edu
1       Introduction

In the past few decades, many markets have become dominated by platforms that enjoy
increasing returns, giving them power and the possibility of abusing it. Prominent examples
include Google, whose search algorithm is alleged to favor properties in which it has a finan-
cial interest (Edelman, 2011) and Amazon, which may use its internal data to disadvantage
its suppliers (Zhu and Liu, 2018). The music industry, too, is now dominated by a small
number of platforms, chiefly Spotify and Apple Music, whose power has invited scrutiny
about possible bias.1

At the same time, digitization has brought an explosion of new creative production; and
large libraries of new and old songs are now directly available to consumers. For example,
Spotify has over 40 million songs and adds about 40,000 per week. In this environment,
platforms such as Spotify and Apple Music ­ through the songs they choose to promote ­
have substantial power to determine which songs and artists succeed. The main mechanism
for promotion on these platforms is "playlists," which are both informative lists of songs as
well as utilities for listening to these songs. Playlists can have many followers, and placement
on influential lists has large impacts on artist and song success (Aguiar and Waldfogel,
forthcoming).

Both theoretical considerations, as well as perspectives of industry participants, provide
reasons for concern that such power might be exercised with bias (Hagiu and Jullien, 2011;
Bourreau and Gaudin, 2018). First, some upstream suppliers ­ the "major" record labels
­ have ownership stakes in Spotify, which could give Spotify a reason to provide more
advantageous promotion of their products. In parallel, representatives of independent record
labels have voiced concern about bias against their products (Dredge, 2016, 2015). Industry
participants have also raised concerns about platform roles in the music industry success of
women. Although it is not clear a priori why platforms would have a financial incentive to
engage in gender bias, there is reason for concern, particularly in the wake of the #metoo
movement.2
    1
      In 2019, both services together accounted for 55 percent of the global streaming subscription market.
Spotify alone accounted for 36 percent of the market. See https://musically.com/2019/12/09/report-
spotify-has-36-market-share-of-music-streaming-subs/
    2
      See Smith et al. (2018), and Flanagan (2018). Similar concerns have been raised in the film industry.
See, for example, Ellis-Petersen (2014).




                                                    1
Assessing these claims requires a method for measuring platform bias, which is inherently
difficult. One could test for bias simply if one knew which factors legitimately affected the
way in which platforms should rank products. Conditional on these factors, one could then
ask whether different suppliers received differential treatment from a platform (for example,
search Google rankings). In our context, one could ask whether different songs ­ by label
type or artist gender ­ received different rankings on playlists. For example, if two songs had
the same expected commercial promise, but the major-label song received a better ranking
on the playlist, then one could infer bias in favor of major label music. One might be
tempted to implement this by regressing songs' playlist ranks on characteristics reflecting
commercial promise as well as label type, interpreting the label type coefficient as bias. But
it is difficult to rule out the possibility that apparent bias reflects correlation with relevant
but unobserved factors. So we regard this "conditioning on observables" (COO) approach
as inherently unpromising, although we implement a version for comparison in section 5.3.

In the past few decades, researchers have developed alternative, outcome-based approaches
for measuring bias. Rather than asking whether different groups are treated differently after
controlling for available factors, these tests compare the ex post performance of different
groups assessed to be of equal promise. This approach has two information requirements.
First, one needs a measure of the decision maker's ex ante assessment of promise. Second,
one needs measures of ex post performance. To use a traditional offline example, if a hiring
firm gives applicants a score, then one can compare, say, the on-the-job performance of hired
men and women. If women outperform men who had received the same score at hiring,
then the firm's scoring procedure is biased against women. Researchers have applied this
approach to measuring bias in policing, bail setting, hiring, and journal publication, among
other contexts (Ayres and Waldfogel, 1994; Smart and Waldfogel, 1996; Hellerstein et al.,
1999; Knowles et al., 2001; Arnold et al., 2018; Card et al., 2020).

The way that Spotify operates some of its playlists satisfies the information requirements for
outcome-based bias testing, which surmounts the challenge inherent in the COO approach.
First, we can observe curators' ex ante assessments of songs' commercial promise: Spotify
maintains human-curated "New Music Friday" lists in each of the countries in which it
operates.3 Each week, Spotify curators rank songs on each country's list; and songs ranked
    3
         We use the terms "New Music" and "New Music Friday" interchangeably in the text to refer to these
lists.




                                                      2
higher on these lists ultimately stream more based, in part, on curators' ex ante assessments
of songs' commercial promise (Aguiar and Waldfogel, forthcoming). Second, we can also
observe ex post streaming: Spotify discloses daily streams for the top 200 songs by country.
These two ingredients allow bias tests that compare eventual success, relative to ex ante
curator assessments. Our contribution is the development of an implementable approach to
measuring platform bias, illustrated with measurement of possible platform bias in Spotify's
New Music playlists.

While our analysis focuses on a subset of the many playlists available at Spotify, we note
that the New Music Friday lists are of particular relevance. They have arguably become
"an important part of launching any new song" and the exposure they offer is often seen as
"career-changing," also by improving the likelihood of appearing on other important Spotify
playlists (Aswad, 2020). Because the New Music Friday lists serve as an important entry
point for new products and artists, their potential biases may affect not only which existing
products succeed, but also the type of products entering the market in the future.

Using data on 5,736 songs assigned to 14,747 top 20 entries on weekly New Music lists
in 26 countries during 2017, we find the following. First, songs with better New Music
ranks have more ex post streaming success on the platform, which provides evidence ­ to
a first approximation ­ that curators rank songs to maximize eventual streams of songs on
the playlists. Second, conditional on New Music ranks, songs on independent record labels
stream less than songs on major record labels. We find a similar result by gender, although
the gender differential in ex post streaming arises only for songs that curators rank outside
the top 10. Hence, despite concerns about bias against independent-labels and women, these
results indicate that independent music, and music by women, receive better ranks than their
eventual on-platform streaming performance seems to warrant.4 Independent music receives
an average boost of about 2 ranks, while music by women receives an average boost of 1.4
ranks. Third, the degree of bias implied by the outcome-based tests differs systematically
from the amount implied by a conditioning-on-observables regression of New Music ranks on
song types and available predictors of commercial promise, reinforcing our concern about the
adequacy of conditioning on observables. Fourth, our bias results do not appear to be driven
by differential promotion by label type or artist gender. Finally, we estimate the relative
   4
     We refer to "songs by women" rather than "songs by female artists" because we test whether an artist's
perceived gender, not their biological sex, affects how the platform treats them.




                                                    3
weights that curators apply to independent-label music and music by women, relative to their
respective complements: Curators behave as if they maximized weighted streams, where the
weights are 40 percent higher for independent-label music, and 10 percent higher for music
by women. We conclude that Spotify New Music playlist rankings use the platform's power
to promote music from independent record labels and, to a lesser extent, women; and we
suggest that ­ with access to data ­ our approach is applicable to other platform contexts.

The paper proceeds in five sections after the introduction. Section 2 provides background on
playlists and possible reasons for concern about bias. We also place this work in context of
the relevant existing literatures. Section 3 presents a simple model of the curator's ranking
decisions in which curators maximize the weighted sums of streams for different types of
music, and unequal weights reflect bias. Section 4 describes the data, and Section 5 presents
results, including both direct evidence on the existence of bias and measures of the welfare
weights curators attach to independent vs major music and music by women vs men. Section
6 concludes.




2        Background

2.1        Promotion, Playlists, and Digitization

Digitization has given rise to a large number of new music products as well as large gains
in welfare from products that would otherwise not have been made available to consumers.5
Increasingly, however, consumer discovery of new products depends on a few platform op-
erators. Prior to digitization, success depended on decisions of which songs to promote on
radio, made by program directors at thousands of independently owned radio stations and
at thousands of independently-owned record stores. Promotion on radio, and availability in
record stores, have long been understood to be valuable. As a result, record labels had a
long history of compensating radio stations for airing their songs, sometimes illegally in the
form of "payola" (Nayman, 2012).

With the rise of Spotify and Apple Music, both promotion and distribution now occur
through streaming platforms, which simultaneously play the roles previously played by both
    5
        The discussion of playlists in this section draws on Aguiar and Waldfogel (forthcoming).



                                                       4
radio stations and record stores. While platforms passively accept essentially all new music,
platforms more consequentiallly decide which songs to feature on playlists. Playlists are
lists of songs displayed to users, and they promote music in two ways. First, playlists are
potentially informative lists of songs. Second, they are utilities for listening to music. A
user can click on a playlist button and then be served the songs on the playlist, in either
random or ranked order. Spotify users can choose to "follow" playlists, which causes the
lists to appear on users' home screens. At Spotify, any user is free to create playlists, which
any other user can follow. Despite free entry into playlist creation, the widely followed lists
are controlled by Spotify. Of the top 1,000 playlists on Spotify according to the number of
followers, 866 of these are controlled by Spotify, and their cumulative followers account for
90 percent of the followers of these 1,000 lists.6

Playlists take two broad forms, curated and algorithmic. The Global Top 50 simply algo-
rithmically includes the top 50 streaming songs from the previous day. While the Global
Top 50 is the same for all users, other algorithmic playlists such as "Discover Weekly" are
customized to individual users. The New Music playlists that we study in this paper, by
contrast, are curated by individuals who decide which songs to include on the lists; and they
are controlled by Spotify employees, and each New Music list is the same for all of its users.
These lists focus on newly released music that curators find notable and wish to bring to
users' attention.

With a total number of 9 million followers across the 26 countries included in our analysis,
the New Music Friday lists rank 7th in the most followed Spotify lists on the platform.
During 2017, curators added 50 new songs to each country's New Music list per week,
and songs remained on these lists for seven days. As Aguiar and Waldfogel (forthcoming)
document, playlist inclusion decisions have large impacts on streaming. The higher that
curators rank songs on the New Music Friday playlists, the more likely the songs eventually
appear on the top 200 streaming songs, and about half of this effect appears causal; the rest
reflects curators' predictive ability. As we discuss further in Section 5, curators give more
favorable ranks to songs that they correctly predict will become successful. While the effect
is substantial for top-ranked songs, it is negligible for songs that curators rank outside the
top 20.
   6
    These calculations are based on the top 1,000 playlists listed at Chartmetric's playlist ranking (https:
//app.chartmetric.com/playlist-list/spotify) on November 7, 2020.




                                                     5
Policy makers and industry observers have demonstrated growing concerns about platform
behavior, including concerns about biased exercise of their power. Perhaps the most promi-
nent example of this arose in 2017 when the European Commission fined Google $2.7 billion
for delivering biased search results which favored its own properties (Scott, 2017). Financial
relationships between platforms and products among those they promote arises not only
at Google but also at Spotify. The major record labels own substantial shares of Spotify:
In 2008 they collectively owned 18 percent of Spotify; by 2018 this had fallen to about 6
percent.7

Music industry participants have concerns about the possibility of financial influence on pro-
motion decisions, even apart from incentive issues arising from ownership stakes. According
to Dredge (2015), independent record labels "worry that major labels will start putting more
pressure on Spotify to include more of their songs, while others note that some independent
creators of popular playlists are hoping to charge money to add tracks." A few years later,
the concern about payola was reinforced when Spotify CEO Daniel Ek indicated, in a 2019
earnings call, that Spotify had found "a way to charge record companies to pay to promote
their artists direct to their fans on our platform without p**sing off our users too much"; and
in October of 2019 Spotify announced that labels could "pay to have their artists promoted
to targeted fans within the Spotify ecosystem via a `Brand New Music For You' pop-up
visual ad" (Ingham, 2019). In 2020 Spotify announced a `Discovery Mode' for artists in
which their songs would be featured more in personalized listening sessions in exchange for
a lower royalty (Stassen, 2020). While neither of these Spotify innovations directly affects
placement on the New Music lists studied in this paper, they may fuel industry concerns
about bias.

Other observers raise concerns about possible gender bias. For example, Smith et al. (2018)
reports that of "600 popular songs on the Billboard Hot 100 year end charts from 2012 to
2017," it is "suspicious" that "women comprised just 22.4% of artists and 12.3% of songwrit-
ers." A widely read journalistic account (Pelly, 2018) reported, based on monitoring some
popular Spotify playlists (including Today's Top Hits, New Music Friday, Rock This, Rap-
Caviar, Hot Country, and ¡Viva Latino!), that many were "staggeringly male-dominated."
Concerns about gender issues in recorded music are also reflected by events surrounding re-
marks of Recording Academy President Neil Portnow after the 2018 Grammy awards. Asked
   7
       See Ingham (2018).



                                              6
about gender imbalances in the awards, he indicated that women needed to "step up." This
attracted criticism, and he resigned in 2019 (Flanagan, 2018).



2.2    Existing Evidence

This paper contributes to two existing literatures. First, there is a growing body of work on
possible platform bias. Hagiu and Jullien (2011), Bourreau and Gaudin (2018), and Belle-
flamme and Peitz (2018) provide theoretical rationales for platform bias. On the empirical
side, Edelman (2011) explores whether Google biases its search results in favor of its own
properties, and Zhu and Liu (2018) study whether Amazon enters the markets for products
established by its marketplace vendors. Hunold et al. (2020) show that travel platforms rank
hotels less favorably if the hotel charges less off the platform. A related literature is con-
cerned with gender bias in particular: Lambrecht and Tucker (2019) investigate the role of
algorithms in possible gender bias of ad targeting. Datta et al. (2015) use field experiments
to document that user behavior and characteristics such as gender affect the ads the user is
shown. We extend this literature with direct test for platform bias.

Second, playlists are a form of product recommendation made more important by the large
increase in the number of new products brought forth by digitization. Hence, this work is also
related to both work on the long tail of new creative products (Anderson, 2006; Brynjolfsson
et al., 2003; Aguiar and Waldfogel, 2018), as well as work on product recommendations,
reviews, and product discovery (Sorensen, 2007; Reinstein and Snyder, 2005; Forman et al.,
2008; Duan et al., 2008; Datta et al., 2018).




3     A Model of Playlist Rankings

We now introduce a model of curator playlist rank determination in order to guide our
empirical work by providing both testable predictions and an explicit way to define and
measure bias.

Consider a playlist curator who decides which songs to add to the lists, and in which order.
We assume that songs differ in their likeability, which we define as the tendency for people,
once exposed, to desire further engagement with the song. Playlists provide exposure, and


                                                7
positions higher on the list provide more exposure. Define lj as the likeability of song j , and
suppose that the amount of exposure a song receives depends on its playlist rank r according
to AeBr , where A > 0 and B < 0. Then the expected streams eventually received by song
j when it is placed at rank r is given by s(j, r) = lj AeBrj . Total expected streams for the
ranked songs are given by S = s(j, r) = lj AeBrj , where the summation occurs over the
playlisted songs. A curator maximizing listening to playlisted songs would rank chosen songs
according to their likeability.

While we postulate playlist stream maximization as the curator's rationale for ranking songs
already chosen for the list, a curator can choose songs for list inclusion with other rationales
in mind. The curator might view the 50-song list as a bundle whose appeal depends on more
than the songs' individual attributes. Thus, for example, a curator might include only one
track from popular artist's newly released album, even if its second or third most appealing
tracks were more "likeable" than other songs chosen for the playlist. We can distinguish
between rationales for including songs on the list and the rationale for the ranking. Even
if a curator does not include all of the most likeable songs on the list, the maximization of
streams of the songs on the list entails ranking songs from most to least likeable. A curator
seeking to maximize listening would rank listed songs according to their likeability. That is,
if l1 > l2 , then l1 AeB + l2 Ae2B > l1 Ae2B + l2 AeB . In words, expected streams are maximized
by granting more exposure to more likeable songs.

We can augment the above framework to accommodate possible bias by allowing the curator
to attach different weights to different types of music.8 We define bias as a positioning
that deviates from stream maximization.9 For example, if the curator attaches different
weights to major- and independent-label music, then the curator's maximand becomes W =
      lj AeBrj +         lj AeBrj , which can be written more succinctly as:
j M                j I




                                    W =           [(1 -  I ) +  I  ]lj AeBrj ,                          (1)
                                          j M I



where  I is an indicator for independent-label songs, M is the set of major-label songs, I is
   8
      Uncovering welfare weights underlying decision maker behavior has a long history. See Ahmad and
Stern (1984) and Ross (1984).
    9
      Our notion of platform bias recalls the definition of media bias in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), which
measures bias as the deviation in product positioning from the location on the political spectrum that would
maximize profits.



                                                        8
the set of independent-label songs, and  is the weight the curator attaches to streams of
independent-label songs, relative to streams of major-label songs. Maximization of expected
weighted streams, W , by the ranking of songs requires the curator to order songs by [(1 -
 I ) +  I  ]lj rather than by simply lj . Note that [(1 -  I ) +  I  ] equals 1 for major-label
songs and  for independent-label songs.

We have thus far described curators as maximizing weighted streams, but a platform facing
differing streaming costs across types of songs might instead maximize the net benefit of
streams, i.e. the benefit of generating streams less their costs. In that case  would have a
different interpretation. Rather than simply reflecting the differential benefit that curators
attach to, say, indie-label streams, the parameter  would instead reflect differential benefits
less costs. Hence, a value of  > 1 would reflect some combination of curators attaching
greater benefits to indie streams and the platform facing lower costs on those stream. While
different, this interpretation also reflects a form of bias. Given Spotify's prohibitions on
payment for playlist placement, we understand playlist ranking to reflect curators' editorial
predictions of song likeability. Hence, we interpret differential playlist rankings based on
costs as a form of bias as well.

This setup gives us a way to interpret the relationships among the New Music ranks chosen
by the curator, eventual streams, and song type. First, monotonic decline in realized streams
as songs are ranked worse is consistent with stream maximization by curators. Second, if
realized streams vary by song type, conditional on curator rank ­ for example between major
label and independent music ­ then we have evidence of bias. Moreover, we can identify the
degree of bias ( ).

Suppose we see an independent-label song at rank r streaming less than a major-label song
that is ranked one place worse, at r + 1. We can rationalize this ranking as one that
maximizes weighted streams with a weight  that the curator attaches to independent-label
music. Figure 1 illustrates this with a stylized pattern of average streams by rank and label
status. In the Figure, average streams for independent-label songs ranked 2 (s(I, 2)) fall short
of average streams for major-label songs at rank 3 (s(M, 3)). We can rationalize this pattern
of average streams by rank and song type as one that maximizes weighted streams if curators
value independent streams more highly than major-label streams, or that s(I, 2) > s(M, 3).
                                                             s(M,r+1)
More generally, we obtain a lower-bound on  from:  >           s(I,r)
                                                                      .



                                               9
We could satisfy this inequality with an arbitrarily large value of  . To pin down a finite
estimate of  , we also need an upper bound. A second condition on the curator's weight,
also illustrated in Figure 1, is that the weight on independent streams ( ) cannot be so large
that weighted streams of independent songs ranked 2 exceed streams of major-label songs
ranked 1. That is, the upper bound on  is defined by s(I, 2) < s(M, 1) or, more generally,
              s(M,r)
that  <      s(I,r+1)
                      .

In short, we have upper and lower bounds on the weight the curator attaches to independent-
label music based on the expected streaming success of major and independent music at
adjacent ranks:


                                      s(M, r + 1)     s(M, r)
                                                  <<             .                        (2)
                                        s(I, r)      s(I, r + 1)

We obtain similar conditions when considering the possibility of curators attaching different
weights to songs by women and men. We can econometrically estimate  by obtaining
the expected streams by rank and song type, then choosing a value of  to minimize the
magnitude of the inequality violations, and we implement this in Section 5.5.

Although this method for measuring bias is built around features of our music-industry
context, it is worth noting that the basic approach could be applied in other platform areas.
For example, Google's organic search results are supposed to be ranked according to the
quality of the link, reflecting users' tendencies to click through and to stay at the linked
page. Conditional on their order in the search results, if links to Google's own pages had
fewer, or less successful clicks, that could be interpreted as pro-Google bias.10



3.1       Testing for Bias

One way to test for bias is to estimate the parameter  in the foregoing model and check
whether it deviates from unity. We will do this, but it is also useful to pursue a direct
measurement of bias via our outcome-based approach.

As discussed in the introduction, one could try to measure bias, using the conditioning-on-
observables (COO) approach, by regressing ranks on factors predictive of curator likeability
  10
       See Varian (2009) for a discussion of search auctions.


                                                       10
assessments along with, say, a label type indicator. Although there are some available
observables ­ such as artist past streaming success ­ that are predictive of song success,
it is difficult to rule out the possibility that unobservable song characteristics predictive of
success are correlated with song characteristics of interest such as label type or artist gender.

Our preferred outcome-based approach avoids these concerns. While neither likeability (lj )
nor the degree of exposure associated with each rank (AeBrj ) is observable, realized average
streams ­ the empirical analog of expected streams ­ for each rank are observable. That
is, expected streams s(j, r) for each rank can be measured based on realized averages. This
generates both a way to see whether curators are maximizing streams and a way to measure
bias. If curators are maximizing expected streams, then we should see curators rank-ordering
songs by likeability. We do not observe likeability, but we do observe its consequence, realized
streams; and, as we document below, we see higher realized streams for songs ranked better.

Interpreting this as evidence that curators rank order by likeability is complicated by the
possibility that playlist position may reflect not only curators' assessments of likeability but
also a causal influence of playlist ranks on eventual streams. In the extreme, the entire rela-
tionship between ranks and eventual streaming could be the causal influence of the exposure
associated with the rank, and lower streams for songs with worse ranks might not provide
evidence about curator ordering based on likeability. If all songs were equally likeable, then
realized streams would still decline as rank worsened simply because of exposure. Aguiar
and Waldfogel (forthcoming) document that songs better ranked on the New Music playlists
experience more streaming success but ­ importantly ­ that only about half of the raw rela-
tionship between rank and streaming success is causal. This provides evidence that curators
allocate the more commercially promising (likeable) songs to better playlist positions and,
in turn, indicates that curator maximize listening, to a first approximation. Beyond that,
differential realized streams, conditional on curators' ex ante assessments ­ the New Music
ranks ­ are evidence of bias.11

The outcome-based test avoids the need to find sufficient measures of likeability to circumvent
the problem of potentially correlated unobservables. Implementing the OB test requires
information on the curator's ex ante likeability assessments. While it is generally challenging
  11
     In addition to systematic evidence of the rank-streams relationship, we can also point to curator claims
that they rank songs according to predicted promise. According to Spotify's Head of Global Hits, "We
highlight the songs that will probably get the most streams at the top..." See Aswad (2020).



                                                     11
to know how commercially promising the curator assesses teach song to be, our context
provides us with such a measure through the rank that is assigned to each song included on
the New Music lists.

All of Spotify's playlists have ranks, but the New Music lists have the unique feature that
songs are given a rank when placed on the list; and this rank remains constant for the seven
days that songs remain on the lists. Other lists operate differently: A song enters a list at
some rank, and the rank can change repeatedly while the song remains on the list, often
for months. Hence, the New Music lists are well suited for implementing the outcome-based
approach. The associated limitation is that our results are specific to the curation decisions
for these lists and may not generalize to Spotify's playlist curation as a whole.

One important caveat is in order. Our approach tests for curatorial bias in choosing rankings,
taking consumer tastes as given. If listeners are biased against some type of music, then
catering to this taste by giving worse ranks to the sort of music that listeners dislike ­ even
if unfairly ­ will not register as bias in our test. Our approach does not test whether there is
bias in the environment. Rather, our test indicates whether curators' ranking decisions favor
or disfavor particular kinds of music, given listener preferences. We return to this theme in
the conclusion.




4        Data

The data for this study consist of the 14,747 top-20 entries on Spotify's New Music Friday
playlists, for 26 countries during the period from early April until the end of 2017.12 The
14,747 entries include 5,736 distinct songs. For each entry, we observe its New Music rank
in each country where it is included and the week when it was included. We also observe
four groups of variables related to the song. First, we observe measures of its streaming
success, in particular its daily Spotify streams, by country, during the 52 weeks following its
appearance on a New Music playlist, if it appeared in a country's daily top 200. Second, as
detailed below, we observe whether a song is on a major or an independent label, as well
as artist gender. Third, we observe some additional song characteristics, including artists'
past (2016) streams, as well as sonic characteristics (key signature, etc). Finally, we observe
    12
     We include only the top 20 New Music entries per country and week because Aguiar and Waldfogel
(forthcoming) document that New Music inclusion effects are negligible for songs ranked outside the top 20.


                                                    12
measures of song promotion at Spotify, in particular the other playlists on which a song
appears around the time it appears on a New Music list, as well as the numbers of followers
for each of those playlists. We are able to obtain these playlist variables for 4,067 songs
accounting for 12,366 playlist entries.

We also calculate artists' (previous-year) 2016 streams on Spotify, by country. Finally, we
observe numerous song characteristics, including beats per minute, key signature, whether
major or minor, and seven other characteristics of the songs measured on 100 point scales
(danceability, valence, energy, acousticness, instrumentalness, liveness, and speechiness).

Our data are drawn from three sources. The data on the New Music playlist entries, and the
data on song characteristics, are drawn from Spotontrack (https://www.spotontrack.com/).
The data on Spotify streams are from https://kworb.net/spotify/. Data on the songs'
playlist histories are from Chartmetric (https://www.chartmetric.com/).

We do additional work to create two variables of special interest for the study, whether a
song is released by a major record label and the gender(s) of a song's artist(s). We measure
whether a song is on a major record label according to whether the song is on a label we
have classified as major, according to information at Wikipedia label pages.13

We used a three-pronged approach to determine artist gender. First, we searched the
artist name on Musicbrainz, which provides genders for many individual artists. Second,
we checked the artist names against first name databases.14 If we lacked a Musicbrainz
match and the first name was attached to a gender with at least 90 percent probability,
we assigned that gender. We found the remaining artist genders by hand.15 We discard
songs when the genders of either of the first two listed artists is unknown. Assigning artist
gender is complicated by the fact that may artists are not individual but are instead groups
of people. In our main analysis we code a song as being by a woman if its sole artist is a
woman, or in the case of multiple artists, the first two artists or bands are either women or
   13
      We classify a label as major if its name includes any of the following names: Asylum, Atlantic, Capitol,
Epic, Interscope, Warner, Motown, Virgin, Parlophone, Republic, Big Machine, Sony, Polydor, Big Beat,
Def Jam, MCA, Universal, Astralwerks, WM, Tobago, RCA, Ultra Records, LLC, disco:wax, Island Records,
Spinnin' Records, Black Butter, Fueled By Ramen, WEA Latina, UMLE, Hollywood Records, Ariola, EMI,
b1, FFRR, Elektra France, WEA, Reprise, Arista, and Columbia.
   14
      We use the U.S. Social Security names database as well as the website https://gender-api.com, which
allows to determine gender based on a first name and covers non-US names.
   15
      To do this, we visited artists' Wikipedia pages, social media pages, and interviews and looked for artists'
pronouns. While the best measure of gender requires asking artists how they identify, our perception of the
artist's gender - what we can observe - is likely to be the same information that is available to Spotify.



                                                       13
mixed ("women or mixed").16

Table 1 provides sample statistics. Of the New Music entries in the data, 66 percent are
on major labels, and 21 percent are by women. Just over a third appear in the daily top
200 streaming data. Even assigning zero streams to songs not making the top 200, the
average streams per song is close to 1 million, and the average first-week streams measure is
70,000. The streams distribution is highly skewed: the median is zero, and the 75th percentile
measure 0.026 million streams. For the songs with the additional playlist data, the average
number of playlist followers that a sample song has at the time of its appearance on the New
Music list is 3.37 million. Of this total, 88 percent are for lists curated by Spotify, while 7
percent are on major-label-controlled playlists.




5        Empirical Results

This section presents empirical results, in five parts. First, we present evidence that curators
rank songs to maximize streams. Second, we provide the results of the outcome-based tests
for bias. Third, we compare the degree of rank bias implied by the OB test with the rank
bias implied by the inherently challenged COO approach. Fourth, we explore robustness
of the OB bias results to the time horizons for streams and to the inclusion of controls
for other playlist inclusion. Finally, we present estimated weights that curators attach to
independent-label music, and songs by women, relative to other music using the inequalities
approach in Section 3.



5.1      Curator Goals

The outcome-based test asks whether two songs that curators give the same initial assess-
ment ultimately experience similar degrees of success. Implementing the outcome-based test
requires both measures of ex post song success as well as measures of curators' assessments
of song likeability at the time of release. Streams provide a clear measures of song success,
    16
     In the appendix we explore the sensitivity of the gender results to three additional approaches. Our
most restrictive measure treats a song as a woman-only song only if its sole artist, or both entities (artists
or groups), are all women. We refer to this as the "women-only" measure. Less restrictive than our main
approach is a measure that deems the song to be by women if the first artist (or band) is a woman regardless
of the additional participants ("first artist woman"). Our most liberal measure classifies the song as by
women if either the first or second entity is a woman ("either artist woman"). See Figure B.1 and Table B.1.


                                                     14
and the songs' New Music ranks are curators' ex ante assessments. This runs the risk of
circularity. Curators' New Music ranks are, by assumption, reflections of their likeability
assessments. Relying on this approach requires evidence that curators assign New Music
ranks with stream maximization in mind. Fortunately, the relationship between curators'
New Music ranks and songs' subsequent success provides strong evidence that curators' order
songs to maximize streams. As depicted in Figure 2, songs that curators rank 1st have over
an 80 percent probability of appearing among the top 200 streamers, while songs ranked
5th have roughly a 50 percent probability; and those ranked 10th have about a 25 percent
probability. The log of eventual streams bears a similar monotonic relationship with curator
ranks.

Of course, the positive relationship between curators' ranks and eventual streaming success
reflects two distinct mechanisms. First, as Aguiar and Waldfogel (forthcoming) document,
there is a causal impact of New Music ranks on eventual streams, which presumably arises
from exposure. Even if songs did not differ in likeability (lj ), their eventual streaming
volumes would decline for worse ranks due simply to exposure differentials. But this causal
effect, as shown by the authors, explains only half of the magnitude of the difference between
the streaming success of the top-ranked and lower-ranked songs. The second mechanism is
simply prediction: Curators choose songs that they predict will be appealing to consumers,
so part of the relationship between curatorial ranks and streaming success arises from the
curators' higher ranking of more likeable songs. The fact that the causal impact of New Music
ranks delivers only half of the relationship between ranks and eventual streams means that
ranks also reflect curator prediction and, in particular, that curators order songs according
to their commercial prospects, or likeability.

We can also test whether curators rank songs according to likeability using data on song
characteristics predictive of commercial success. One such variable is the past (2016) streams
of songs by the artist whose song is currently on the New Music list. As Figure 3 shows, past
streams ­ both the share of songs whose artists had past streams in the top 200 and average
past log streams ­ decline essentially monotonically in current New Music ranks. That is,
curators give better ranks to songs whose artists have had more prior success, on average.

We take the evidence in Figures 2 and 3 to indicate that curators rank songs on the New
Music lists as if they were ­ broadly ­ trying to maximize eventual streams. We say "broadly"



                                                 15
because specific kinds of deviations from this pattern constitute bias.



5.2    The Outcome-Based Test for Bias

Our outcome-based bias test is literally a test for bias in curators' assignment of ranks:
Conditional on the rank assigned by a curator, does a song of one type stream more than
a song of another type? If so, then the song was ranked in a biased fashion. For example,
does a song by a woman need, on average, better prospects - measured, for us, by eventual
streaming success - to be granted the same New Music rank as a song by a man? We can
test this simply by comparing measures of streaming success for men and women, or major
and independent-label, songs that curators assign the same New Music rank.

Figures 4 and 5 compare streaming success of songs by label type and artist gender, respec-
tively, using two measures of streaming success: the share of songs appearing in the daily
top 200 in the country in which they appear on the New Music list, and observed log streams
(all streams for the days when the songs appear in the top 200). As Figures 4 and 5 show,
conditional on New Music rank, independent-label songs ­ and songs by women ­ have less
streaming success. Moreover, the differential streaming averages prevail throughout the top
20 for label type, while they are more pronounced outside of the top 10 playlisted songs for
gender. These figures provide our first glimpse of the paper's main results. Conditional on
how likeable curators assess a song to be, independent-label music, and music by women,
becomes less successful. This is consistent with curator biases in favor of independent-label
music and, to a more limited extent, music by women.

We perform the basic outcome-based tests via regressions of streaming success on New Music
rank variables and song type indicators. In particular, we estimate the following equation:



                   sjc = Rankic + indie j
                                        indie
                                              + women j
                                                      women
                                                            + µc + jc ,                   (3)


where the dependent variable sjc is a measure of streaming success for song j in country
c. We consider two measures of streaming success. The first one is a binary measure of
whether song j appears among the daily top 200 streaming songs in country c at some
point after entering the New Music playlist. As a second measure of streaming success, we


                                             16
use the logarithm of the cumulative streams obtained by song j in country c after entering
                    indie     women
the New Music list. j     and j     are indicator variables equal to 1 if song j is on an
independent label or by a woman, respectively. Rankjc is the rank obtained by song j on
the New Music Friday list of country c, µc are country fixed effects, and jc is an error term.
We alternatively use rank fixed effects instead of including the New Music rank linearly in
some of our specifications.

Table 2 provides the results of estimating equation (3). The first two columns include
indicators for New Music ranks as well as country indicators. The latter two columns repeat
the exercise using the New Music rank linearly, rather than flexibly with rank indicators.
Both songs by women and songs on independent record labels receive fewer streams ­ by both
measures ­ than their men and major-label counterparts. The effect is larger for label type
than gender. These results, along with Figures 4 and 5, indicate bias in favor of independent
labels and songs by women.17

The linear specifications in the last two columns allow us to measure the average magnitude
of the bias, in terms of rank, via the ratio of the indicator coefficient () and the linear New
Music rank coefficient ( ). For example ­ based on the last column ­ independent label
songs have 0.962 fewer log streams, conditional on their ranks. Being ranked one worse is
associated with 0.488 fewer log streams. Hence, the differential treatment of independent
label songs is equivalent to favoritism in rank assignment of 1.97 ranks (0.962/0.488). The
analogous rank differential for gender is 1.40 (0.682/0.488).

Table 2 and Figures 4 and 5 aggregate countries into single coefficients. According to Spo-
tify, the New Music playlists are "curated by our playlist editors - genre, lifestyle, and
culture specialists with diverse backgrounds from all around the world." Moreover, Spo-
tify reports having curation teams "in every country."18 It is possible that curation for the
respective countries' New Music lists exhibits different degrees of bias. To explore this we
estimate country-specific coefficients on gender and label status, using our binary measure
of streaming success as the dependent variable (appearing in the top 200). We find strong
evidence against coefficient constancy for label status (p-value < 0.000001) and weaker evi-
  17
      In unreported regressions that allow gender and label type effects to differ for songs ranked 11-20,
gender effects are insignificant in the top 10 using the share of songs streaming in the top 200.
   18
      See      https://artists.spotify.com/help/article/new-music-Friday                   and    https://
www.forbes.com/sites/dannyross1/2020/03/02/spotifys-head-of-music-explains-playlisting/.




                                                   17
dence against constancy for gender (p-value = 0.014).19 The left panel of Figure 6 shows that
the pro-indie bias in the aggregate coefficient is driven most strongly by Norway, Finland,
Great Britain, the United States, and Spain. The right panel of Figure 6 shows that the
degree of gender bias is more similar across countries. Here, Chile, Germany, the United
States, Canada, and Great Britain have the largest bias in favor of women. While we reject
coefficient constancy for label type in both tests and in one of two tests by gender, the gender
coefficients are more similar across country than the label type coefficients. In that sense,
the treatment of gender is closer to a platform-wide strategy.



5.3     Comparing Outcome-Based and Conditioning on Observable
        Tests

With the shortcomings of the conditioning on observables approach in mind, we can run a
regression of New Music rank on factors plausibly associated with the ranks that curators
would assign, including measures of past (2016) streaming by the artist, as well as song
characteristics. Then we can compare measures of rank bias from the COO approach with
measures of rank bias implied by our preferred estimates from outcome-based tests (in Table
2). In particular, we estimate the following equation:



                    Rankjc = Xj  +  indie j
                                          indie
                                                +  women j
                                                         women
                                                               + µc + jc ,                        (4)


where Xj is a vector of song characteristics, including country-specific past log streams (and
an indicator for zero past streams), song characteristics, including whether the song is of
US-origin, the number of beats per minute, seven characteristics of the songs measured on
100 point scales (described above), whether the song is in a major or a minor key, and the
song's key signature. We report the results of estimating equation (4) in the first column of
Table 3; and it yields a coefficient of -0.758 for songs by women (indicating pro-woman bias)
and a coefficient of 1.074 for independent label music (indicating an anti-independent label
bias). The remaining columns present estimates of rank bias implict in the outcome-based
test calculated from Table 2. The lower panel presents tests of equality between the rank
  19
    Using the log streams measure, we reject constancy for label type (p-value < 0.000001) but not for
gender (p-value=0.108).



                                                 18
bias estimated in the first specification and the rank biases in the last two columns. That
                               
is, we test whether  =         
                                  separately for label type and gender. We reject equality of the
bias for label type using both specifications and in one of two gender tests. We take this
fairly systematic rejection as empirical evidence, in addition to the a priori concerns, of the
shortcomings with the conditioning on observables approach.



5.4       Outcome-Based Test: Robustness

While the outcome-based approach obviates the concern about unobserved likeability de-
terminants correlated with label type or gender, the OB approach has a vulnerability of its
own. The OB test reveals, for example, that independent label music ultimately streams
less, conditional on New Music rank. We interpret this as bias, but it is also possible that,
conditional on New Music rank, independent label music receives less promotion than major
label music, which could explain lower levels of subsequent streams. We have two ways to
address this concern.

First, we can look at initial streams ­ while the songs are on the New Music Friday list ­
rather than eventual streams during the year following appearance on a New Music list. If
playlist placement is responsive to streaming success, then we would expect a feedback loop
between streaming, conditional on current playlist placement, and subsequent playlist place-
ment. Eventual streams would therefore reflect not only initial New Music rank and listener
response to the songs but also intervening promotion decisions to place the songs on more or
less followed playlists, according to ongoing consumer response. This logic suggests that an
outcome based test using eventual streaming, conditional on initial conditions, runs the risk
of conflating later promotion with consumer response. A test using the streaming outcomes
from the first week of post-New Music list streaming should be uncontaminated by feedbacks
between streaming success and resulting - endogenous - promotion. Table 4 reproduces the
analysis in Table 2, using measures of initial streams rather than eventual streaming success.
Results are nearly identical, suggesting that our estimates may be interpreted as the result
of bias rather than differential promotion.

Second, we can use the playlist follower data to directly control for additional promotional
effects on the Spotify platform.20 At the time a song is added to a New Music list, the
  20
       While our playlists follower measures describe promotion on the Spotify platform, two of the measures ­


                                                      19
song can also be added to other Spotify playlists specializing in new music. We observe all
of the playlists to which the song is added as of two days after its inclusion on the New
Music list, and we tabulate the numbers of followers on these lists. We do this separately
for Spotify playlists controlled by Spotify itself, by the major record labels, and by other
entities collectively. Because these playlist data are only available for a subsample, the first
two columns of Table 5 repeat the basic outcome-based test regressions from the first two
columns of Table 2. The third and fourth columns add the initial playlist follower measures.
While the initial followers measures are strongly significant, the bias coefficients remain large
and significant.21 The last four columns of Table 5 reproduce the analysis using initial rather
than eventual streams, with very similar results.

The evidence presented above indicates that Spotify's New Music ranks are biased; in par-
ticular, they favor music from independent labels and, to a lesser extent, music by women.



5.5     Curator Welfare Weights

The evidence in the foregoing section ­ that eventual success declines monotonically with the
songs' ranks ­ shows that curators rank songs, broadly, to maximize streams. But we also
see systematic deviations from stream maximization, in that songs from independent labels
and by women receive better ranks than their eventual streaming success warrants. We can
rationalize this behavior inside the stream maximizing framework by allowing curators to
have different weights by label type or gender; and we can uncover these weights.

                                                            s(M,r +1)         s(M,r)
Starting with the inequalities from Section 3 ­               s(I,r)
                                                                        <<   s(I,r+1)
                                                                                        ­ the main implemen-
tation question is how to estimate the expected streams conditional on song type and rank,
e.g. s(j  M, r) or s(j  I, r). We implement this by averaging across all of the country
weeks in our data, to calculate s(j  M, r) and s(j  I, r) for r = 1, . . . , 20, as well as the
analogous measures for by gender. We then find the  that minimizes the violations of these
two inequalities:

s(I, r) > s(M, r + 1) and s(I, r + 1) < s(M, r)
those for major labels and others ­ reflect promotional efforts by entities that operate outside of the platform.
Hence, including these controls may also account for off-platform promotional activities. If promotion outside
of the Spotify platform affects streams in ways not directly correlated with our in-platform promotion
measures, then it is possible that our outcome-based test results will be biased.
   21
      We obtain similar results if we condition on playlist followers as of the end of the week the songs are
on the New Music lists.

                                                       20
We implement this for both label type and gender, and we do so using four measures of
streaming success employed above (appearance in the top 200 and log streams, for eventual
and initial streaming). Table 6 reports the resulting welfare weight estimates, along with
standard errors produced by 100 bootstrap replications in which we resample on country
weeks in producing the s(., r) measures.

Depending on the measure used, the weight on independent streams, relative to major-label
streams, is between 1.40 (se = 0.05) and 1.45 (0.05). That is, curators appear to rank songs
as if they attached 40-45 percent more weight to independent-label than to major-label
songs. The weights on music by women, relative to men, range from 1.08 (0.03) to 1.17
(0.04), indicating that curators rank songs as if they attached about 10-15 percent more
weight to streams for songs by women.




6    Conclusion

Large sectors of the economy have come to be dominated by platforms whose decisions can
affect the fortunes of their suppliers and consumers. We examine the exercise of this sort of
power by Spotify, the largest of the platforms serving the recorded music industry. We pro-
pose and implement an outcome-based test for bias that avoids the challenges of traditional
"conditioning on observables" approaches to bias measurement but requires information on
platform assessments of product quality along with measures of eventual product success.
In our context, playlist ranks are the ex ante measure; and eventual streaming success is the
ex post success measure.

We find that Spotify's New Music curators' ranking decisions largely reflect stream maxi-
mization but deviate from this basic goal by ranking independent music and songs by women
more highly than the work's eventual streaming success warrants. While we do find evidence
of bias, the apparent bias that we document is at odds with the allegations of industry crit-
ics. Despite substantial major-label ownership stakes, Spotify does not appear to bias its
New Music rankings toward the majors. And despite industry criticism about label type
and gender bias, Spotify's New Music curators appear to favor these groups.

While our study covers only the New Music Friday lists, we highlight that these can also
affect the likelihood of appearing on other important Spotify playlists (Aswad, 2020) and

                                             21
play an important role in the discovery and success of new products (Aguiar and Waldfogel,
forthcoming). Their biases may affect not only which existing products succeed on the
platform, but also the type of products that will be brought forth in the future. Even if the
New Music lists favor independent-label music and music by women, however, we cannot
rule out that other playlists, and other promotional activity at Spotify, favor different sorts
of music.

Still, if the results are correct, they beg the question of why Spotify would exercise bias in
this fashion. We offer two pieces of speculation. First, Spotify may be responsive to the
criticism ­ from independent labels and about treatment of women in the industry ­ that we
cite above. This might lead them to actively promote work from the groups voicing concerns.
Spotify's concern about gender issues led them to partner with Smirnoff on the "Smirnoff
Equalizer," an app that linked to users' Spotify accounts to analyze "the percentage of
music you listen to created by men versus women" (Bein, 2018). Second, to the extent that
promotion of independent label music de-concentrates market power from Spotify's major-
label suppliers, promotion of independent-label music may create a future environment more
favorable for streaming rate negotiations.

Although our results are specific to one context ­ the New Music Friday lists at Spotify ­
our approach may have broader applicability. Our approach for measuring an agent's bias
requires the agent's ex ante assessment of a product's commercial prospects, along with
ex post measures of eventual commercial success. These elements are widely available in
platform contexts. Platforms often display product options in some ranked order, descending
in ostensible usefulness to consumers. Examples include Google search results, airline and
hotel options are travel sites, and Marketplace vendors at Amazon. Conditional on the order
in which options are ranked, do consumers ultimately purchase different types of products
(for example, those with financial connections to the platforms) at different rates? With
access to relevant data, our approach would allow easily implemented tests for bias.

An important last word is in order. Our finding that Spotify's New Music ranks display
some bias in favor of independent label artists and women does not mean that these groups
face a generally welcoming environment in the recorded music industry. There are reasons
for concern that women are underrepresented among successful artists. Streams for music
by women account for roughly a quarter of total streams, a share that is low compared with



                                              22
the shares of women in listening, among musicians, and ­ of course ­ in the population as
a whole.22 Our findings indicate that Spotify's New Music playlist rankings do not appear
to compound the challenges women and independent label artists face in the recorded music
industry.




  22
     The US Bureau of Labor Statistics reported in 2020 that 31.8 percent of musicians and singers were
women. See https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.htm. On June 12, 2021, everynoise.com reported that
44.1 percent of Spotify listeners were women, while 22.8 percent of streams were of music by women. See
https://everynoise.com/gender tldr.html.


                                                  23
References
Aguiar, L. and J. Waldfogel (2018): "Quality predictability and the welfare benefits
 from new products: Evidence from the digitization of recorded music," Journal of Political
 Economy, 126, 492­524.

------ (forthcoming): "Platforms, Power, and Promotion: Evidence from Spotify Playlists,"
  Journal of Industrial Economics.

Ahmad, E. and N. Stern (1984): "The theory of reform and Indian indirect taxes,"
 Journal of Public economics, 25, 259­298.

Anderson, C. (2006): The long tail: Why the future of business is selling less of more,
 Hachette Books.

Arnold, D., W. Dobbie, and C. S. Yang (2018): "Racial bias in bail decisions," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 1885­1932.

Aswad, J. (2020): "Inside the Human Science of Spotify's New Music Friday Playlist," Vari-
 ety, https://variety.com/2020/music/news/spotify-new-music-friday-playlist-
 1234843453/, Dec 4.

Ayres, I. and J. Waldfogel (1994): "A market test for race discrimination in bail
 setting," Stanford Law Review, 987­1047.

Bein, K. (2018): "Test Your Gender Bias with Honey Dijon, Smirnoff & Spotify's Equalizer:
 Exclusive." Billboard Magazine, https://www.billboard.com/articles/news/dance/
 8224527/honey-dijon-smirnoff-spotify-equalizer-womens-month., March 2.

Belleflamme, P. and M. Peitz (2018): "Inside the engine room of digital platforms:
 Reviews, ratings, and recommendations," .

Bourreau, M. and G. Gaudin (2018): "Streaming platform and strategic recommenda-
 tion bias," .

Brynjolfsson, E., Y. Hu, and M. D. Smith (2003): "Consumer surplus in the dig-
 ital economy: Estimating the value of increased product variety at online booksellers,"
 Management Science, 49, 1580­1596.

Card, D., S. DellaVigna, P. Funk, and N. Iriberri (2020): "Are referees and editors
 in economics gender neutral?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 269­327.

Datta, A., M. C. Tschantz, and A. Datta (2015): "Automated experiments on ad
 privacy settings: A tale of opacity, choice, and discrimination," Proceedings on privacy
 enhancing technologies, 2015, 92­112.

Datta, H., G. Knox, and B. J. Bronnenberg (2018): "Changing their tune: How con-
 sumers' adoption of online streaming affects music consumption and discovery," Marketing
 Science, 37, 5­21.

Dredge, S. (2015): "10 things we learned from a day of indie labels talking digital mu-
 sic," The Guardian, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/10/things-
 we-learned-indie-labels-digital, April 10.


                                            24
------ (2016):   "Music curation and playlists:  the new music battleground
  (#midem)," Musically, https://musically.com/2016/06/05/music-curation-and-
  playlists-the-new-music-battleground-midem/, June 5.

Duan, W., B. Gu, and A. B. Whinston (2008): "Do online reviews matter? ­ An
 empirical investigation of panel data," Decision support systems, 45, 1007­1016.

Edelman, B. (2011): "Bias in search results: Diagnosis and response," Indian JL & Tech.,
 7, 16.

Ellis-Petersen, H. (2014): "Gender bias in the film industry: 75% of blockbuster crews
 are male," The Guardian, https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/22/gender-
 bias-film-industry-75-percent-male, July 22.

Flanagan, A. (2018):      "Grammy President Neil Portnow To Step Down In
  2019." NPR.com, https://www.npr.org/sections/therecord/2018/06/01/615889769/
  grammy-president-neil-portnow-to-step-down-in-201, June 1.

Forman, C., A. Ghose, and B. Wiesenfeld (2008): "Examining the relationship be-
 tween reviews and sales: The role of reviewer identity disclosure in electronic markets,"
 Information systems research, 19, 291­313.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2010): "What drives media slant? Evidence from
 US daily newspapers," Econometrica, 78, 35­71.

Hagiu, A. and B. Jullien (2011): "Why do intermediaries divert search?" The RAND
 Journal of Economics, 42, 337­362.

Hellerstein, J. K., D. Neumark, and K. R. Troske (1999): "Wages, productiv-
 ity, and worker characteristics: Evidence from plant-level production functions and wage
 equations," Journal of labor economics, 17, 409­446.

Hunold, M., R. Kesler, and U. Laitenberger (2020): "Rankings of online travel
 agents, channel pricing, and consumer protection," Marketing Science, 39, 92­116.

Ingham, T. (2018):     "One Reason Why Spotify's Deals with the Major La-
  bels are Balanced on a Knife-Edge." Music Business Worldwide, https:
  //www.musicbusinessworldwide.com/one-reason-why-spotifys-deals-with-the-
  major-labels-rest-on-a-knife-edge/., November 13.

------ (2019): "Record Companies Can Now Pay Spotify to Promote Artists on
  the Platform Via Pop-up Music for You Alerts," Music Business Worldwide,
  https://www.musicbusinessworldwide.com/record-labels-can-now-pay-spotify-
  to-promote-artists-on-the-platform-via-pop-up-music-for-you-alerts/, Octo-
  ber 24.

Knowles, J., N. Persico, and P. Todd (2001): "Racial bias in motor vehicle searches:
 Theory and evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 109, 203­229.

Lambrecht, A. and C. Tucker (2019): "Algorithmic bias? An empirical study of
 apparent gender-based discrimination in the display of STEM career ads," Management
 Science, 65, 2966­2981.



                                           25
Nayman,    L. (2012):     "Rock 'n' Roll Payola:         Dick Clark and Alan
 Freed,"     In   These    Times,      https://inthesetimes.com/article/13100/
 rock n roll payola dick clark and alan freed, April 24.

Pelly, L. (2018): "Discover Weakly." The Baffler, https://thebaffler.com/latest/
 discover-weakly-pelly., June 4.

Reinstein, D. A. and C. M. Snyder (2005): "The influence of expert reviews on con-
 sumer demand for experience goods: A case study of movie critics," The journal of indus-
 trial economics, 53, 27­51.

Ross, T. W. (1984): "Uncovering regulators' social welfare weights," The RAND Journal
 of Economics, 152­155.

Scott, M. (2017): "Google Fined Record $2.7 Billion in E.U. Antitrust Ruling."
  New York Times, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/27/technology/eu-google-
  fine.html., June 27.

Smart, S. and J. Waldfogel (1996): "A citation-based test for discrimination at eco-
 nomics and finance journals," National Bureau of Economic Research.

Smith, S. L., M. Choueiti, and K. Pieper (2018): "Inclusion in the Recording Studio?
 Gender and Race/Ethnicity of Artists, Songwriters & Producers across 600 Popular Songs
 from 2012-2017," Annenberg Inclusion Initiative, http://assets.uscannenberg.org/
 docs/inclusion-in-the-recording-studio.pdf.

Sorensen, A. T. (2007): "Bestseller lists and product variety," The journal of industrial
  economics, 55, 715­738.

Stassen, M. (2020): "Spotify is Letting Record Labels Influence Personalized Recommen-
  dations So Long as they Pay for it in Royalties," Music Business Worldwide, https://
  www.musicbusinessworldwide.com/spotify-is-letting-record-labels-influence-
  personalized-recommendations-so-long-as-they-pay-for-it-in-royalties/,
  November 20.

Varian, H. R. (2009): "Online ad auctions," American Economic Review, 99, 430­34.

Zhu, F. and Q. Liu (2018): "Competing with complementors: An empirical look at
  Amazon. com," Strategic management journal, 39, 2618­2642.




                                           26
A   Figures and Tables




                 Figure 1: Theory Illustration.




                              27
                             Streaming Success and New Music Friday Rank
                             Share Streaming in Top 200                                                         Log of Streams
                                                                                                  12
                      .8


                                                                                                  10



                      .6
                                                                                                  8




                                                                            Log of Streams
   Share




                                                                                                  6
                      .4



                                                                                                  4


                      .2

                                                                                                  2




                      0                                                                           0
                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920




Figure 2: Share of Songs Streaming in Top 200 by New Music Friday Rank.




                           Past Streaming Success and New Music Friday Rank
                                 Share of Artists                                                           Log of 2016 Streams
                            Appearing in 2016's Top 200                                           12
                      .8



                      .7                                                                          10



                      .6
                                                                            Log of 2016 Streams




                                                                                                  8
   Share of Artists




                      .5


                                                                                                  6
                      .4



                      .3
                                                                                                  4


                      .2

                                                                                                  2
                      .1



                      0                                                                           0
                            1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920




                            Figure 3: Artist Past Success by New Music Friday Rank.




                                                                       28
                        Streaming Success and New Music Friday Rank
                                                                by Label Type
                          Share Streaming in Top 200                                                               Log of Streams
                 1                                                                               12




                                                                                                 10
                 .8



                                                                                                  8
Share of Songs




                                                                                Log of streams
                 .6


                                                                                                  6


                 .4

                                                                                                  4



                 .2
                                                                                                  2




                 0                                                                                0
                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20                              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20



                                                    Indie Label Song                                      Major Label Song




Figure 4: Song Success and New Music Friday Rank, by Label Type.




                        Streaming Success and New Music Friday Rank
                                                                   by Gender
                          Share Streaming in Top 200                                                               Log of Streams
                                                                                                 12
                 .8


                                                                                                 10



                 .6
                                                                                                  8
Share of Songs




                                                                                Log of streams




                                                                                                  6
                 .4



                                                                                                  4


                 .2

                                                                                                  2




                 0                                                                                0
                      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20                              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20



                                                       Song by Women                                         Song by Men




                 Figure 5: Song Success and New Music Friday Rank, by Gender.




                                                                           29
                                                                                                       indie
                                                                                                               coefficient




                                                                                  -.3
                                                                                        -.2
                                                                                              -.1
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                                                        .4


                                                                  N
                                                                    o
                                                            G F rwa
                                                             r
                                                           U eat inla y
                                                            ni B n
                                                              te r d
                                                                 d ita
                                                                   St in
                                                                      at
                                                                    S es
                                                                 Sw pa
                                                                     ed in
                                                                         e
                                                                     C n
                                                                 C hi
                                                                D ana le
                                                                  e d
                                                               C nm a
                                                                 ol a
                                                                   o rk
                                                            N Po mb
                                                             et rt ia
                                                                he ug
                                                                   rla al
                                                                  M nd
                                                                     ex s
                                                                        ic
                                                                M It o
                                                                  a a
                                                                G lay ly
                                                                  er si
                                                                    m a




                                                 country
                                                                       a
                                                              Si Tu ny
                                                                 ng rke
                                                                    ap y
                                                                  Ic or
                                                                    el e
                                                                       a
                                                                   Br nd
                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                             Indie Label Song




                                                             Ph Fr zil
                                                                     a
                                                             H ilipp nce
                                                               on i
                                                                  g ne
                                                                     K s
                                                                  T o
                                                               In aiwng
                                                                 do a
                                                                    n n
                                                                  Po esia
                                                                      la
                                                                         nd




30
                                                                                                    women
                                                                                                                coefficient
                                                                                  -.3
                                                                                        -.2
                                                                                              -.1
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                                                        .4




                                                            U G Ch
                                                             ni er il
                                                               te m e
                                                                  d an
                                                                     S y
                                                             G C tate
                                                              re an s
                                                                 at a
                                                                     Br da
                                                             N            ita
                                                               et             i
                                                                  he Ita n
                                                                      rla ly
                                                                    Ic nd
                                                                       el s
                                                                   Fi n    a
                                                                       nl d
                                                                           a
                                                              Ph S nd
                                                                  ili pa
                                                                C ppin in
                                                                   ol e
                                                                      om s
                                                                    F b
                                                                                                                                                                Outcome-Based Test by Country




                                                                 D ran ia
                                                                   e
                                                                In nm ce
                                                                   do a
                                                                       ne rk
     Figure 6: Outcome-Based Test, by Country.
                                                               Si Me sia
                                                 country




                                                                  ng xic
                                                                      ap o
                                                                    Ta or
                                                                         iw e
                                                                     B an
                                                                  Sw raz
                                                                        e il
                                                                                                                                             Song by Women




                                                              H No den
                                                                on rw
                                                                    g a
                                                                  Po Kon y
                                                                       rtu g
                                                                     T ga
                                                                 M urk l
                                                                    al ey
                                                                        a
                                                                    Po ysia
                                                                          la
                                                                             nd
                                                  Table 1: Descriptive Statistics.

                                                                     Full Sample (N = 14, 747)   Sub-Sample (N = 12, 366)

                                                                     Mean       Std. Dev.        Mean       Std. Dev.
     New Music Friday (NMF) Rank                                     10.45        5.77           10.30        5.77
     Song by Women                                                    0.21        0.41            0.22        0.41




31
     Major Label Song                                                0.66         0.47           0.68         0.47
     Appears in Daily Top 200                                         0.35        0.48            0.35        0.48
     Streams                                                          0.96        5.64            0.93        5.74
     First Week Streams                                               0.07        0.37            0.07        0.40
     Spotify Playlists Followers, on NMF Add Day                                                 2.96         8.74
     Major-Label Playlists Followers, on NMF Add Day                                             0.23         0.93
     Other Playlists Followers, on NMF Add Day                                                   0.18         0.72
     
        Note: Streams and playlist followers are expressed in millions.
     Table 2: Outcome-Based Tests for Bias: Does Indie and Music by Women Stream
     Differently Conditional on Initial Conditions? 

                                    (Top 200) (Log Streams)           (Top 200) (Log Streams)
                                    Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.            Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.
                                                                               
      Indie Label Song                -0.075      -0.855                -0.082      -0.962
                                     (0.007)     (0.083)               (0.007)     (0.085)
      Song by Women                   -0.035      -0.659                -0.036      -0.682
                                     (0.007)     (0.088)               (0.007)     (0.090)
                                                                               
      New Music Friday Rank                                             -0.038      -0.488
                                                                       (0.001)     (0.007)
      Rank Fixed Effects                                                                    




32
      Country Fixed Effects
      R2                              0.359            0.363            0.334            0.325
      No. of Obs.                     14747            14747            14747            14747
      
       Dependent variables are measures of streaming success. Specifications (Top 200) measure
       streaming success with a binary measure of whether song j appears among the daily Top 200
       streaming songs in country c during the year after entering the New Music Friday playlist. Spec-
       ifications (Log Streams) use the logarithm of cumulated streams for song j in country c during
       the year after entering the New Music Friday playlist. Coefficients on independent label and
       songs by women show the degree of differential streaming success, conditional on initial New
       Music Friday rank assigned by curators. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
      
       Significant at the 10% level.
      
        Significant at the 5% level.
      
          Significant at the 1% level.
Table 3: Implied bias in conditioning-on-observables test compared
with outcome-based test 

                                New Music        Appears in       Log of
                               Friday Rank        Top 200        Streams
                                Coef./s.e.       Coef./s.e.      Coef./s.e.
 Indie Label Song                  1.074           -2.177          -1.970
                                  (0.102)         (0.190)         (0.182)
 Song by Women                     -0.758          -0.967          -1.398
                                  (0.116)         (0.199)         (0.186)
 R2                                 0.116           0.334          0.325
 No. of Obs.                       14494           14747           14747
 Bias Difference: Indie                            3.251           3.044
 P-value                                           0.000           0.000
 Bias Difference: Women                             0.209           0.639
 P-value                                           0.361           0.003
 
  The dependent variable in the first specification is the New Music Friday
  rank. The regression also includes measures of past streams for the artists,
  country fixed effects and their interaction with past streams, as well as
  song characteristics. The second and third specifications report the degree
  of bias in New Music Friday Rank implied by the last two columns in Table
  2. The lower panel reports results of tests of whether the two approaches
  deliver equal levels of rank bias. Robust standard errors are reported in
  parenthesis.
 
  Significant at the 10% level.
 
   Significant at the 5% level.
 
    Significant at the 1% level.




                                     33
                                                                                       
           Table 4: Outcome-Based Tests for Bias: Initial Streaming Success

                                  (Top 200) (Log Streams)         (Top 200) (Log Streams)
                                  Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.          Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.
     Indie Label Song               -0.071      -0.782              -0.078      -0.871
                                   (0.006)     (0.071)             (0.007)     (0.072)
                                                                           
     Song by Women                  -0.035      -0.530              -0.037      -0.549
                                   (0.007)     (0.076)             (0.007)     (0.078)
                                                                           
     New Music Friday Rank                                          -0.037      -0.426
                                                                   (0.001)     (0.006)
     Rank Fixed Effects                                                                




34
     Country Fixed Effects
     R2                             0.376           0.387            0.349           0.352
     No. of Obs.                    14747           14747            14747           14747
     
      Dependent variables are measures of streaming success. Specifications (Top 200) measure
      streaming success with a binary measure of whether song j appears among the daily Top 200
      streaming songs in country c while the songs are on the New Music Friday playlist. Specifi-
      cations (Log Streams) use the logarithm of cumulated streams for song j in country c while
      the songs are on the New Music Friday playlist. Coefficients on independent label and songs
      by women show the degree of differential streaming success, conditional on initial New Music
      Friday rank assigned by curators. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
     
      Significant at the 10% level.
     
       Significant at the 5% level.
     
        Significant at the 1% level.
                                                                                                                    
                                            Table 5: Outcome-based test, controlling for initial conditions.

                                                        Ultimate Streaming Success                                  Initial Streaming Success
                                            (Top 200) (Log Streams)    (Top 200) (Log Streams)      (Top 200) (Log Streams)      (Top 200) (Log Streams)
                                            Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.     Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.       Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.       Coef./s.e.  Coef./s.e.
     Indie Label Song                         -0.070      -0.761         -0.069      -0.748           -0.066      -0.724           -0.064      -0.707
                                             (0.007)     (0.093)        (0.008)     (0.094)          (0.007)     (0.079)          (0.007)     (0.080)
     Song by Women                            -0.032      -0.627         -0.035      -0.644           -0.033      -0.510           -0.034      -0.523
                                             (0.008)     (0.096)        (0.008)     (0.096)          (0.008)     (0.083)          (0.008)     (0.084)
     Spotify playlist followers (mil)                                    0.000        0.001                                         0.000       0.006
                                                                        (0.001)     (0.010)                                       (0.001)     (0.009)
     Major-label playlist followers (mil)                                 0.018      0.169                                         0.019       0.156
                                                                        (0.007)     (0.085)                                       (0.007)     (0.075)
     Other playlist followers (mil)                                      -0.029      -0.254                                        -0.026      -0.248
                                                                        (0.008)     (0.105)                                       (0.008)     (0.092)




35
     Rank Fixed Effects
     Country Fixed Effects
     R2                                      0.351        0.355          0.352         0.356          0.366          0.379          0.367         0.379
     No. of Obs.                             12366        12366          12366         12366          12366          12366          12366         12366
     
      Dependent variables are measures of streaming success. For the Ultimate Streaming Success panel, specifications (Top 200) measure streaming success
      with a binary measure of whether song j appears among the daily Top 200 streaming songs in country c during the year after entering the New Music
      Friday playlist, and specifications (Log Streams) use the logarithm of cumulated streams for song j in country c during the year after entering the New
      Music Friday playlist. For the Initial Streaming Success panel, specifications (Top 200) measure streaming success with a binary measure of whether song
      j appears among the daily Top 200 streaming songs in country c while the songs are on the New Music Friday playlist, and specifications (Log Streams)
      use the logarithm of cumulated streams for song j in country c while the songs are on the New Music Friday playlist. Coefficients on independent label
      songs and songs by women show the degree of differential streaming success, conditional on initial New Music Friday rank assigned by curators. Robust
      standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
     
      Significant at the 10% level.
     
       Significant at the 5% level.
     
        Significant at the 1% level.
Table 6: Curator weights on independent (women) relative to major (men)
streams.

                       Appearing in      Log of      Appearing in           Log of
 Song Type               Top 200        Streams     Initial Top 200    Initial Streams
 Song by Women            1.08            1.17            1.10               1.17
                          0.03            0.04            0.03               0.04
 Indie-Label Song         1.40            1.41            1.44               1.45
                          0.05            0.04            0.05               0.05
 
    Bootstrapped standard errors are reported below estimates (N = 100).




                                           36
B        Appendix

B.1       Alternative Song Gender Measures

                                                             Outcome-Based Tests Using Alternative
                                                                   Song Gender Measures
                                                                        (1) Appears in Top 200                                                                                             (2) Log of Streams
                                                          Controlling for New Music Friday Rank with Fixed Effects                                                      Controlling for New Music Friday Rank with Fixed Effects
                                         .02                                                                                                              .2

                                         .01                                                                                                              .1

                                          0                                                                                                               0
             Pro-Men / Pro-Major Bias




                                                                                                                             Pro-Men / Pro-Major Bias
                                                                                                                                                         -.1
                                        -.01
                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                        -.02
                                                                                                                                                         -.3
                                        -.03
                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                        -.04
                                                                                                                                                         -.5
                                        -.05
                                                                                                                                                         -.6
                                        -.06                                                                                                             -.7

                                        -.07                                                                                                             -.8

                                        -.08                                                                                                             -.9

                                        -.09                                                                                                             -1

                                                Women Artist Coefficients                              Indie Coefficients                                      Women Artist Coefficients                             Indie Coefficients


                                                                        (3) Appears in Top 200                                                                                             (4) Log of Streams
                                                               Controlling for New Music Friday Rank Linearly                                                                Controlling for New Music Friday Rank Linearly
                                         .02                                                                                                              .2
                                         .01                                                                                                              .1
                                           0                                                                                                              0
             Pro-Men / Pro-Major Bias




                                                                                                                             Pro-Men / Pro-Major Bias




                                        -.01                                                                                                             -.1
                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                        -.02
                                                                                                                                                         -.3
                                        -.03
                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                        -.04
                                                                                                                                                         -.5
                                        -.05
                                                                                                                                                         -.6
                                        -.06                                                                                                             -.7
                                        -.07                                                                                                             -.8
                                        -.08                                                                                                             -.9

                                        -.09                                                                                                             -1
                                                                                                                                                        -1.1
                                         -.1

                                                 Women Artist Coefficients                             Indie Coefficients                                      Women Artist Coefficients                             Indie Coefficients




                                               All Women                           Women or Mixed                           First Artist Woman                                              Either Artist Woman

            Note: Panels (1) to (4) report the women and indie coefficients from the outcome-based test regressions presented in columns 1 to 4 of Table 2
            in the main text, respectively. Each panel presents 4 distinct pairs of regression coefficients, each of which uses a different definition of a
            song by women as indicated in the legend. The measure corresponds to the measure used in the main text, and the corresponding coefficients
            are therefore the ones displayed in Table 2.




         Figure B.1: Outcome-Based Tests Using Alternative Song Gender Definitions.


    Table B.1: Curator weights on women relative to men streams: Robustness to alter-
    native song gender definitions. 

                                                                                  Appearing in Log of                                                           Appearing in                                                  Log of
      Song Type                                                                     Top 200    Streams                                                         Initial Top 200                                           Initial Streams
      Women-Only                                                                     1.10        1.19                                                                1.10                                                      1.17
                                                                                     0.03        0.05                                                                0.03                                                      0.04
      Women or Mixed                                                                 1.08        1.17                                                                1.10                                                      1.17
                                                                                     0.03        0.04                                                                0.03                                                      0.04
      First Artist Woman                                                             1.04        1.09                                                                1.01                                                      1.07
                                                                                     0.02        0.03                                                                0.03                                                      0.04
      Either Artist Woman                                                            1.00        1.02                                                                1.00                                                      1.03
                                                                                     0.03        0.04                                                                0.03                                                      0.03
      
         Bootstrapped standard errors are reported below estimates (N = 100).




                                                                                                                            37
