                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFICIENCY AND EQUITY IMPACTS OF URBAN TRANSPORTATION POLICIES WITH
                        EQUILIBRIUM SORTING

                                      Panle Jia Barwick
                                         Shanjun Li
                                     Andrew R. Waxman
                                          Jing Wu
                                         Tianli Xia

                                      Working Paper 29012
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29012


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank seminar participants at Boston University, Brazilian School of Economics and Finance,
Cornell University, Duke University, Jinan University, MIT, Peking University, Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics, University of Illinois, University of Maryland, University
of Texas-Austin, the World Bank, and the 2019 Urban Economics Association meeting for
helpful comments. We acknowledge the excellent research assistance from Avralt-Od Purevjav
and Ziye Zhang and the financial support from the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation
(3ie) under project DPW1.1106, and the Center for Transportation, Environment, and Community
Health at Cornell University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Panle Jia Barwick, Shanjun Li, Andrew R. Waxman, Jing Wu, and Tianli Xia. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Efficiency and Equity Impacts of Urban Transportation Policies with Equilibrium Sorting
Panle Jia Barwick, Shanjun Li, Andrew R. Waxman, Jing Wu, and Tianli Xia
NBER Working Paper No. 29012
July 2021
JEL No. H23,R3,R41,R48,R51

                                           ABSTRACT

We estimate an equilibrium model of residential sorting with endogenous traffic congestion to
evaluate the efficiency and equity impacts of urban transportation policies. Leveraging fine-scale
data on household travel diaries and housing transactions with home and work locations in
Beijing, we jointly estimate travel mode and residential location decisions. The estimation
highlights the importance of incorporating work commute in housing decisions and features
preference heterogeneity for the ease of work commute by gender. Counterfactual simulations
show that while different policies can attain the same level of congestion reduction, their impacts
on residential sorting and social welfare are drastically different. First, a driving restriction
intensifies income-stratified urban structure where high-income households live closer to subway
and work. Distance-based congestion pricing reduces the spatial separation between residence
and workplace across income levels, while subway expansion does the opposite. Second,
residential sorting strengthens the effectiveness of congestion pricing in improving traffic
conditions but undermines that of the driving restriction and subway expansion. Third, the driving
restriction is welfare reducing as it leads to large distortions on travel choices. Congestion pricing
improves welfare but is regressive, highlighting the need to recycle revenue to address the
associated equity concern. Finally, congestion pricing and subway expansion when combined
deliver the largest congestion relief and efficiency gain and at the same time achieve self-
financing, with revenue from congestion pricing fully covering the cost of subway expansion.

Panle Jia Barwick                                 Jing Wu
Department of Economics                           Tsinghua University
Cornell University                                Heshanheng Building
462 Uris Hall                                     Beijing 100084, CHINA
Ithaca, NY 14853                                  ireswujing@tsinghua.edu.cn
and NBER
panle.barwick@cornell.edu                         Tianli Xia
                                                  tx58@cornell.edu
Shanjun Li
Cornell University
405 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
SL2448@cornell.edu

Andrew R. Waxman
University of Texas at Austin
awaxman@utexas.edu


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29012
1     Introduction

Transportation plays a crucial role in urban spatial structure and the organization of economic activity (Allen
and Arkolakis, 2019; Tsivanidis, 2019; Heblich et al., 2020; Gorback, 2020). In most fast-growing developing
countries, rapid urbanization and motorization together with poor infrastructure have created unprecedented
traffic congestion with severe consequences for economic outcomes (Akbar et al., 2018; Harari, 2020).1 To
address this challenge, local governments around the world have implemented a suite of policies, includ-
ing driving restrictions, gasoline taxes, public transit investment, and congestion pricing. In the short term,
the effectiveness of these policies crucially hinges on the substitutability among travel modes and the sen-
sitivity of travel demand to changes in the cost of commuting and availability of alternative modes. In the
medium to long run, these policies are likely to have broader impacts on the urban spatial structure through
residential location adjustment, which, in turn, could mediate the effectiveness of these policies and have im-
portant distributional consequences. This paper aims to understand the efficiency and equity impacts of urban
transportation policies while accounting for the interaction between these policies and residential location
decisions. To do so, we jointly model residential locations and travel mode choices in an equilibrium sorting
framework with endogenous congestion.
     The empirical context of our study is Beijing, which has a population of 21.5 million and has been rou-
tinely ranked as one of the most congested cities in the world. Severe congestion has major implications
for air pollution and misallocation of time and negatively affects the quality of urban life (Kahneman and
Krueger, 2006; Anderson et al., 2016). Beijing's municipal government has adopted several policy interven-
tions to aggressively combat traffic congestion and air pollution. It has adopted a driving restriction policy
since 2008 that restricts vehicles from driving one day per week during weekdays based on the last digit of
the license plate. It also invested a staggering $100 billion in transportation infrastructure between 2007 and
2018 and added 16 new subway lines with a total length of 523 kilometers and more than 200 additional
bus lines, a major upgrade of Beijing's public transit network. Despite these efforts, Beijing has only seen
a modest reduction of peak-hour traffic congestion since 2015. The city's experience, common among ur-
ban centers around the world, echos long-standing concerns from economists that without appropriate road
pricing, effective congestion management is unlikely (Vickrey, 1959, 1963).
     Beijing's policies to combat congestion ­ driving restrictions and subway expansion ­ together with its
proposed policy on congestion pricing embody three general approaches to the regulation of unpriced exter-
nalities: command-and-control, supply-side, and market-based approaches, respectively. To understand the
primary channels by which these policies affect travel mode and residential location choices, we proceed
in several steps. We first develop a stylized theoretical model based on LeRoy and Sonstelie (1983) and
    1 Based on real-time GPS traffic data in 403 cities from 56 countries in 2018, the TomTom Traffic Index shows that the 10 most
congested cities were all from developing and emerging economies. The top five cities were Mumbai, Bogota, Lima, New Delhi, and
Moscow. Drivers in Mumbai spent 65% more commuting time on average than they would have under the free flow condition, while
drivers in Beijing (the number 30 on the list) spent 40% extra time on the road. Four cities in China were among the top 30 on the
list. Los Angeles, the most congested city in the US, was ranked 24th with a congestion index of 41%. The full ranking based on the
TomTom Traffic index 2018 is available at https://www.tomtom.com/en_gb/traffic-index/ranking.


                                                                1
Brueckner (2007) while accounting for endogenous congestion and heterogeneity in income and commuting
technologies. The model illustrates differential impacts of urban transportation policies on the spatial pattern
of residential locations and highlights countervailing forces at play between travel mode choices and housing
location. It also suggests that the general equilibrium effects of transportation policies on the housing market
can have efficiency and distributional consequences. Lastly, the model highlights the ambiguity in qualitative
comparative statics even for simple models with two income types and two commuting technologies, demon-
strating the need for subsequent empirical analysis to understand how these factors play out in an actual urban
setting.
    Our empirical analysis leverages fine spatial resolutions from two unique data sets that allow us to jointly
model the residential locations and commuting choices. The first is the Beijing Household Travel Survey
(BHTS) from 2010 and 2014, a large representative survey that records households' home and work loca-
tions, trips made in a 24-hour window and other demographic and transportation-related information. We
complement this data by constructing the counterfactual commuting distance from home to work using his-
torical Geographical Information System (GIS) maps and the Application Programming Interface (API) from
online mapping services. This exercise allows us to calculate commuting routes, travel times, distances and
pecuniary travel costs for each trip-mode combination (walking, biking, taking a bus, subway, car, or taxi).
The second data set contains mortgage transactions from a government-run mortgage program and provides a
large representative sample of Beijing home buyers. Critical to our analysis, the housing data contain not only
home location information but also work locations of both the primary and secondary borrowers. Using this
information, we construct over 12 million hypothetical trip-mode combinations of the home-work commute
for both the primary and second borrowers using the same GIS and API procedure as was done for the travel
survey data.
    We then estimate an equilibrium model of residential sorting with endogenous congestion, while incorpo-
rating preference heterogeneity and allowing for general equilibrium feedback effects between housing and
commuting decisions. In the model, households choose housing units based on their preference for hous-
ing attributes, neighborhood amenities (e.g., schools and parks), and ease-of-commuting from home to work
(separately for each working household member). We allow the traffic congestion level in Beijing to be an
equilibrium outcome that arises from location choices and travel decisions of all households. Once esti-
mated, the model allows us to conduct counterfactual simulations to predict new equilibrium outcomes for
both marginal and non-marginal policy changes in terms of travel mode choices, household locations, the
congestion level and housing prices.
    We use a two-step strategy to estimate the equilibrium sorting model. The first step is to recover consumer
preferences for travel time and cost (therefore the value of time) using the household travel survey data and
the time and pecuniary cost information of all hypothetical commuting trips that we construct. We utilize the
estimated parameters from this step to construct a measure on the work-commute attractiveness for each home
and each buyer in our mortgage dataset, which we call the "ease-of-commuting" attribute of a housing choice.
The proximity to public transit and the level of traffic congestion in different parts of the city play a key role in


                                                         2
determining the extent of ease-of-commuting. For a given home and a potential buyer, the ease-of-commuting
attribute corresponds to the expected maximum utility of commuting from home to the buyer's work location
via available travel modes. It accounts for preference heterogeneity and takes into consideration upgrades
in the transportation system at the time of home purchase. For married couples with two jobs, we include a
separate attribute for each spouse, allowing for preference heterogeneity on the work commute by gender.
    The second step recovers preference for housing attributes in a housing demand model. The ease-of-
commuting index is included as an observed (buyer-specific) home attribute. The key identification challenge
in the housing demand model is the potential correlation between unobserved housing attributes and housing
price as well as the ease-of-commuting index. The latter two variables are equilibrium outcomes determined
by observed and unobserved housing attributes. To address this challenge, we construct three sets of instru-
mental variables in the spirit of Berry et al. (1995) and Bayer et al. (2007): average housing and neighborhood
attributes of homes at a reasonable distance from a given home, the number of homes sold in a three-month
window around the sale date, and the time-varying odds of winning a license lottery to purchase a vehicle.
The lottery's time-varying winning odds is a powerful IV and shifts demand for houses in premium locations
(close to subways and the city center). We allow both observed and unobserved preference heterogeneity,
control for home fixed effect, and estimate parameters through maximum-likelihood estimation with a nested
contraction mapping that is combined with IVs (Train and Winston, 2007).
    Utilizing these estimates, we then simulate equilibrium housing and transportation outcomes based on the
three policies of interest in our study: the license plate-based driving restriction, subway expansion from 2008
to 2014, and congestion pricing. Since the first two policies have been enacted, we begin with a no-policy
counterfactual and then compare this no-policy baseline to each policy as well as their combinations. We also
compare partial equilibrium outcomes that do not allow residential sorting to a general equilibrium that allows
households to relocate in response to the transportation policy. Our simulations also account for adjustments
in housing supply in response to changes in equilibrium housing prices and congestion.
    Our policy simulations yield four key findings. First, although different transportation policies can attain
the same level of congestion reduction, they exhibit different and even opposite impacts on the housing market
and the spatial pattern of residential locations. Both the driving restriction and congestion pricing increase
the price premium of homes near the city center and subway stations, as high-income households outbid low-
income households for these locations. As a result, the driving restriction reduces the distance to work for
high-income households but increases that for low-income households. In contrast, distance-based congestion
pricing reduces distance to workplace for both income groups, while subway expansion leads to the opposite
effect.
    Second, residential sorting can either strengthen or undermine the congestion-reduction potential of trans-
portation policies as well as the welfare impacts. Sorting strengthens the impact of congestion pricing in
both congestion reduction and welfare gains as households are incentivized to live closer to work locations
and drive less. On the other hand, sorting in response to subway expansion would lead to a larger separation
between housing and work locations, damping the congestion reduction effect and welfare gains from infras-


                                                       3
tructure investment. The implication of sorting on the effectiveness of driving restrictions is more nuanced
and depends on the extent of reduction in average commuting distance and the increased propensity of driving
for more distant trips. Our analysis finds that sorting only slightly weakens the effectiveness of the driving
restriction.
    Third, transportation policies generate equity impacts and could either exacerbate or alleviate economic
inequality (Waxman, 2017; Akbar, 2020). Congestion pricing provides a larger welfare gain for low-income
households than high-income households if its revenue can be uniformly recycled. Without recycling, how-
ever, congestion pricing is regressive and leads to a larger welfare loss for low-income households. This
distributional concern is an important impediment to congestion pricing adoption in practice. The driving
restriction policy is progressive as it leads to less distortion on travel decisions for low-income households,
potentially explaining the wider adoption of this policy than congestion pricing around the world.
    Finally, the actual and hypothetical transportation policies have different implications on aggregate wel-
fare. Beijing's rapid subway expansion from 2008 to 2014 led to an increase in consumer surplus and aggre-
gate welfare despite modest congestion reduction. In contrast, driving restriction is welfare reducing despite
a larger congestion reduction. Congestion pricing and subway expansion in tandem deliver the largest im-
provement in traffic speed and welfare gain. In addition, the revenue from congestion pricing could fully
finance the capital and operating costs of subway expansion, eliminating the need to fund the expansion from
other distortionary taxes. These results showcase the sorting model's strength in capturing various adjustment
margins and its ability to compare different policy scenarios in a unified framework that accounts for general
equilibrium welfare effects with preference heterogeneity.
    Our study makes three main contributions to the literature. First, while quantitative spatial economics
has made considerable advances to explore the role of transportation in urban systems (see Redding and
Rossi-Hansberg (2017) for a review), there has been little attempt in the empirical urban literature to explore
the role of preference heterogeneity and congestion externalities in mediating the welfare effects of different
transportation policies. As the urban literature has long pointed to "wasteful commuting" that results in
equilibrium housing and transportation choices deviating from the social optimum (Hamilton and Röell, 1982;
Cropper and Gordon, 1991), accounting for preference heterogeneity could be crucial for understanding the
equilibrium and distributional impacts of urban policies. With growing concerns about the role of location in
economic opportunity (Chetty et al., 2014), the rich preference heterogeneity incorporated in our framework
allows us to identify winners and losers from urban transportation policies, in the spirit of the theoretical and
reduced form work by LeRoy and Sonstelie (1983), Glaeser et al. (2008) and Brueckner et al. (1999). As
some more recent quantitative spatial models (Allen and Arkolakis, 2019; Fajgelbaum and Gaubert, 2020),
we explicitly model endogenous congestion to capture its increasing marginal external cost, as highlighted by
Anderson (2014). Critically, our dual-market approach provides a micro-foundation for the hedonic models
that study the capitalization of transportation investment in the housing market (Baum-Snow and Kahn, 2000;
Gibbons and Machin, 2005; Zheng and Kahn, 2013) and demonstrates considerable distributional impacts.
    Second, our analysis contributes to a large equilibrium residential sorting literature by incorporating en-


                                                       4
dogenous work commuting decisions in residential location choices. Sorting models have been used to study
consumer preferences for local public goods and urban amenities (e.g., air quality, school quality, and open
space) and evaluate policies that address economic, social and environmental challenges (Epple and Sieg,
1999; Kuminoff et al., 2013).2 Most existing papers use the distance to work to measure ease-of-commuting
and treat it as an exogenous attribute, even though ease-of-commuting is endogenously determined by both
residential locations and equilibrium traffic congestion. Our approach is perhaps closest to Kuminoff (2012)
which allows for households to make decisions in both the work and housing markets and take into account
the work commute. However, it treats congestion as exogenous and the commuting time is affected solely by
the distance. Our paper is to our knowledge the first in the empirical sorting literature that explicitly models
congestion as an equilibrium outcome that is simultaneously determined by household locations and travel
mode choices.
    Third, our paper relates to the literature on transportation policies that address the negative congestion
externality (Parry et al., 2007).3 Studies in this literature commonly focus on short-run or partial equilibrium
effects of transportation policies on travel choices, traffic congestion, and air pollution. By characterizing
the underlying travel and housing choices, our equilibrium sorting framework provides a micro-foundation
for the reduced-form impact evaluation studies. More importantly, the unified framework offers a common
yardstick to evaluate actual and counterfactual policies over a wide range of outcomes including congestion
reduction, urban spatial structure, social welfare, and distributional consequences. A few studies examine the
general equilibrium feedback effects through housing location, such as Anas and Kim (1996) and Langer and
Winston (2008) that evaluate transportation policies taking into account their impacts on land use. Compared
with the calibrated computable general equilibrium analysis, our approach is internally consistent in that the
estimation of structural parameters and the policy simulations are based on the same model.
    Section 2 uses a stylized model to explain the key forces underlying the interaction between housing and
transportation. Section 3 describes the data and provides reduced-form evidence on the effect of Beijing's
driving restriction on the housing market to motivate and ground subsequent analysis. Section 4 lays out
the equilibrium sorting model and the estimation strategy. Estimation results are presented in Section 5.
Section 6 conducts simulations to examine the impacts of transportation policies and compare their welfare
consequences. Section 7 concludes.
    2 See for example Bayer et al. (2007); Ferreyra (2007); Epple and Ferreyra (2008); Epple et al. (2012) on school quality, Sieg

et al. (2004); Bayer et al. (2009); Kuminoff (2009); Tra (2010); Bayer et al. (2016) on air quality, Timmins and Murdock (2007);
Walsh et al. (2007); Klaiber and Phaneuf (2010) on open space and recreation, Bajari and Kahn (2005); Bayer et al. (2007); Bayer
and McMillan (2012); Hwang (2019) on racial and ethnic composition, Calder-Wang (2020) on the distributional impacts of the
sharing economy in the housing market. Several recent studies seek to incorporate dynamic models of housing demand into sorting,
allowing for households to make choices based on expectations about the evolution of location amenities, prices and wages over time
on endogenous amenities as a bundle (Almagro and Domínguez-Iino, 2020; Murphy, 2015; Wang, 2020). We do not incorporate
dynamics into our model but consider their influence in our interpretation of the results.
    3 Various policies have been evaluated. See Parry and Small (2005); Bento et al. (2009); Knittel and Sandler (2013); Li et al.

(2014) on gasoline taxes, Bento et al. (2005); Parry and Small (2009); Duranton and Turner (2011); Anderson (2014); Basso and
Silva (2014); Li et al. (2019); Severen (2019); Gu et al. (2020) on public transit subsidies and expansion, Davis (2008); Viard and Fu
(2015); Carrillo et al. (2016); Zhang et al. (2017) on driving restrictions, and Langer and Winston (2008); Anas and Lindsey (2011);
Hall (2018); Yang et al. (2019); Kreindler (2018) on congestion pricing.



                                                                  5
2      Theoretical Framework

We motivate our setup with a graphical presentation of the welfare effects of two transportation policies that
are examined in our empirical analysis: congestion pricing and driving restrictions. There are two dimensions
of this effect captured: that in the primary market for commuting reflecting the direct effect of an unpriced
externality on the marginal social cost of driving, and a secondary effect on a related market, housing, where
changes in commuting costs are capitalized into housing prices and can induce changes in commuting mode
choice and housing location.4
     Figure 1 illustrates the welfare effects of these two policies in the primary "market" for vehicle road
traffic. Here, the economic cost induced by congestion can be demonstrated in terms of the level of traffic
volume, V as the difference between marginal social cost (MSC) and Average Social Cost (ASC) and the
unpriced externality created by the marginal external cost of congestion (MEC). Both congestion pricing and
a driving restriction result in a reduction of traffic volumes from the unregulated level, V 0 , to the socially
optimal level, V  . However, congestion pricing reduces the trips with the lowest marginal benefit while the
driving restriction, due to the fact that its design does result in sorting based on differences in the value of
time, could reduce trips with various levels of marginal benefit.5 If the length of commuting trips are reduced
in a random manner, the driving restriction will lead to welfare loss equivalent to the blue triangle in Figure 1.
The size of the triangle is positively related to the degree of heterogeneity in the marginal benefit of trips. The
figure illustrates that while congestion pricing leads to welfare gain, the welfare impact of a driving restriction
is ambiguous.
     However, Figure 1 is only a partial equilibrium analysis that does not take into account the potential impact
of transportation policies on proximate markets. It also tells us little about differences in these incomes across
individuals. To understand these additional effects, consider a monocentric city model where households with
different incomes sort into different locations in response to transportation policies based principally on their
deterministic preferences for housing, other goods and time.6 This model includes three key components of
recent applied work in urban economics: endogenous congestion, mode choice, and residential sorting. We
fully develop this model in Appendix A including presenting key comparative statics building on the approach
from Brueckner (2007), but here we summarize some key properties, standard in this class of models, and
elaborate on a set of stylized outcomes that illustrate heterogeneous welfare effects via capitalization.


Model Primitives Here are the key model primitives:

     · The monocentric city is linear with a fixed population (N ) of rich, NR , and poor, NP , residents.
    4 Following Roback (1982), there is also a capitalization in the labor market but this lies outside the scope of our study.
    5 Inthis sense, driving restrictions correspond to classic command-and-control or mandate-based quantity restriction form of
environmental policy. On the other hand, congestion pricing corresponds to a traditional market-based approach. We use these
designations interchangeably in this paper.
   6 In our empirical analysis, we will relax assumptions of monocentricity and allow for random utility.




                                                               6
    · All residents work at the urban center (CBD) at location 0, where wage income for the rich is larger:
       yR > yP .7

    · The rest of urban space is occupied by homes with lot sizes normalized to 1 and where land rents are
       remitted to absentee landlords.

    · Households maximize utility via housing and non-housing consumption subject to a budget constraint
       that includes commuting costs and varies between rich and poor based on their value of time (higher
       for the rich).

    · Housing consumption (in square meters) is provided by perfectly competitive developers.

    · Beyond the residential area is agricultural land, which returns rental value pa .


Commuting Technology Several key features characterize the nature of commuting technology:

    · Two commuting modes exist in the city: personal vehicles with higher fixed costs and lower variable
       costs relative to the alternative commuting mode, subway.

    · Variable costs, denoted wd ,m (x) for mode m = car, subway and group d = R, P, include time and pecu-
       niary costs.

    · Travel time is monetized by the value of time (VOT): R > P .8

    · We begin by assuming that the subway network covers the entire urban area and then relax this assump-
       tion when considering the role of public transportation infrastructure.

    · Car commuting suffers from endogenous congestion determined by the commuting choices of all other
       households in the city. We ignore the role of congestion in public transportation and focus solely on its
       effect on car travel.

    · The model is a closed-city model with intracity, but not intercity migration.9

    A feature of the model that usefully simplifies the analysis is that changes in commuting cost will not
affect the overall size of the city as reflected by the location of the urban boundary, x
                                                                                        ¯, since the population is
fixed and land use per household is also fixed.
   7 Given    the linear structure of the city, we assume roads take up no space and all land goes towards housing.
   8 We also assume that fixed commuting costs are larger but variable costs (without congestion) are lower for car relative to subway.
   9 Public transit congestion and closed-city assumptions could be relaxed without affecting the key predictions of the model.
Brueckner (1987) provides an analysis of a monocentric city model with a perfectly competitive supply side for both cases of a
closed and open city.




                                                                    7
Equilibrium Properties            Given a mass of rich and poor households residing and working in the city, a
spatial equilibrium is determined by a bid rent function p (x) that is the envelope of individual willingness-
to-pay for housing based on mode and housing type at each point, x, in the city,10 keeping the utility for each
                     ¯d , d = R, P:
income type fixed at u



                     p (x) = max p (yd - m - wd ,m (x), u
                                                        ¯d )                   d = R, P; m = car, subway.                         (1)
                                 d ,m


    For subway commuters, who are assumed to experience no congestion, the slope of the bid rent function
does not change. In residential regions with car commuting, moving from right to left across the region means
adding additional car commuters, further increasing per kilometer commuting time costs and steepening the
bid rent function.


Model Calibration and Policy Analysis                 In the Appendix A, we explain and show the result of calibration
yielding the urban configuration presented in Figure 2: rich subway commuters live closest to the CBD, then
poor subway commuters, then rich car commuters, then poor subway commuters. This outcome is not unique
and is purely illustrative to yield a pattern of sorting that roughly approximates the qualitative pattern for
Beijing described in section 3.11
    In Figure 2, we show the effect of two transportation policies, congestion pricing and a driving restriction,
on the equilibrium bid-rent envelope corresponding to (1). Colored lines in Figure 2 reflect the gradient of
housing prices in equilibrium after the indicated transportation policy, where the colors correspond to the
bid-rent for the group of commuters indicated below the horizontal axis. Gray lines in both panels reflect the
same no-policy baseline price gradient.
    The additional welfare effects of transportation policies in the housing market is reflected by the areas
between these envelopes. A key principle in urban economics underlying the Rosen (1974) and Roback
(1982) approach as well as the Henry George Theorem is that investments in public goods or reductions in
negative externalities should be capitalized into housing values and so comparing differences in the sum of
housing values can be used to approximate welfare changes under housing and land markets characterized by
perfect competition.


Key Model Takeaways             In Figure 2, we can see two principal effects of both congestion pricing and driving
restrictions on rents and therefore the capitalization of transportation policies: one, the value of proximity to
the CBD (i.e., workplace) rises for those nearby (specifically subway commuters), while for those farthest
away, it falls. Capitalization gains are larger than losses for congestion pricing (where revenues are recycled
lump-sum) because wealthy drivers gain from time savings net of tolls, while the poor who move to the
  10 Thefull set of market clearing conditions are presented in the Appendix A.
  11 In
      reality, Beijing does not have a single CBD and there are varying patterns of proximity of relatively wealthy to relatively less
wealthy across Beijing.


                                                                  8
subway commuting area benefit from revenue recycling and shorter commutes net of higher housing costs.12
Two, rent losses for longer commutes are larger under the driving restriction. This is because those who would
ordinarily drive are forced to take the subway for very long commutes on restricted days of the week.
      In summary, while the primary effect of transportation policies on commuting costs in the market for
driving is straightforward, the secondary effect on housing via price capitalization can be large and depends on
relative differences in the marginal cost of commuting, income heterogeneity and preferences for housing and
time. While illustrative, this simple model ignores a host of important features important for understanding the
economic effects of transportation policies in Beijing such as polycentricity of the city, travel modes beyond
driving and subway, and variation in the availability of housing across the city. For these reasons, we now
turn to our equilibrium sorting model to empirically evaluate these policies.


3      Policy Background, Data Description and Reduced-form Evidence

3.1     Policy Background

During the last four decades, China has witnessed the largest rural to urban migration in human history: urban
population increased from 171 million (about 18% of total population) in 1978 to 823 million (nearly 60% of
total population) by the end of 2018. After the turn of the century, vehicle ownership increased dramatically:
total sales of new passenger vehicles grew from 0.7 million units in 2001 to nearly 24 million units in 2018.
The rapid growth in urbanization and vehicle ownership has overwhelmed the road infrastructure and public
transit, leading to serious traffic congestion and exacerbating severe air pollution in all major urban areas
across the country. Similar challenges are observed in large cities in other developing and especially fast-
growing countries as well. Beijing has been ahead of most other urban centers in China in terms of growth
in population, household income, and vehicle ownership. Between 2001 and 2018, Beijing experienced a 56
percent increase in population while household disposable income grew from about $1,500 to nearly $9,000
per year, and the vehicle stock increased from one million to over six million.13
      The central and municipal governments in China have pursued a series of policies to address traffic con-
gestion. In Beijing, these policies include a driving restriction, a vehicle purchase restriction, and a massive
subway and rail transportation infrastructure investment boom. The driving restriction started as part of Bei-
jing's effort to prepare for the 2008 Summer Olympics. It initially restricted half of the vehicles from driving
on a given weekday based on their license plate. After the Olympics concluded, the restriction was relaxed to
one day a week during weekdays depending on the last digit of the license plate number.14 In an attempt to
  12 Panel (a) shows a small, but negligible loss of rents for poor car commuters reflecting the fact that given low values of time,

congestion reduction may not fully compensate for the fee.
  13 The consumer price index increased by 50% from 2001 to 2018. Among the six million vehicles in Beijing, about five million

are owned by households. The household vehicle ownership rate is about 0.6 cars per household in Beijing, compared to 0.46 in New
York city and 1.16 in the U.S. based on the 2010 U.S. Census.
  14 Police vehicles, buses, municipal street cleaning vehicles, and taxi are exempt from the policy. Athens, Greece implemented

the first of driving restrictions in 1982 and since then, at least a dozen other large cities in the world have adopted similar policies



                                                                   9
curb the growth in vehicle ownership, the Beijing municipal government adopted a purchase quota system for
new vehicles in 2011 by capping the number of new vehicle sales. About 20,000 new licences were distributed
each month through non-transferable lotteries during 2011 and 2013 and the monthly quota was reduced to
about 12,000 after 2013. Winning the lottery became increasingly difficult: the winning odds decreased from
1:10 in early 2012 to nearly 1:2000 in 2018 as the pool of lottery participants increased dramatically while
the number of licenses fell over time (Xiao et al., 2017; Li, 2018; Liu et al., 2020). Along with demand-
side strategies, the Beijing municipal government also invested heavily in public transportation infrastructure.
From 2007 to 2018, 16 new subway lines were built with a combined length of over 500km (See Appendix
Figure A1 for subway maps over time). By the end of 2019, the Beijing Subway is the world's longest and
busiest subway system with a total length of nearly 700km, and daily ridership over 10 million.15
      Despite these policy efforts, traffic congestion continues to be a pressing issue in Beijing: the average
traffic speed was 24.6km/h during peak hours (7-9am and 5-7pm) in 2019 according to the 2020 Beijing
Transportation Report. From a neoclassical microeconomic perspective, the aforementioned policies fail to
directly address the root cause of traffic congestion: the mispricing of road capacity. By recognizing traffic
congestion as a classic externality, (Vickrey, 1959, 1963) proposed congestion pricing as the first-best policy to
address traffic congestion. Despite being continuously advocated by economists since then, congestion pricing
has only limited adoption in practice with many failed attempts around the world largely due to technical
feasibility and especially political acceptability.16 The Beijing municipal government recently announced a
plan to introduce road pricing in the near future while soliciting feedback from experts and the general public
(Yang et al., 2019).


3.2     Data Description

To compare the impacts of different transportation policies on commuting and housing location decisions, we
construct the most comprehensive data on work-commute travels and housing transactions ever used in the
context of equilibrium sorting models. We rely on two main data sets for our analysis: Beijing Household
Travel Survey in 2010 and 2014 and housing mortgage data over 2006-2014 with detailed information on
household demographics as well as the work address of home buyers.
including Bogotá, Mexico City and New Delhi. The impacts of these policies on reducing congestion and air pollution have been
mixed (Davis, 2008; Viard and Fu, 2015; Carrillo et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017).
   15 Many other cities in China are also rapidly building and expanding their subway systems. The number of cities with a subway

system in mainland China increased from four to over 40 from 2000 to 2019, and the total urban rail network reached over 6,700
kilometers of by the end of 2019. One intended effect of these expansions is to slow the growth of personal vehicle use by making
public transportation more accessible. See Anderson (2014); Yang et al. (2018); Gu et al. (2020) for recent analysis on the impact of
subway expansion on traffic congestion.
   16 Vickrey (1963) asserted: "... in no other major area are pricing practices so irrational, so out of date, and so conducive to waste

as in urban transportation." This statement remains largely true today. Singapore first adopted congestion pricing in 1975 and is now
transitioning to the 4th generation GPS-based system in 2020. During the last 15 years, several European cities (London, Milan,
Stockholm, and Gothenburg) have successfully implemented various congestion pricing schemes. After several proposals over the
years, New York State legislature has approved a congestion pricing plan for New York City. Pending approval by the Federal
Highway Administration, New York City will become the first city in the US to enact congestion pricing, potentially as soon as late
2021.


                                                                  10
Beijing Household Travel Survey        We utilize two rounds of the Beijing Household Travel Survey (BHTS)
that are collected in 2010 and 2014 by the Beijing Transportation Research Center (BTRC), an agency of the
Beijing municipal government. The survey is designed to inform transportation policies and urban planing. It
includes individual and household demographic and occupational information (e.g., household size, vehicle
ownership, home ownership, age, gender, occupation), availability of transportation options (vehicles, bikes,
etc.), and a travel diary for the preceding 24 hours. The diary includes information on all trips taken including
the origin and destination, the departure and arrival time, the trip purpose and mode used.
    Our analysis focuses on 73,154 work commuting trips (home to work and work to home). Work trips
are likely to be the most important trips in housing purchase decisions. They account for 53% and 59% of
weekday trips among the working-age respondents and 62% and 75% of total travel distances in 2010 and
2014, respectively.
    Table 1 provides summary statistics for variables used in the analysis by the survey year. Household
income increased dramatically from 2010 to 2014, with the share of the lowest income group (< 50k annually)
decreasing from 48 to 18 percent while shares for higher income groups grew. Vehicle ownership increased
from 44 to 62 percent. Both the share of respondents living within the 4th ring road (which proxies for the
city center) and that working within the 4th ring road decreased by about 10 percentage points from 2010 to
2014, reflecting the increased spatial dispersion of housing and work locations. Other individual attributes
(gender, age, and education) are similar across the two years.
    To understand a commuter's travel mode choices, we need attributes for all travel modes in his choice
set. We focus on six travel modes: Walk, Bike, Bus, Subway, Car, and Taxi, as other modes (motorcycles,
company shuttles, and unlicensed taxis) collectively account for less than 4% of all trips. The travel survey
only reports the actual mode that is taken. We complement the travel survey and construct commuting time,
distance, and cost for each of the six modes and validate our calculations using information from reported
trips.
    Appendix Figures A3 and A4 provide two illustrations. We use Baidu Map API to calculate the travel time
and distance for walking, biking, car and taxi. Baidu maps incorporate predicted congestion level based on
the time of day and day of week. We query Baidu API at the same departure time that is recorded in the travel
survey (e.g., 7am). To account for changes in the average congestion level between the survey year and the
year we queried Baidu API, we adjust the predicted travel time based on the annual traffic congestion index
across different regions in Beijing. For bus travel time, we use Gaode Map API as Baidu does not provide
information on the number of transfers and walking time between bus stops, which can be substantial for
longer trips. To take into account the subway expansion in our sample period, we use historical subway maps
and an GIS software to reconstruct the historical subway network. The subway travel time is calculated based
on the published time schedules of subway lines. Our calculation assumes that commuters use the subway
stations that are closest to their trip origin and destination and incorporates the walking distance to the subway
stations as well as the corresponding time in the total trip distance and duration. Appendix ?? provides more
details on the full procedure.


                                                       11
    Figure 3 plots each travel mode's observed share of commuting trips, as well as the constructed travel
time, cost, and distance by each mode. Panel (a) contrasts travel patterns in 2010 with those in 2014 and
presents several notable patterns. First, walking account for a significant share of all commuting trips: 15.0%
and 13.5% in 2010 and 2014, respectively. These trips take 51 and 40 minutes on average with a distance
of 4.9 and 3.7 kilometers. Second, from 2010 to 2014, the shares of walk, bike, and especially bus see a
reduction while the share of car (i.e., driving) and subway have increased, reflecting the increase in vehicle
ownership and the expansion of the subway network. Third, walking and subway trips are the longest in
duration, while the subway and car trips are longest in distance. While car trips have slightly longer duration
and distance than taxi trips, they are cheaper. Overall, the trade-off between time and cost is clear: trips by
walking are slowest but also the cheapest. Car and tax trips are faster but more expensive than other modes.
    Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows the data by high- and low-income groups. High-income households are
more likely to drive, use subway, take taxis and less likely to use other modes, compared with low-income
households. As a percentage of the hourly wage, car and taxi trips are much more expensive for low-income
households than for high-income households. In terms of travel distance, there is very little difference across
the two income groups except among car trips. This is consistent with the housing data below that display no
evidence on strong income-delineated residential sorting patterns.


Housing Transactions Data             Data on housing transactions come from a major government-sponsored mort-
gage program in Beijing from July 2006 to July 2014. As is reflective of the housing supply in urban China,
almost all of the housing units are within housing complexes analogous to condominiums in the United States.
The interest rate for this mortgage program is subsidized and more than 30% lower than the commercial mort-
gage rates for eligible borrowers. Virtually all home buyers apply for mortgages through this program first
before going to other loans. There are no refinancing activities and each mortgage contract represents a
housing transaction.
    The final data set includes 79,884 mortgage transactions. Table 2 provides summary statistics of the
data.17 The mortgage data include information on household demographics including income, age, marital
status, residency status (hukou), and critically for our analysis, the work address for the primary borrower
(and that of the co-borrower if present). The data also contain information on housing attributes such as the
size, home age, street address, transaction price, and date when the mortgage was signed. We geocode the
home and work locations. The mortgage data represent a subset of housing transactions and may be subject to
selection issues. Hence, we re-weight the mortgage data to match the population distribution of housing price,
size, age, and distance to city center using entropy balancing (Hainmueller, 2012). Appendix B.2 discusses
the re-weight procedure in more detail and additional data patterns (such as differences in commuting distance
by gender). We use the weighted sample in our benchmark analysis and the unweighted sample in robustness
  17 We remove transactions with missing or zero reported price, price per square meter less than Y5,000, buyers with no reported

income, and an address outside of the 6th ring road. The data set for the structural analysis is slightly smaller than this as we lose
some data in constructing the choice set.



                                                                 12
checks.
    Appendix Figures A5 maps the location of all home transactions in the mortgage data overlaid with black
ring roads and blue subway lines (as of 2015). Beijing's spatial structure largely represents a monocentric
city possessing multiple ring roads, with some notable exceptions. The expanding set of concentric ring roads
layouts the city center. For example, the 2nd ring road largely traces out the contour of the old Beijing prior to
the 1980s. On the other hand, there are several large work clusters across the city, such as the financial cluster
between the 2nd and 4th ring roads on the east side of the city and a high-tech cluster towards the northwest
between the 3rd and 5th ring roads. Government-designated signature schools are denoted by red stars and
the government designated parks by green areas, which are important amenities that affect housing purchase
decisions.18 Signature schools are concentrated within the 4th ring road while the parks are more dispersed
across the city. Beijing has a total of 18 districts, each containing on average 8 Jiedaos (or neighborhoods).
    Figure 4 shows the spatial pattern of housing and household attributes by Traffic Analysis Zone (TAZs)
based on the mortgage transactions from 2006 and 2014, with a warmer color representing a higher value.
TAZs are spatial units defined by the government used for Beijing transportation planning purposes. They
are one to two square kilometers on average and smaller when they are closer to the center of Beijing. There
are 2050 TAZs in 2014. Housing prices tend to be higher in the city center while housing size smaller, as
predicted by the classical monocentric city models. Distance to work is shorter for those living close to the
city center, reflecting a higher concentration of work closer to the city center. There are exceptions: some
TAZs in the northwest outside the 5th ring road exhibit short work distance, due to a high-tech center in that
area as shown in Figure A6. Relative to housing price, housing size, and commuting distance, the pattern of
household income is more mixed. Some high-income households opt to live in larger homes with a lower
unit price to the north of the city center, reflecting the classic distance-housing size tradeoff illustrated in the
monocentric city model in Section 2. In addition, the northern parts of the city attract high-income households
with better amenities and more work opportunities (Appendix Figures A5 and A6).
    To incorporate commuting into housing decisions, we need to construct work commute attributes (i.e.,
time and out-of-pocket costs). In theory, one could construct the attributes of different travel modes for each
potential housing choice for a given home buyer/work location as illustrated in Appendix Figure A3. However,
this is technically infeasible given the vast number of home-work-mode pairs and the query restrictions by
the Baidu and Gaode APIs. The large choice set is a common empirical challenge in the housing demand
literature, and in our case, it is further compounded by the fact that there are multiple travel modes associated
with each potential housing choice. To reduce the computational burden, we use a choice-based sampling
strategy to limit the size of the housing choice set following McFadden (1978), Wasi and Keane (2012), and
Guevara and Ben-Akiva (2013). The choice set for a given transaction in the mortgage data is composed of
the purchased home and a one percent sample of homes randomly chosen from those sold during a two-month
  18 There  are 65 signature schools in Beijing that are designated by the Beijing municipal government as the `key' elementary
schools. These schools have better resources and better student performance. The enrollment in these schools in most cases guarantees
a seat in the the top middle schools and subsequently top high schools.



                                                                13
window (30 days before and after) around the purchase date. Beijing's real estate market was fluid during our
data period: the median days-on-market for a home seller is only 8 and 13 in 2013 and 2014, respectively,
with the average days on market 22 and 38 days. For each home in a household's choice set, we construct
the travel mode attributes for both the male borrower's and the female borrower's work commute, based on
their respective work locations. The construction of the mode attributes involves over 13 million route-mode
combinations.


3.3      Reduced-form Evidence

Before proceeding to the structural sorting model, we examine whether changes in the transportation system
are capitalized into housing prices and the residential sorting in response to these changes is meaningful.
Specifically, we examine the housing market response to the car driving restriction policy (CDR). The CDR
was implemented in July 2008 and prohibited car-owners from driving one day a week based on the last
digit of their license plates. The theoretical model in Section 2 predicts both an adjustment in travel choices
(substitution away from driving towards the public transportation) and relocation of residential locations.
Driving restrictions induce greater demand for homes closer to the public transportation, increasing the price
of these homes. In addition, wealthier households with potentially higher values of time are more likely to
sort into these units, the so-called transit-induced gentrification.
       Figure 5 shows scatter plots of home prices in Y1,000/m2 against the distance to the nearest subway sta-
tion before and after the CDR.19 The top panel uses raw data, while the bottom panel shows residualized plots
after controlling for year-by-month and neighborhood fixed effects.20 The price gradient becomes steeper post
CDR, suggesting that homes close to subways command a higher price premium after the policy. Consistent
with theoretical predictions, the driving restriction increases the price premium of the homes near subway
stations. Appendix Section C provides an event study analysis, a falsification test and additional evidence.
       We next examine residential sorting by regressing the distance from home to subway (and distance be-
tween home and work) on the interaction between the CDR dummy and household income (Appendix Section
C. Driving restriction policy reduced the distance to the nearest subway station and distance to work much
more for high income households. This provides suggestive evidence that high-income households sorted
closer to premium locations and low-income households sorted away, potentially because they were priced
out.
       The reduced-form analyses above confirm the importance of the housing market capitalization and sorting
in response to transportation policies. We now turn to an equilibrium sorting model of housing demand
and commuting choice that features preference and spatial heterogeneity to quantify the channels by which
   19 We focus on two years before and two years after the starting date of the program in balancing the tradeoff between the sample

size and the potential for confounding changes in housing and transportation.
   20 A neighborhood is defined as a Jiedao, an administrative unit that is similar to a census tract and is 2.8 square kilometers in size

on average. Each district of Beijing contains an average of 8 Jiedaos. We use Jiedao to denote neighborhoods where homes share
similar observed and unobserved amenities.




                                                                   14
transportation policies affect these choices. This allows us to analyze the efficiency and equity impacts of
different policies in a unified framework.


4      Empirical Sorting Model

We now lay out an empirical equilibrium sorting model that incorporates commuting choices into housing
decisions. We first describe the model and then discuss identification and estimation of model parameters.


4.1      Model Overview

Our sorting model characterizes the determinants of individual commuting choices and residential location
decisions. It also specifies the joint equilibrium conditions for the traffic congestion (a key amenity in our
analysis) and the housing market. On the one hand, residential locations determine households' commute
distances and affect the driving demand and hence traffic congestion. On the other hand, traffic congestion in
turn affects the attractiveness of a residential location and consequently the housing demand. For example,
high congestion levels increase demand for premium locations (places close to subways and the city center).
The equilibrium nature of our sorting model allows for counterfactual simulations and provides direct com-
parative statics of housing prices, residential locations, and congestion levels from marginal or non-marginal
policy changes.
      In practice, the choice of housing location could be part of a joint decision of work and home locations
that may be simultaneous or sequential. We assume they are sequential and take work locations as given
in our analysis for three reasons. First, for many households, the choice of work location is likely to be the
outcome of a longer-term process of labor supply and migration decisions. Second, employment opportunities
in the same industry tend to be clustered in Beijing and switching jobs may not entail meaningful changes of
work locations. Third, while the mortgage data provide rich information on locations of housing and current
employment, they do not have information on job opportunities (e.g., available job openings at the time of
searching). Therefore, incorporating work location decisions would necessitate additional data. Similarly, we
do not model firm locations which could be affected by transportation policies in the long run. Our analysis
therefore does not model the potential positive spillovers from the agglomeration of firms as modeled in some
recent studies using the quantitative spatial models.21
      Our approach contrasts with the emerging literature using quantitative spatial models that have made
considerable advances in modeling the joint processes of work and residential locations. Improvements in
the transportation system could translate into higher productivities (through better allocation of time and la-
bor market matching), a margin of adjustment not incorporated in our model. This literature uses observed
worker flows and wages to recover iceberg commuting costs via a gravity equation framework. However, with
    21 Diamond (2016) is a micro-founded study that bridges this gap by incorporating housing and labor markets into the evaluation of

the heterogeneous welfare consequences of the movement of workers between US cities, although it does not endogenize congestion
from the transportation sector.



                                                                  15
few exceptions (Fajgelbaum and Gaubert, 2020), this literature tends to recover the cost of commuting through
an origin-destination-specific disamenity rather than incorporating individual commuting decisions and con-
gestion externality. In contrast, While taking work locations as given, our equilibrium sorting framework
can predict the endogenous congestion level and welfare impacts from unpriced externality across commuters
under different policy scenarios.22


4.2     Housing Demand

We specify a characteristics-based housing demand model, in which preferences over housing are parameter-
ized as a function of both observed and unobserved household attributes (Lancaster, 1971; McFadden, 1978;
Berry et al., 1995). Our data are longitudinal, but we suppress time t to ease exposition. Conditioning on the
work locations, utility for household i choosing home unit j can be written as:

                                       max Ui j = i p j + x j i +  ik EVi jk +  j + i j ,                                            (2)
                                       { jJ }                          k

where J is the choice set for household i and the construction of the choice set is discussed below. The
household-specific price coefficient i is related to the log of household income yi :

                                                      i = 1 + 2  ln(yi ).

We use p j to denote the price of home j, x j to denote a vector of housing attributes such as size and the
number of bedroom, and i to denote household preferences over housing attributes. The marginal utility for
each housing attribute is decomposed into an individual-specific component and a population average, i.e., for
each element s in i :
                                                          is = ¯s + zi s ,

where zi are household demographics.  j captures unobserved housing attributes and i j is an i.i.d. error term
that reflects unobserved preferences over each housing choice.
      Household members with commuting needs are denoted by k  {Male, Female}. EVi jk is the expected
utility for member k in household i that is derived from the best commuting alternative. It characterizes the
attractiveness of home j in terms of member k's work commute. This ease-of-commute term is constructed
from a discrete choice model of commuting mode that we describe below. It is affected by the congestion
level, which is determined in equilibrium by all households' travel mode choices and residential locations.
Preference for ease-of-commute ik differs across gender and households and is characterized by random
   22 One limitation of the quantitative spatial model is that welfare improvements only result from changes in real income due to gains

from trade via an increase in market access. This benefit is mediated directly through the elasticity of imports with respect to variable
trade costs (Arkolakis et al., 2012). In the context of urban transportation, this seems potentially limiting because spatial mismatch
and wasteful commuting due to pre-existing distortions, like congestion, may leave open opportunities for Pareto improvements
without a change in the level of market access.




                                                                  16
coefficients:

                                        ik = ¯k + k ik , k  {Male, Female}, and

                                            i,male                   0         1 0
                                                         N                ,                .
                                           i, f emale                0         0 1

In subsequent formulations, we suppress subscript k for the ease of exposition and use EVi j to denote the
commuting utility for both household members k ik EVi jk . The commuting utility is the key innovation
relative to residential sorting models that incorporate commuting based on fixed distances. It allows for a joint
consideration of the heterogeneous impact of transportation policies on commuting costs across individuals
and homes.


4.3    Travel Mode

Utility-maximizing individuals within a household choose a commuting mode based on the time and financial
cost associated with each of the six modes: Walk, Bike, Bus, Subway, Car, and Taxi. In this subsection,
we abuse the notation and use i to denote an individual within a household rather than a household. This
is consistent with the level of aggregation in the travel survey that reports the travel mode choices for each
commuting member within a household.23 Preferences vary across individuals, such as the enjoyment of
driving a car, perceived "greenness" of using public transportation, or health benefits of biking and walking.
We include mode-specific random coefficients to account for these considerations. Individual i's utility of
commuting from home j to work using mode choice m is specified as:

                               max ui jm = m + 1itimei jm + 2 costi jm /yi + wi jm  + i jm ,                                    (3)
                              mMi j


where Mi j is the set of transportation modes available to individual i. We allow for a mode-specific random
coefficient, m , that has a normal distribution with mean µm and variance m . The mode-specific random co-
efficient for walking is normalized to zero. These random-coefficients capture heterogeneous mode-specific
(dis)amenities, scheduling or inconvenience costs that do not scale with the time or distance traveled. Vari-
able timei jm denotes the commute duration between i's work location and home j via mode m. Note that
driving time timei j,car is affected by the congestion level, an endogenous outcome as discussed above.24 Time
preference 1i follows a chi-square distribution with three degrees of freedom and mean µ . The chi-square
  23 For the purpose of our analysis we consider the mode choices of different individuals within a household as independent be-

cause of limited information on the joint decision processs. When it comes to housing location, we are also modeling hypothetical
commutes, for which the exact process of trip-chaining is not likely to be ex-ante clear to most households. Rather they may have a
general sense of the relative cost of commuting for one home relative to another as specified in the EV term.
  24 Road congestion affects travel times for buses in addition to driving and taxi, however this effect is more complicated as it

depends on the local characteristics of the roadway, the design of bus schedules, and location of bus stops. For the purpose of our
analysis we treat buses as if they were in dedicated lanes unaffected by congestion, which may result in a an over-prediction of bus
mode shares from our estimates.



                                                                17
distribution allows all individuals to have a positive value of time. The monetary cost of the trip is denoted as
costi jm . Individual's sensitivity to the monetary costs of commuting is assumed to decrease in income: 2 /yi .
Finally, variable wi jm captures mode-commuter specific controls (such as the driving dummy interacted with
commuter's gender) and i jm is the i.i.d. error term.
                                                                                                            1i
      The utility function makes it straightforward to calculate the value of time (VOT), which is          2    · yi . In
this formulation, the financial burden of travel scales with income and VOT can be conveniently expressed
as a share of hourly income. VOT is a fundamental concept in transportation analysis and its empirical mea-
surement is crucial for travel demand analysis and the evaluation of public policies. Under Becker (1965)'s
framework of time allocation, the travel time should be valued relative to the after-tax wage rate assuming
that time can be freely transferred between work and non-work activities (e.g., leisure or travel).
      Expected utility from commuting, EVi j in equation (2), is defined as the following:


                                               EVi j = Ei j      max ui jm ,                                          (4)
                                                                 mMi j


where the expectation is over the set of i.i.d. draws i jm across travel modes. Once we obtain the expected
commuting utility for all commuting members within a household, we aggregate it to the household level and
use it to measure house location j's ease-of-commute given individual/household i's work locations.


4.4     Market Clearing Conditions and the Sorting Equilibrium

This section defines the sorting equilibrium and the market clearing conditions for two interrelated markets
in our model: the housing market and the market for driving. In the housing market, choices of individual
households aggregate to the total housing demand. Housing prices adjust to equate demand and supply (hous-
ing supply is specified in Section 6.1). In the market for driving, the equilibrium driving speed and hence
congestion level is jointly determined by driving demand through all individuals' travel mode choices and
road capacity (the supply of the driving market). The two markets interact in two dimensions: the spatial
location of households affects the distance of work commute and the travel mode, and hence the market for
driving. At the same time, the level of traffic congestion that is determined in the driving market affects the
attractiveness of residential locations through the `ease of commuting' index as discussed above, and in turn
the spatial distribution of households.


Commuting Mode Choice            Conditional on home location j, the probability that individual/household i
chooses mode m for his work commute is defined as:

                                    Ri jm |i, j = r(costi j /yi , timei j (vi j ), wi jm ;  )                         (5)

where costi j /yi and timei j (vi j ) denote the vector of travel cost as a share of individual i's hourly wage and the
vector of travel time for each travel mode, respectively. The travel time by cars is a function of the driving


                                                              18
speed between individual i's work location and home location j: vi j , which is endegeneously determined in
equilibrium.25 Lastly, wi jm captures all other individual-trip-mode specific characteristics and  denotes all
relevant parameters in travel mode choices:  = {{m }m , 1i , 2 ,  }. We use R = {Ri jm |i, j} to denote all
households' commuting mode choices.


Housing Choice The probability that household i chooses home j is determined by the distribution of
random utility as specified in the housing demand model and is denoted as:

                                                                         Pi j = h(EVi (v), p, X,  , zi ),                 (6)

where EVi (v) is a vector of the `ease-of-commute' index for all potential home locations giving household
i's work locations. It links the housing market with the commuting mode choices, whose element is defined
above in equation (4). We have made it explicit that the ease-of-commute index depends on driving speed
v. The following triplet, p, X, and  , denotes prices, observed housing attributes, and unobserved housing
quality for all homes in household i's choice set. The last term, zi , represents household i's demographic
attributes. We use P = {Pi j } to denote all households' residential choice probabilities.
    The aggregation of households' choice probabilities Pi j gives rise to the aggregate housing demand: D j =
i Pi j (p, v),  j. Note that the aggregate housing demand depends on both housing prices p and driving speed v
through the east-of-commute index. Housing market clears when the aggregate demand is equal to aggregate
supply (that also depends on housing price):

                                                                         D j =  Pi j (p, v) = S j ,  j                    (7)
                                                                                 i


Driving Speed         Demand for driving is determined by both housing locations and travel mode choices. Intu-
itively, mode choices determines the extensive margin of the driving demand (to drive or not), while housing
choices determines the intensive margin of the driving demand (the commuting distance). Total driving de-
mand and hence traffic density is the aggregation of all households' location and commuting decisions, which
ultimately depends on the housing price p and driving speed v:

                                                            Dv =   Ri j,car · disti j,car · Pi j = g (p, v) .             (8)
                                                                     i     j


where Ri j,car is the driving probability for household i living in location j, disti j,car is the commuting distance,
and Pi j is the probability that household i chooses location j.
  25 Specifically, time                   disti j,drive
                          i j,drive   =       vi j      .   Note that timei jdrive in wi j is also determined by vi j .




                                                                                       19
    For a fixed road capacity, the driving speed v decreases in traffic density:26

                                                           v = f (Sv )

Intuitively, to sustain a higher travel speed, a transportation system has to limit the traffic density to a greater
extent. Traffic market clears when the aggregate traffic demand equals to traffic supply:

                                                     Dv = g (p, v) = Sv (v)                                                     (9)


Sorting Equilibrium          A sorting equilibrium is defined as a set of housing choice probabilities P , the vector
of housing prices p , a set of travel choice probabilities R , and speed, v , such that:

   1. The housing market clears according to equations (6) and (7), and

   2. The travel market clears according to equations (8) and (9).

    Our model follows the class of equilibrium horizontal sorting models with local spillovers studied in Bayer
and Timmins (2005) and more closely in Bayer et al. (2004). If the error terms in both the housing equation
(2) and the commuting mode choice equation (3) are from continuous distributions (such as the type I extreme
value distribution), then the equation system (6), and (7), (8), (9) is continuous. The existence of such a sorting
equilibrium follows from Brouwer's fixed point theorem. Intuitively, a unique vector of housing prices (up to
a scalable constant) p solves the system of equations defined by equations (6) and (7), conditional on a set
of observed and unobserved housing attributes (X and  ) as well as EV s. At the same time, (8), (9) implicitly
define traffic speed v as a continuous mapping of a compact and convex set. Any fixed point of this mapping
determines EV s and is associated with a unique vector of housing prices p . The equilibrium housing choice
probabilities P and travel choice probabilities R directly follow from the sorting equilibrium.
    In this class of sorting models, the presence of a negative spillover due to traffic congestion leads to a
unique equilibrium. In the simplest example when the driving speed is uniform across all locations (though
the speed level negatively depends on the density of cars), this is a traditional demand system with a unique
allocation (choice probabilities), as shown in Berry (1992). With heterogeneous congestion effects that differ
across space, one can show that the equation system (6), and (7), (8), (9) remains a contraction mapping,
and hence accommodates a unique fixed points (i.e., a unique equilibrium). It is worth noting that if there
are positive spillovers (e.g., agglomeration effects), uniqueness is not guaranteed. Sufficiently strong positive
spillovers could alter the rank-order of the location choices and give rise to multiple equilibria. A proof of
existence and uniqueness is provided in Appendix D.27
  26 This  gives rise to a congestion externality, because the driving decisions of others reduce the driving speed for household i.
Figure 1 depicts the congestion externality and how the equilibrium congestion level is determined. We formulate the parametric
relationship between driving speed and traffic density in Section 6.1.
   27 The proof follows Bayer and Timmins (2005). In the presence of positive spillovers, the unique equilibrium is more likely to

arise with strong consumer heterogeneity, weak spillover effects, or a larger number of choices.



                                                                20
4.5     Identification and Estimation

Choice Set       We first expand on the construction of the housing choice set discussed in Section 3.2. Compu-
tational and data limitations often, and in our case, require a restriction on the number of alternatives included
for empirical estimation. Nevertheless, overly restrictive culling of the choice set can be problematic as doc-
umented by Banzhaf and Smith (2007). While it may be logical to restrict the choice set to a set of affordable
or nearby homes, this literature suggests that this approach may unnecessarily bias estimation due to unob-
served heterogeneity in the choice set definition, and so we eschew any restriction of the choice set based on
attributes. In our implementation, we rely on choice-based sampling by taking one percent random sample
from homes on the market 30 days before and after the sale date of the chosen home.28 The consistency
of choice-based sampling methods in multinomial logit and mixed logit models is formalized in McFadden
(1978), Wasi and Keane (2012), and Guevara and Ben-Akiva (2013).


Identification & Estimation in Travel Mode Model To estimation of the parameters specified in the hous-
ing demand and travel choice models follows a two-stage process. In the first stage, we estimate the mode
choice model via simulated maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) based on household travel survey data.
The key parameters of interest are preferences for time and monetary costs. We include mode-specific random
coefficients to control for mode-specific (dis)amenities or qualities that do not scale with the time or distance
traveled. To further control for unobservables that could be correlated with travel time and monetary costs, the
model also includes mode-specific fixed effects interacting with year fixed effects, district fixed effects, and
household demographics (income categories, age). These interactions control for a rich set of time-varying
and location specific unobservables by travel mode.
      The key identification assumption in estimating mode choices is that the error term is not correlated with
time and monetary costs. This assumption would be violated if, for example, the route-specific quality of
public transit service (e.g., in terms of delay, comfort, or safety) is correlated with the route-specific monetary
cost or travel time. Cost is likely to be exogeneous because the public transit is run by Beijing's public transit
authority which sets bus and subway fares according to a uniform rule across all routes. Although some bus
or subway routes are more congested than others, the fares do not vary by the level of congestion on-board.
In addition, time is unlikely to correlated with unobserved shocks because during our sample period (2010
and 2014) real-time traffic apps are not widely used so people may be more likely to make travel decisions
based on ex-ante estimate of travel time. This ex-ante estimate is likely orthogonal to the realization of traffic
shocks on a particular day, hence requires no instruments.


Identification & Estimation in Housing Location Choice Model                          In the second stage, we first construct
the ease-of-commuting index EVi j for every house j in household i's choice set using the logsum expression
in Equation (4) and parameter estimates from travel mode choices. This step consists of a large set of EVi j ,
  28 To reduce the computational burden, we treat each year as a distinct market and this allows us to conduct the contraction mapping

year by year. The average size of the choice set is 27 with a range of 3 to 56. We drop households with a choice set less than 5.


                                                                 21
one for each home-work pair, including pairs between i's work location and homes that they did not choose
but considered. The calculation of EVi j is computationally intensive, requiring us to construct travel time and
cost for all available modes for each home location, following the discussion in the household travel survey
and Appendix Figure A3. While the application of this two-stage approach to residential sorting is new to
our knowledge, similar approaches of nesting the logsum values from random utility models have been used
by Capps et al. (2003) and Phaneuf et al. (2008) in healthcare and recreational demand respectively. The
estimated EV i j enters the housing choice model as an observed housing attribute.
    The parameters in the housing demand model themselves are estimated using a two-step procedure, with
the first step being a simulated MLE with a nested contraction mapping and the second step being a linear
IV/GMM. The two-step strategy follows Berry et al. (1995) and Bayer et al. (2007) in order to address un-
observed attributes that could be correlated with housing prices. Unobserved attributes (e.g., quality)  j in
Equation (2) could render the price variable endogeneous and bias the price coefficient toward zero. The
nested contraction mapping algorithm isolates price endogeneity into a linear framework which permits the
usage of the IV strategy. Following the structural demand literature we re-organize Equation (2) into a sum
of household-specific utility µi j and mean utility  j (or alternative-specific constants) which absorbs variation
from unobserved housing attributes  j :

                                Ui j = µi j (2 ) +  j (1 ) + i j                                              (10)
                           µi j (2 ) = 2 ln(yi ) p j +  X jk zik k + m EVi jm +  f EVi j f                    (11)
                                                       k

                             j (1 ) = 1 p j + x j ¯ +  j.                                                     (12)

Further details about the estimation can be found in Appendix E.
    Once 2 and  j are estimated, we then use linear regressions to estimate preference parameters (1 ) in
mean utilities  j as specified in Equation (12) using three different sets of variables. First, the average housing
and neighborhood attributes (excluding price and the EV term) within 3 kilometers outside the same complex
sold within two-month time window from a given house. The identification assumption is that the average
attributes of housing choices outside the same complex from housing choice j are not correlated with the
unobserved housing attributes  j and have no direct effect on the utility from housing choice j. But due to the
housing market competition, they are correlated with the price of housing choice j. Consider, for example,
two identical housing choices in the same neighborhood being sold at two different points in time (or from
two different neighborhoods with the same amenities but sold at the same time), prices may be different due
to varying intensity of competition (e.g., the availability of other housing choices) on the market faced by the
two housing choices at the time of their sales.
    The second set of instruments is the interaction between the first set of IVs and the winning odds of the
vehicle licence lottery policy. The winning odds have decreased dramatically from 9.4% in Jan. 2011 to 0.7%
by the end of 2014. The interaction terms capture the likely impact of license lottery policy on the nature of


                                                           22
housing market competition and price setting. Decreasing winning odds push up demand (and hence prices)
for houses in desirable locations, such as places close to the subways or the city center. The third set of IVs
is the number of homes sold in the real-estate listing dataset in the two-month time window of a given home,
which is also a proxy for market competition.


5      Estimation Results

We begin by presenting estimation results for the commuting mode choice model. Then we construct the
ease-of-commuting index, which captures the value of commuting options for work trips based on home and
work locations. Taking the ease-of-commuting index as an observed housing attribute, we then estimate the
housing demand model.29


5.1        Commuting Mode Choice

We assume that the error terms in both the housing equation (2) and the commuting mode choice equation (3)
have the type I extreme value distribution. Table 3 presents parameter estimates for six specifications of the
multinomial logit model based on work commutes from household travel survey in 2010 and 2014. The first
three specifications do not have random coefficients and the heterogeneity comes only from the interaction
between the travel cost and income. The last three specifications include random coefficients on travel time to
capture unobserved consumer heterogeneity. The value of time is represented as the percentage of the hourly
wage, and is defined by the ratio of the parameter on travel time and that on travel cost.
      Column (1) begins with interactions between year dummies (2010 or 2014) and mode-specific constants
(car, taxi, bus, subway, walking, and biking). The implied VOT from these estimates is 0.757 times the hourly
wage. Column (2) adds the interactions between mode-specific constants and trip characteristics including
trip distance and ring road dummies of the trip origin and destination. Trip distance could affect mode choices
because important trip characteristics such as uncertainty in travel time will likely scale with the length of a
trip. This uncertainty, typically called travel time reliability in the transportation literature, has been shown to
be an important factor in travel decisions (Brownstone and Small, 2005; Small et al., 2005; Tseng et al., 2009).
Ring road dummies for trip origin and destination may also capture differences in the frequency or quality of
the public transit, which could affect travel model choice. Including these sets of interactions dramatically
affects the coefficient estimate on the travel cost variable, resulting an implied VOT being 0.342 of the hourly
wage.
      Column (3) further adds the interactions of model-specific constants with household demographics in-
cluding age, gender, education, vehicle ownership, the number of workers, and household size. Adding these
    29 A
       key assumption underlying our approach is that, after accounting for location and demographic differences, preferences for
commuting mode choice from the travel survey are representative of those for home buyers in the mortgage data. A large literature
in environmental economics considers conditions under which the approach of transferring preferences for non-market amenities is
valid (Boyle and Bergstrom, 1992; Rosenberger and Loomis, 2003).



                                                               23
variables greatly improves the fit of the model and better captures the heterogeneity in mode choices across
demographic groups. The VOT estimate is 33.9% of hourly wage. Columns (4) to (6) use a chi-square distri-
bution with three degrees of freedom to approximate heterogeneous preference on travel time following Petrin
(2002).30 In addition to the random coefficient on travel time, Column (5) also allows a random coefficient
on the mode of driving. Column (6) further incorporates random coefficients for each of the five travel modes
(with walking as the reference group).
      Our preferred specification is Column (6). The preference heterogeneity for different travel modes is
assumed to be i.i.d. normal and captures the impact of unobserved demographics on mode choices. For
example, some commuters choose driving or taxi not because of their high VOT but because of scheduling
constraints. Some commuters choose walking or biking for their exercise benefit. The dispersion on the
preference parameters for all transit modes is quite large, suggesting significant heterogeneity for different
modes. Adding these random coefficients leads to much stronger consumer sensitivity to travel cost. The
average (median) VOT estimate is 95.6% (84.6%) of hourly wage and these estimates are within the range
typically found in the recent literature.31


5.2     Housing Location Choice

We now turn to the estimation results of the housing demand model described in Section 4.2. We first construct
the ease of commuting (EVi j ) for each member within household i based on parameter estimates from the
travel choice model:


EVi jk = Ei jk    max ui jkm = log                 exp m + 1ik timei jkm + 2 costi jkm /yi + wi jkm           , k  {Male, Female}.
                 mMi jk                   mMi jk


For each home in household i's choice set, we generate this measure separately for male (61% main borrower)
and female (39% main borrower) members based on their work locations.32 These two variables enter the
housing demand as additional household-specific attributes. We first present the MLE estimates of household-
specific preference parameters, and then discuss the IV estimates for coefficients in the mean utility.
   30 We winsorize the top and bottom 5% of the distribution to bound the distribution and to minimize the impact of outliers. The

three degrees of freedom provide the best model fit.
   31 Appendix Figure A11 depicts the histogram of the VOT estimate in our sample. The empirical estimates of VOT in the literature

vary as they come from different contexts and methodology. In the context of travel demand, the estimates typically range between
30% and 100% of hourly income (Small et al., 2007; Small, 2012). The US Department of Transportation recommends 50% of the
hourly income as VOT for local personal trips (e.g.,work commute and leisure but not business trips) to estimate the value of travel
time savings (VTTS) for transportation projects (USDOT, 2015). Using a discrete choice framework similar to ours, Small et al.
(2005) estimate the median VOT at 93% of hourly wage for commuters in Los Angeles based on data from both travel surveys and
choice experiments. Leveraging the tradeoff between vehicle driving speed and gasoline usage, Wolff (2014) estimates the average
VOT of 50% of hourly wage based on traffic speed data in eight rural locations in Washington State. Buchholz et al. (2020) use
the tradeoff between wait time and price among users on a large ride-hail platform in Prague and find the average VOT to be equal
to users' wage during work hours. Goldszmidt et al. (2020) find an average (median) VOT of 75% (100%) of hourly (after-tax)
wage based on a large-scale field experiment by the ridesharing company Lyft in 13 US cities by leveraging the random variation in
customer wait time and fare.
   32 If a family member is unemployed, we set EV = 0 for that member, effectively ignoring this term in the decision process.
                                                  ij




                                                                24
    Table 4 reports the estimates of heterogeneous preference parameters for three specifications: without the
EV terms, with the EV terms, and with random coefficients on the EV terms. The coefficient estimates from
these three specifications are by and large similar, except for the coefficient on the interaction between age
great than 45 and distance to key schools. Housing price is interacted with household income, which is used
as an proxy for household wealth.33 As expected, high-income households tend to be less price sensitive.
    Both EV terms in the second and third specifications have positive and significant coefficients estimates.
The log-likelihood value increases substantially from Column (1) to Columns (2) and (3), indicating strong
explanatory power of the EV terms. The estimates imply that households prefer homes with better ease-of-
commute measures, i.e., more convenient for work trips, for both family members. The coefficient estimates
in our preferred specification (3) suggest that an average household is willing to pay Y18,000 (21,000) more
on a home to save Y1 in the male (female) member's work commute, or Y185,000 (219,000) more to shorten
the male (female) member's work commute by 10 minutes. The coefficient estimate on the EV term for the
female member is 18% larger than that for the male member, suggesting that households prioritize the female
member's ease-of-commute in housing choices. This is consistent with the descriptive evidence that females
tend to live closer to their work locations (Appendix Figure A7). In addition, there is significant preference
heterogeneity across households on the EV terms, e.g., due to unobserved household demographics.
    We interact the age group dummies with the distance to the nearest signature elementary school. Enroll-
ment to these top schools is restricted to the residents in the corresponding school district, and homes in these
districts command a high premium. The baseline group is those with the primary borrower younger than age
30. The interaction coefficients in all specifications are negative and highly significant, though borrowers
between age 30 and 45 exhibit the strongest preference for proximity to key schools, as they are most likely
to have school age children.
    We do not observe the household size. To capture preference heterogeneity on home size due to variation
in household size, we use the age of the primary borrower as a proxy and interact age group dummies with
home size. Older households have stronger preference for home size. The group with age over 45 has
the strongest preference, likely due to the presence of both children or elderly grandparents living in the
household, a common household structure in China.
    Estimates for coefficients in the mean utility are reported in Table 5. Columns (1) and (2) use OLS,
while columns (3)-(6) are from IV regressions. All regressions month-of-sample interacted with district fixed
effects to capture time-varying changes in market conditions and amenities that could vary across the 18
districts in Beijing. Columns (2)-(6) also include neighborhood (158 different jiedaos) fixed effects to capture
unobserved time-invariant neighborhood amenities. We use the three sets of IVs for housing prices that are
discussed in Section 4.5: the average attributes of the homes within 3km outside the sample complex sold in
a two-month time window of a given home; the interaction between the first set of IVs and the winning odds
of the vehicle licence lottery; the number of homes sold in a two-month window. Our preferred specification
  33 The interaction itself only captures part of the consumer price sensitivity since housing price also enters the mean utilities

(household-invariant utilities).


                                                               25
is Column (6) with all instruments. The first stage F- statistics is 14.22, and the over-identification test cannot
be rejected at 10% level.
    Across all columns, the price coefficient estimate is negative and statistically significant. The IV estimates
are larger (in magnitude) than the OLS estimates, consistent with the findings in the demand literature that
unobserved product attributes bias OLS estimate toward zero. The average price elasticities vary from -1.34 to
-1.94 in Columns (4)-(6), suggesting elastic housing demand.34 The coefficient estimates from IV regressions
in columns (3) to (6) are all intuitively signed. Households prefer larger homes and homes closer to the
signature schools, but dislike older buildings and homes that are far away from parks.
    Based on parameter estimates from the last columns in 4 and 5, the sample average of the implied income
elasticity of housing demand and the income elasticity of marginal driving cost is 0.10 and 0.78, respectively.
To our knowledge, these are the first estimates of the two elasticities based on data from China. Our estimate
of the income elasticity of demand for housing size is somewhat smaller than those based on the US data
while the elasticity of marginal driving cost is largely consistent with the literature. Using 2003 American
Housing Survey, Glaeser et al. (2008) find the elasticity of lot size to be from 0.25 to 0.5 and they argue that
these estimates likely provide an upper bound on the true income elasticity of land demand with respect to
housing prices. In addition, our elasticity of housing demand is with respect to the (condo) interior size rather
than the lot size.


6     Counterfactual Simulations

We now utilize the estimates from the housing and travel mode choices to conduct counterfactual simulations.
We examine five policy scenarios: the driving restriction, congestion pricing, subway expansion, driving re-
striction and subway expansion, and congestion pricing and subway expansion. The first two are demand-side
policies while the third is a supply-side policy. The last two counterfactual analyses examine combinations
of different policy mix. The driving restriction scenario follows the actual policy employed in Beijing during
our sample: a vehicle is prohibited from driving in one of the five working days. Under congestion pricing,
which is hypothetical, we choose a distance-based congestion charge to achieve the same level of congestion
reduction as the driving restriction to facilitate comparison. The key difference between these two policies is
that driving restriction is a command-and-control approach while congestion pricing is a market-based policy
that affects the price that drivers pay. The subway expansion simulation compares the subway network in
2008 and 2014. During this period, the length of the subway network increased from 100km to 486km, with
8 new lines opened for operation. The details of the simulation approach are provided in Appendix F.
    Before we present simulation results, we first validate the structural model by comparing the model's
  34 To evaluate the impact of ignoring the work commuting attribute (the EV terms) on price elasticities, Appendix Table A4 reports

the second-stage regression results based on the first specification without the EV terms in Table 4. The price coefficient estimates
and the price elasticities are smaller in magnitude, consistent with the downward bias due to unobserved attributes. Timmins and
Murdock (2007) find a 50% downward bias in the estimation of consumer welfare from recreation sites when congestion on site is
ignored in demand estimation.



                                                                26
predictions to the mortgage data. We simulate the market equilibrium under the 2008 subway network with
and without the driving restriction. Then we examine the effect of the driving restriction on the housing price
gradient with respect to the subway access using the model's predicted equilibrium housing price. The results
are reported in Appendix Table A5. Consistent with the reduced-form evidence in Table A1 based on observed
data, the driving restriction steepens the price gradient with respect to subway access. The coefficient estimate
on the interaction between subway distance and the driving restriction policy dummy is -0.01 compared with
-0.023 (with a standard error of 0.013) in the regression with observed data.


6.1     Travel and Housing Choices and Equilibrium Prices

We begin by considering the simulation results with sorting in Table 6. To incorporate sorting, we allow
households to re-optimize their housing locations and solve for the new market equilibrium under each sce-
nario. The first three columns are under the 2008 subway network, while the next three are under the 2014
subway network, reflecting the effect of subway expansion. Column (1) shows the baseline results while
columns (2) to (6) present the differences relative to the no-policy baseline in column (1). Panel A reports
changes in the share of mode choices and equilibrium traffic speed under each scenario, Panel B displays key
housing market outcomes, and Panel C presents the welfare results. The results are shown separately for two
income groups: households with income above the median (rich) and those with income below the median
(poor) to reflect distributional considerations following Section 2.
      Several features of endogenous congestion and household sorting have important implications on the
policy effectiveness in terms of congestion relief. Sorting introduces two countervailing forces under a driving
restriction. On one hand, a driving restriction incentivizes households to live closer to work. This reduction
in the driving distance further magnifies the alleviation of congestion as a result of travel mode changes when
households substitute away from driving. On the other hand, congestion reduction from the driving restriction
improves the driving speed, makes driving less costly, and hence disproportionally increases driving among
those with a long commute. As the equilibrium congestion is affected by both intensive and extensive margins,
the increase in the extensive margin dampens the effectiveness of a driving restriction policy.
      In contrast, as a distance-based policy, congestion pricing affects driving in the same direction for both
the intensive and extensive margins and delivers a larger congestion reduction with sorting.35 Congestion
pricing induces mode shifting in the same directions as a driving restriction, but there are two key differences.
First, while congestion pricing generates a modest driving reduction among high-income households, it leads
to a much bigger reduction among low-income households. The large response from the low-income group
is driven by the fact that low-income households are more sensitive to the travel cost and hence to congestion
charges. Second, although the level of congestion reduction is the same under the two policies, the share of
commuting trips via driving remains higher under congestion pricing. This is because distance-based con-
gestion pricing reduces congestion through an intensive margin by disproportionally reducing longer driving
  35 We   set the congestion price to be Y0.92/km to achieve the same congestion reduction as that under a driving restriction.



                                                                  27
trips.
    Despite the large increase in subway usage, subway expansion leads to the smallest congestion reduction.
Column (4) presents the impact of subway expansion from the 2008 network to the 2014 network. Traffic
speed increases by about 7 percent with sorting, only about 40% of what is achieved under the driving re-
striction and congestion pricing, the two demand-side policies. Our estimate is lower than what is implied
by recent empirical studies that focus on the short-run impact of the subway system on traffic congestion
(Anderson, 2014; Yang et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2020).36 Our analysis shows that the effectiveness of subway
expansion is attenuated by sorting as illustrated in Figure 6. Both income groups move farther away from
work and commute longer distances with a more extensive subway network. This additional induced travel
demand from transportation infrastructure investment undermines the objective of congestion reduction, a re-
sult consistent with the previous literature (Downs, 1962; Vickrey, 1969; Duranton and Turner, 2011). The
results on the further separation of workplace and residence from subway expansion corroborate with the
evidence in Gonzalez-Navarro and Turner (2018) and Heblich et al. (2020).
    Nonetheless, the expansion dramatically increased subway access for both income groups: the distance to
the nearest subway station from home is reduced by about 80% for both groups. As a result, the expansion
increases subway ridership by 51% and 56% among high- and low-income groups, respectively. Subway
expansions reduce the share of all other travel modes, though the reduction in taxi and bus trips is more
pronounced. Low-income groups are much more likely to substitute from other travel modes toward subway,
due to their larger price sensitivity. Overall, the reduction in the driving share of commuting trips as a result of
the subway expansions is about 43% of that observed under driving restriction and congestion price, leading
to smaller congestion relief. While the substitution away from bus, bike, and walk trips toward subway trips
does not alleviate traffic congestion, it improves welfare by offering quicker and hence better commuting
choices for some trips.
    We calibrate the congestion charge so that both congestion pricing and driving restrictions achieve the
same level of congestion reduction under the 2008 subway network. At the same level of congestion charges,
congestion pricing is more effective than driving restrictions under the 2014 subway network. That is, the
market-based demand policy and the supply side policy exhibit complementarity by producing a stronger
aggregate impact.37 The results reflect two underlying countervailing forces. On the one hand, subway
expansion increases the attractiveness of using subways and hence reduces the share of driving. This leaves
a smaller room for and reduces the impact of demand-side policies among an average driver. On the other
hand, the demand-side policy could be more effective in affecting the infra-marginal drivers who now have a
better subway network to switch to. The first force appears to dominate under the driving restriction but the
  36 Using a regression discontinuity (in time) approach, Anderson (2014) finds a 47% increase in highway traffic delays during the
peak hours from the shutdown of the Los Angeles bus and rail lines for 35-days. Yang et al. (2018) shows that the subway expansion
in Beijing from 2009 to 2015 reduces traffic congestion by 15% on average using a 120-day window surrounding subway opening.
Using a difference-in-differences framework, Gu et al. (2020) estimate that one new subway line increases traffic speed by 4% during
peak hours on nearby roads based on 45 subway lines opened across 42 Chinese cities during 2016 and 2017.
   37 As demonstrated in Akbar et al. (2018), the supply-side constraint (poor transport infrastructure) is a key determinant in traffic

speed across cities India, highlighting the importance of transport infrastructure provision.


                                                                  28
second force is stronger under congestion pricing. Congestion pricing affects both the extensive and intensive
margins, both of which could be reinforced by the subway expansion.
    Column (5) presents the results from the combination of subway expansion and driving restriction while
column (6) shows the combination of subway expansion and congestion pricing. The impacts on driving under
each of these two columns are similar to the sum of the impacts from the two individual policies. There are
two countervailing forces at play under the combination of supply-side and a demand-side policies. First, the
policies could have redundant impacts in reducing driving trips: some of the driving trips would be reduced
under either the supply-side or the demand-side policy, leading to a smaller aggregate impact than the sum of
the impacts from individual policies. Second, the supply-side policy could enhance the demand-side policy
in that the larger subway network makes substitution away from driving easier under driving restriction or
congestion pricing. Indeed, as the subway becomes a more attractive option, both driving restriction and
especially congestion pricing lead to a larger substitution from driving to subway under the 2014 network
than the 2008 network.
    It is instructive to compare these results to those without sorting that are presented in Appendix Ta-
ble A6.38 The comparison illustrates that sorting reinforces the impact of congestion pricing on congestion
reduction but weakens the impact of subway expansion. Finally, the optimal congestion price (with revenue
recycling) that maximizes consumer surplus is Y1.2/km (the speed increase is 3.81km/h) without sorting com-
pared to Y1.4/km (the speed increase is 4.70km/h) with sorting under the 2014 subway network (as shown in
Panel (b) of Figure 8 below).


Spatial Distribution of Changes               While driving restrictions and congestion pricing both reduce congestion,
the impacts on the spatial distribution of households differ under sorting. Consistent with the reduced-form
evidence, a driving restriction induces high-income households to move closer to subway, while pushing low-
income households to move farther away from work and subway. In contrast, congestion pricing induces both
high- and low-income groups to move closer to work, hence reducing "wasteful commuting" for both groups.
As congestion pricing is distance-based, it induces a stronger sorting than driving restriction. As illustrated
in Figure 6, driving restrictions lead to small changes in commuting distance and often in opposite directions
across neighborhoods, but congestion pricing leads to a larger reduction in commuting distance in nearly all
neighborhoods relative to the no-policy scenario. In terms of subway access, both driving restrictions and
congestion pricing make high-income households move closer to the subway while low-income households
move further away from the subway compared to the baseline scenario. The exact opposite effect on distance
between home and subway for the two income groups is driven by the fact that the subway network is the
same for all households and therefore households have to compete for the closeness to subways in a zero-sum
game, but work locations differ across households so a Pareto improvement in commuting distance is possible.
    In Figure 7, while both driving restriction and congestion pricing increase the prices of homes that are
closer to work centers, the impact is stronger under congestion pricing driven by the distance-based nature of
  38 The   congestion price is kept at Y0.92/km as in Table 6 with sorting to facilitate comparison.


                                                                   29
congestion pricing. Under congestion pricing, housing prices in northwest parts of the city (near work centers)
would increase by about 2,000 Y/m2 while those in some parts of southeast that are far from work centers
and public transit would decrease by 2000 Y/m2 (from a baseline average price at 24022 Y/m2 ). Subway
expansion has opposite spatial impacts on housing price: the price increase is mainly observed among homes
farther away from the city center (where the public transportation is poor prior to the expansion) but also along
the new subway lines as shown by the green lines in Panel (c). Home prices increase by as much as 4000
Y/m2 in some southwest parts of the city, where the subway expansion is greatest and the prices have been
the lowest historically. With both the subway expansion and congestion pricing, the price impacts of subway
expansion dominate those from congestion pricing.
    To understand the differential impact on home prices with respect to access to subway, Appendix Figure
A12 plots the the housing price gradient with respect to the subway distance for 2008 subway network, and
2014 subway network, respectively. The bid-rent curve is steeper under the 2014 network (-Y1900/m2 per
km) than 2008 network (-Y700/m2 per km) because the 2014 network is larger and hence the proximity to this
network is more valuable to commuters. The bid-rent curve under the 2014 network shifts down, reflecting
the composition change of the homes whereby the subway expansion reaches to cheaper homes farther away
from the city center.39


With Sorting and Supply Adjustment Finally, we present the results with sorting in Table 7 and addition-
ally allowing the housing supply to adjust. Housing supply is modeled as a constant elasticity function of
local home prices.40 To fix ideas of how incorporating the supply-side changes our previous findings, think
about a home whose price increases after a policy. Now housing supply of that home will increase. Hence
in the new equilibrium, we expect part of housing price changes to be absorbed by the increasing housing
supply. The additional increases in the housing supply of attractive homes will allow more efficient sorting,
hence magnifying the sorting effects compared to the case when the housing supply is fixed.
    This intuition is supported by our simulation results. In terms of the driving speed, housing supply ad-
justments make the congestion pricing policy more effective (the driving speed improvement increases from
3.13km/h to 3.26 km/h), while attenuating the gains from subway constructions (from 1.49km/h to 1.13 km/h).
These changes could be driven by both the intensive and the extensive margin. With a varying housing sup-
ply, distance to work under congestion pricing further decreases relative to the case where the supply is fixed
(from -0.15km to -0.26 km for high-income male member and from -0.07 km to -0.19 km for low-income
male member), while the distance to work under subway constructions increases relative to the case where the
  39 Similarly, from Figure A13, we find change in the subway price gradient from congestion pricing is larger (-Y80/m2  per km) than
that from driving restriction (-Y10/m2 per km). While the driving restriction makes homes close to the subway more attractive for
everyone, congestion pricing, being a distance-based policy, makes homes close to subway more attractive for those who live far from
work, and for those who are sensitive to a cost increase. The differential impact across households from congestion pricing therefore
steepens the bid-rent curve more. We also find that the increase in the price premium from subway proximity due to congestion
pricing is smaller under the 2014 network than that under the 2008 network under either policy. As the subway network becomes
more attractive, fewer commuters use driving as the travel mode under 2014 network, implying less competition for the homes close
to the subway.
   40 We set the elasticity to be 0.52 following Wang et al. (2012)'s estimates on housing supply elasticity in Beijing.



                                                                30
supply is fixed (from +0.33 km to +0.76 km for high-income male member and from +0.15 km to +0.61 km for
low-income male member). Driving probability, on the other hand, does not change significantly when supply
adjustment is allowed. Hence we conclude that the changes in speed should mostly be contributed to intensive
margin. In other words, the supply-side adjustment under congestion pricing increases the supply of homes
in the city center and allows people to live even closer to their work, which shortens their commuting trips
and magnifies the anti-sprawling effects. The supply-side adjustment under subway construction increases
the supply of homes in suburban areas, making people live farther away from their work and exacerbating the
sprawling effects. We elaborate on the welfare consequences of the supply adjustment in the next section.


6.2     Welfare Analysis

Panel C in Table 6 and 7 as well as Appendix Tables A6 presents the welfare results under the five scenarios,
relative to the baseline scenario of no policy and the 2008 subway network. To construct net welfare, we
keep a balanced government budget. Subway construction and operation are funded by a head tax while the
revenue from congestion pricing is recycled back to households via a lump sum. The discussion in this section
focuses on our benchmark results that are presented in Table 6.
      Since transportation infrastructure such as subways are durable, we assume a 30-year time-span during
which the capital cost should be recouped. The choice of the time span matters for the magnitude of the
welfare but does not qualitatively affect the comparison across the policy scenarios. To be conservative,
we assume that households only benefit from commuting trips and ignore utilities they derive from non-
commuting trips.41 A related issue is the utility function specification where the total housing price rather
than rental price is used. So the numbers on consumer surplus reported below should be considered as a
discounted lifetime utility over a period of 30 years.42
      There are several key findings. First, driving restrictions reduce consumer welfare especially for the
high-income group despite the reduction in traffic congestion in both Table 6 and Table A6.43 There are two
opposing effects as illustrated in Figure 1. On the one hand, the policy should reduce the deadweight loss
from congestion relief. On the other hand, the policy leads to losses in consumer surplus as it removes the
choice of driving from households' choice set one day a week (equivalent to shifting the driving demand
curve downward). The second effect dominates: driving restrictions are associated with a Y92 thousand loss
per household. The welfare loss is larger for high-income households because they are more likely to have
cars and commute via driving (a Y165 thousand loss per high-income household and a Y18 thousand loss
per low-income household). Sorting exacerbates the welfare loss by 1% and 2% for high- and low-income
groups, respectively.
  41 Work   trips account for about 60% of all trips and 75% of the total travel distance in the 2014 travel survey.
  42 Our parameter estimates suggest a much larger marginal utility of housing price than the marginal utility of (per-trip) travel costs.

On average, a 30-year housing tenure would imply 467 trips per year for male borrower ad 577 trips for female borrower. The implied
trip numbers are plausible.
   43 The average household income in Beijing is about Y167k in 2014. The average is Y204k and Y110k for high- and low-income

groups, respectively.


                                                                    31
    In contrast to the driving restriction policy, congestion pricing disproportionally affects low-income house-
holds more in mode choices and consumer surplus given that these households are more price-sensitive. This
distributional concern could hinder the political acceptability of congestion pricing and explain the limited
adoption of congestion pricing despite it being continuously advocated by economists and urban planners.
With the recycling of the congestion revenue that is uniform across income groups, congestion pricing leads
to a welfare gain overall. This highlights the role that revenue from congestion pricing can play in addressing
equity concerns. Sorting strengthens congestion reduction (an additional 0.13 km/h increase with sorting, a
4% increase) and enhances welfare gain from congestion pricing (an additional Y5.8 thousand per house-
hold from sorting, a 10% increase), consistent with the finding in Langer and Winston (2008) based on a
cross-section analysis for 98 US cities.
    Figure 8 shows the welfare gain from different levels of congestion pricing under different assumptions.
The optimal congestion price is 1.6 Y/km and 1.4 Y/km under the 2008 and 2014 subway networks, respec-
tively. At the optimal levels of congestion pricing, sorting would increase consumer welfare by 20%-30%, and
supply adjustment contributes to another 10%-20%. The additional gain of sorting and supply-side adjust-
ment both stems from the reduced deadweight loss from the congestion externality due to the further increase
in traffic speed. This result highlights another reason for incorporating sorting to understand the impacts and
cost-effectiveness of different transportation policies. Sorting also shifts the optimal congestion pricing level
to the right, achieving higher level of equilibrium traffic speed (26.2 km/h with sorting versus 25.3 km/h with-
out sorting). The figure also shows that under a wide range of levels of congestion pricing (<Y2.5/km) and
different sorting assumptions, consumer welfares are always positive. This indicates that congestion pricing
is likely to be an effective tool even when governments cannot gauge the exact optimal pricing level a priori.
    In our simulation table, we assume away the implementation cost of the congestion pricing system in
Beijing because the congestion pricing has yet to be implemented. Singaporean government's implementa-
tion of a satellite based road pricing system in 2021 provides a back of envelope calculation on the cost of a
congestion toll system.44 The system costs Singaporean government around $ 400 million, which is roughly
what would cost Beijing to adopt a similar system. This cost translates into around 1,000 RMB per house-
hold in Beijing, likely to be negligible in our welfare analysis (under optimal pricing, one-year operation of
congestion pricing will create 3,000 RMB toll revenue per household, already enough to cover the cost).
    Third, although subway expansion from 2008 to 2014 does not achieve the same level of congestion
reduction as driving restriction and congestion pricing, it leads to a larger increase in consumer surplus,
especially for the high-income group with and without sorting. The large increase in consumer surplus is
consistent with the fact that the share of subway trips increases more than half after the expansion. Sorting
slightly reduces the aggregate welfare gain due to the reduction in traffic speed. To gauge the magnitude
of net consumer surplus, we calculate the construction cost and the operating cost during a 30-year period.
Assuming that the cost are financed through a uniform lump-sum tax across households, consumer surplus for
  44 For more information on Singapore's road pricing syste, refer         to   https://www.zdnet.com/article/
singapore-readies-satellite-road-toll-system-for-2021-rollout/


                                                       32
high-income households exceeds their tax burden in both with-sorting and without-sorting scenarios, while
consumer surplus of low-income households exceeds their tax burden without sorting, and marginally get hurt
with sorting.
    Fourth, the combination of congestion pricing and subway expansion achieves the largest congestion
reduction and has the potential to achieve the largest welfare gain across five policy scenarios. The results in
Column (6) of Table 6 also show that the revenue from congestion pricing (107.8 thousand Yper household)
could fully cover the costs of subway expansions (103.0 thousand Yper household). Earlier studies have
shown that the revenue from optimal road pricing could be used to fully finance the capital and operating
costs of transportation infrastructure under the condition that capacity and (pavement) durability costs are
jointly characterized by constant returns to scale (Mohring and Harwitz, 1962; Winston, 1991; Verhoef and
Mohring, 2009). In our simulation, the cost of subway construction can indeed be covered by congestion
pricing. The comparison highlights the advantage of congestion pricing from congestion reduction, welfare,
and fiscal perspectives.


7    Conclusion

Transportation plays a critical role in determining residential locations, while at the same time, the pattern
of residential locations affects the efficiency of the transportation system and policies. This study provides,
to our knowledge, the first unified equilibrium sorting framework with endogenous congestion to empirically
evaluate the efficiency and equity impacts of various transportation policies taking into account the interac-
tion between the transportation system and the housing market. Our empirical analysis leverages spatially
disaggregate data on travel behavior and housing transactions with information on residential and work loca-
tions in Beijing from 2006 to 2014. We first estimate a flexible travel mode choice model and then construct
measures of ease-of-commuting for different homes based on the job locations of each working members.
This home-work pair specific measure is determined by traffic congestion and transportation infrastructure,
and enters the housing demand model as an observed housing attribute. Based on the estimates of model pa-
rameters, we conduct counterfactual simulations to examine the impacts and welfare consequences of various
transportation policies from both the demand- and supply- sides: a driving restriction, congestion pricing,
subway expansion, and combinations of demand-side and supply-side policies.
    The parameter estimates from the flexible travel mode choice model imply the median value of time being
two thirds of the hourly wage. The estimates from housing demand illustrate the importance of incorporating
work commute in the model: doing so improves the model fit dramatically and affects preference estimates
on other housing attributes. An average households is willing to pay 20% more in exchange for an easier
work commute for the female member than for an equivalent improvement for the male member. The optimal
congestion pricing taking into account sorting and supply-side responses is estimated to be Y1.6/km and
1.4/km under 2008 and 2014 subway network, respectively. Allowing for equilibrium sorting could have
significant implications on welfare estimates of urban transportation policies: sorting accounts for over 20-


                                                      33
30% of the welfare gain from optimal congestion pricing.
    While different policies can be designed to attain the same level of congestion reduction, they lead to
different spatial patterns of residential location. A driving restriction leads to an income-stratified structure
that favors high-income households with respect to access to subways and work, which could disadvantage
low-income households in the long run. Congestion pricing incentivizes residents to live closer to their work
locations and the equilibrium sorting leads to a more compact city with shorter commutes to work for both
income groups. Subway expansion does the opposite by increasing the separation of residence and workplace.
    In addition to residential locations, different policies generate drastically different efficiency and equity
consequences. While the driving restriction reduces social welfare due to the large distortion in travel choices,
congestion pricing is welfare improving for both income groups with a uniform recycling of congestion rev-
enue. A driving restriction generates a larger welfare loss among high-income households, while congestion
pricing hurts low-income households more in the absence of revenue recycling, pointing to the underlying
difference in political acceptability between the two policies. These results underscore both the distributional
concern and the efficiency gain from congestion pricing relative to the driving restriction. The combination
of congestion pricing and subway expansion stands out as the best policy among all policy scenarios from
congestion reduction, social welfare, and fiscal perspectives. With the congestion pricing of Y0.92/km and
the observed subway expansion from 2008 to 2014, the policy mix generates the largest improvement in both
traffic speed (about 25%) and welfare (Y43,000 per household). In addition, it is self-financing in that the
revenue from congestion pricing could fully cover the cost of the subway expansion.
    Our analysis does not consider the potential impacts of policies on intercity migration and the labor mar-
ket. Both could be additional margins of adjustments that affect traffic congestion and urban spatial structure.
Future research could relax these assumptions to capture even broader general equilibrium effects. Incorpo-
rating these channels in our current framework with rich heterogeneity and endogenous congestion would
necessitate additional data and computational resources. Nevertheless, such a framework would allow the ex-
istence of both congestion and agglomeration forces, which could affect the nature of the interaction between
transportation policies and urban spatial structure.


References

Akbar, Prottoy, "Who Benefits from Faster Public Transit?," Technical Report, working paper 2020.

Akbar, Prottoy A, Victor Couture, Gilles Duranton, and Adam Storeygard, "Mobility and Congestion in
  Urban India," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Albouy, David and Aarsh Farahani, "Valuing Public Goods More Generally: The Case of Infrastructure,"
  2017. Upjohn Institute working paper.

Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis, "The welfare effects of transportation infrastructure improvements,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.


                                                       34
Almagro, Milena and Tomás Domínguez-Iino, "Location Sorting and Endogenous Amenities: Evidence
  from Amsterdam," 2020. Working Paper.

Anas, Alex and Ikki Kim, "General Equilibrium Models of Polycentric Urban Land Use with Endogenous
  Congestion and Job Agglomeration," Journal of Urban Economics, September 1996, 40 (2), 232­256.

   and Robin Lindsey, "Reducing urban road transportation externalities: Road pricing in theory and in
  practice," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2011, p. req019.

Anderson, Michael L, "Subways, strikes, and slowdowns: The impacts of public transit on traffic conges-
  tion," The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (9), 2763­2796.

  , Fangwen Lu, Yiran Zhang, Jun Yang, and Ping Qin, "Superstitions, street traffic, and subjective well-
  being," Journal of Public Economics, 2016, 142, 1­10.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, "New trade models, same old gains?,"
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94­130.

Arnott, Richard J and Joseph E Stiglitz, "Aggregate land rents, expenditure on public goods, and optimal
  city size," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1979, 93 (4), 471­500.

Bajari, Patrick and Matthew E Kahn, "Estimating Housing Demand With an Application to Explaining
  Racial Segregation in Cities," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2005, 23 (1), 20­33.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer and V. Kerry Smith, "Meta-analysis in model implementation: choice sets and the
  valuation of air quality improvements," Journal of Applied Econometrics, September 2007, 22 (6), 1013­
  1031.

Basso, Leonardo J. and Hugo E. Silva, "Efficiency and Substitutability of Transit Subsidies and Other Urban
  Transport Policies," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, November 2014, 6 (4), 1­33.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Matthew E Kahn, "The effects of new public projects to expand urban rail
  transit," Journal of Public Economics, 2000, 77 (2), 241­263.

Bayer, Patrick and Christopher Timmins, "On the equilibrium properties of locational sorting models,"
  Journal of Urban Economics, 2005, 57 (3), 462­477.

   and Robert McMillan, "Tiebout sorting and neighborhood stratification," Journal of Public Economics,
  2012, 96 (11), 1129 ­ 1143.

  , Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan, "A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences for
  Schools and Neighborhoods," Journal of Political Economy, August 2007, 115 (4), 588­638.

  , Nathaniel Keohane, and Christopher Timmins, "Migration and hedonic valuation: The case of air
  quality," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, July 2009, 58 (1), 1­14.

  , Robert McMillan, Alvin Murphy, and Christopher Timmins, "A Dynamic Model of Demand for

                                                    35
  Houses and Neighborhoods," Econometrica, 2016, 84 (3), 893­942.

  ,   , and Kim Rueben, "An equilibrium model of sorting in an urban housing market," Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2004.

Becker, Gary S, "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," The economic journal, 1965, pp. 493­517.

Bento, Antonio M, Lawrence H Goulder, Mark R Jacobsen, and Roger H Von Haefen, "Distributional
  and efficiency impacts of increased US gasoline taxes," American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 667­99.

Bento, Antonio M., Maureen L. Cropper, Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Katja Vinha, "The Effects of
  Urban Spatial Structure on Travel Demand in the United States," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2005, 87 (3), 466­478.

Berry, Steven, Amit Gandhi, and Philip Haile, "Connected Substitutes and Invertibility of Demand,"
  Econometrica, September 2013, 81 (5), 2087­2111.

  , James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, "Automobile prices in market equilibrium," Econometrica, 1995,
  pp. 841­890.

Boyle, Kevin J and John C Bergstrom, "Benefit transfer studies: myths, pragmatism, and idealism," Water
  Resources Research, 1992, 28 (3), 657­663.

Brownstone, David and Kenneth A. Small, "Valuing time and reliability: assessing the evidence from road
  pricing demonstrations," Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 2005, 39 (4), 279 ­ 293.

Brueckner, Jan K, "The structure of urban equilibria: A unified treatment of the Muth-Mills model," Hand-
  book of regional and urban economics, 1987, 2, 821­845.

  , "Urban growth boundaries: An effective second-best remedy for unpriced traffic congestion?," Journal of
  Housing Economics, 2007, 16 (3-4), 263­273.

  , Jacques-Francois Thisse, and Yves Zenou, "Why is central Paris rich and downtown Detroit poor?: An
  amenity-based theory," European economic review, 1999, 43 (1), 91­107.

Buchholz, Nicholas, Laura Doval, Jakub Kastl, Filip Matejka, and Tobias Salz, "The Value of Time:
  Evidence From AuctionedCab Rides," 2020. Working Paper.

Calder-Wang, Sophie, "The Distributional Impact of the Sharing Economy on the Housing Market," 2020.
  Working Paper.

Capps, Cory, David Dranove, and Mark Satterthwaite, "Competition and market power in option demand
  markets," RAND Journal of Economics, 2003, pp. 737­763.

Carrillo, Paul E, Arun S Malik, and Yiseon Yoo, "Driving restrictions that work? Quito's Pico y Placa
  Program," Canadian Journal of Economics, 2016, 49 (4), 1536­1568.



                                                    36
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, "Where is the land of opportunity?
  The geography of intergenerational mobility in the United States," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2014, 129 (4), 1553­1623.

Cropper, Maureen L and Patrice L Gordon, "Wasteful commuting: a re-examination," Journal of urban
  economics, 1991, 29 (1), 2­13.

Davis, Lucas W, "The effect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico City," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 2008, 116 (1), 38­81.

Diamond, Rebecca, "The determinants and welfare implications of US workers' diverging location choices
  by skill: 1980­2000," The American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (3), 479­524.

Downs, Anthony, "The Law of Peak-Hour Expressway Congestion," Traffic Quarterly, 1962, 16 (3), 393­
  409.

Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A Turner, "The fundamental law of road congestion: Evidence from US
  cities," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2616­52.

Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg, "Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1999, 107 (4), 645­681.

   and Maria Marta Ferreyra, "School finance reform: Assessing general equilibrium effects," Journal of
  Public Economics, 2008, 92 (5), 1326 ­ 1351.

  , Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg, "The intergenerational conflict over the provision of public educa-
  tion," Journal of Public Economics, 2012, 96 (3), 255 ­ 268.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D and Cecile Gaubert, "Optimal spatial policies, geography, and sorting," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (2), 959­1036.

Ferreyra, Maria Marta, "Estimating the effects of private school vouchers in multidistrict economies,"
  American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 789­817.

Gibbons, Stephen and Stephen Machin, "Valuing rail access using transport innovations," Journal of urban
  Economics, 2005, 57 (1), 148­169.

Glaeser, Edward L, Matthew E Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport, "Why do the poor live in cities? The role
  of public transportation," Journal of urban Economics, 2008, 63 (1), 1­24.

Goldszmidt, Ariel, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Ian Muir, V. Kerry Smith, and Jenny Wang,
  "The Value of Time in the United States: Estimates from a Nationwide Natural Field Experiment," 2020.
  Working Paper.

Gonzalez-Navarro, Marco and Matthew A. Turner, "Subways and urban growth: Evidence from earth,"
  Journal of Urban Economics, November 2018, 108, 85­106.


                                                     37
Gorback, Caitlin, "Your Uber has Arrived: Ridesharing and the Redistribution of Economic Activity," Tech-
  nical Report, Wharton working paper 2020.

Gu, Yizhen, Jiang Chang, Junfu Zhang, and Ben Zou, "Subways and Road Congestion," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 2020. forthcoming.

Guevara, C. Angelo and Moshe E. Ben-Akiva, "Sampling of alternatives in Logit Mixture models," Trans-
  portation Research Part B: Methodological, 2013, 58, 185 ­ 198.

Hainmueller, Jens, "Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate Reweighting Method to Produce
  Balanced Samples in Observational Studies," Political Analysis, 2012, 20 (1), 25?46.

Hall, Jonathan D., "Pareto improvements from Lexus Lanes: The effects of pricing a portion of the lanes on
  congested highways," Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 158, 113 ­ 125.

Hamilton, Bruce W. and Ailsa Röell, "Wasteful Commuting," Journal of Political Economy, 1982, 90 (5),
  1035­1053.

Harari, Mariaflavia, "Cities in bad shape: Urban geometry in India," American Economic Review, 2020,
  110 (8), 2377­2421.

Heblich, Stephan, Stephen J Redding, and Daniel M Sturm, "The Making of the Modern Metropolis:
  Evidence from London," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2020, 135 (4), 2059­2133.

Hwang, Yujung, "An Estimable General-Equilibrium Structural Model of Immigrants' Neighborhood Sort-
  ing and Social Integration," 2019. Working Paper.

Kahneman, Daniel and Alan B. Krueger, "Developments in the Measurement of Subjective Well-Being,"
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, March 2006, 20 (1), 3­24.

Klaiber, Allen H. and Daniel J. Phaneuf, "Valuing open space in a residential sorting model of the Twin
  Cities," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, September 2010, 60 (2), 57­77.

Knittel, Christopher R and Ryan Sandler, "The welfare impact of indirect pigouvian taxation: Evidence
  from transportation," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.

Kreindler, Gabriel E., "The Welfare Effect of Road Congestion Pricing: Experimental Evidence and Equi-
  librium Implications," 2018. Working Paper.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V., "Decomposing the structural identification of non-market values," Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management, March 2009, 57 (2), 123­139.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V, "Partial identification of preferences in a dual-market sorting equilibrium," 2012. Work-
  ing Paper.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V., V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher Timmins, "The New Economics of Equilibrium
  Sorting and Policy Evaluation Using Housing Markets," Journal of Economic Literature, December 2013,

                                                      38
  51 (4), 1007­1062.

Lancaster, Kelvin, Consumer Demand: A New Approach, Columbia University Press, 1971.

Langer, Ashley and Clifford Winston, "Toward a Comprehensive Assessment of Road Pricing Accounting
  for Land Use," Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 2008, pp. 127­175.

LeRoy, Stephen F and Jon Sonstelie, "Paradise lost and regained: Transportation innovation, income, and
  residential location," Journal of Urban Economics, 1983, 13 (1), 67­89.

Li, Shanjun, "Better lucky than rich? Welfare analysis of automobile license allocations in Beijing and
  Shanghai," Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 85 (4), 2389­2428.

  , Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger, "Gasoline taxes and consumer behavior," American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2014, 6 (4), 302­42.

  , Yanyan Liu, Avralt-Od Purevjav, and Lin Yang, "Does subway expansion improve air quality?," Jour-
  nal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2019, 96, 213 ­ 235.

Liu, Youming, Shanjun Li, and Caixia Shen, "The Dynamic Efficiency in Resource Allocation: Evidence
  from Vehicle License Lotteries in Beijing," Working Paper 26904, National Bureau of Economic Research
  March 2020.

McFadden, Daniel, "Modeling the choice of residential location," Transportation Research Record, 1978,
  (673).

Mohring, Herbert and Mitchell Harwitz, Highway Benefits: An Analytical Framework, Northwestern Uni-
  versity Press, 1962.

Murphy, Alvin, "A dynamic model of housing supply," Available at SSRN 2200459, 2015.

Parry, Ian WH and Kenneth A Small, "Does Britain or the United States have the right gasoline tax?,"
  American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1276­1289.

   and     , "Should urban transit subsidies be reduced?," The American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3),
  700­724.

  , Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington, "Automobile externalities and policies," Journal of economic
  literature, 2007, 45 (2), 373­399.

Petrin, Amil, "Quantifying the benefit of new products: the case of minivan," Journal of Political Economy,
  2002, 110 (4), 705­729.

Phaneuf, Daniel J, V Kerry Smith, Raymond B Palmquist, and Jaren C Pope, "Integrating property value
  and local recreation models to value ecosystem services in urban watersheds," Land Economics, 2008, 84
  (3), 361­381.



                                                    39
Redding, Stephen J. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Quantitative Spatial Economics," Annual Review of
  Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 21­58.

Roback, Jennifer, "Wages, rents, and the quality of life," Journal of political Economy, 1982, 90 (6), 1257­
  1278.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure competition," Journal
  of political economy, 1974, 82 (1), 34­55.

Rosenberger, Randall S and John B Loomis, "Benefit transfer," in "A primer on nonmarket valuation,"
  Springer, 2003, pp. 445­482.

Saiz, Albert, "The geographic determinants of housing supply," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010,
  125 (3), 1253­1296.

Severen, Christopher, "Commuting, Labor, and Housing Market Effects of Mass Transportation: Welfare
  and Identification," 2019. Working Paper.

Sieg, Holger, V Kerry Smith, H Spencer Banzhaf, and Randy Walsh, "Estimating the general equilibrium
  benefits of large changes in spatially delineated public goods," International Economic Review, 2004, 45
  (4), 1047­1077.

Small, Kenneth A., "Valuation of travel time," Economics of Transportation, December 2012, 1 (1-2), 2­14.

Small, Kenneth A, Clifford Winston, and Jia Yan, "Uncovering the distribution of motorists' preferences
  for travel time and reliability," Econometrica, 2005, 73 (4), 1367­1382.

  , Erik T Verhoef, and Robin Lindsey, The economics of urban transportation, Routledge, 2007.

Stiglitz, Joseph E, "The theory of local public goods," in "The economics of public services," Springer, 1977,
  pp. 274­333.

Timmins, Christopher and Jennifer Murdock, "A revealed preference approach to the measurement of
  congestion in travel cost models," Journal of Environmental Economics and management, 2007, 53 (2),
  230­249.

Tra, Constant I., "A discrete choice equilibrium approach to valuing large environmental changes," Journal
  of Public Economics, 2010, 94 (1), 183 ­ 196.

Train, Kenneth E. and Clifford Winston, "Vehicle Choice Behavior and the Declining Market Share of U.S.
  Automakers," International Economic Review, 2007, 48, 1469­1496.

Tseng, Yin-Yen, Erik Verhoef, Gerard de Jong, Marco Kouwenhoven, and Toon van der Hoorn, "A
  pilot study into the perception of unreliability of travel times using in-depth interviews," Journal of Choice
  Modelling, 2009, 2 (1), 8 ­ 28.

Tsivanidis, Nick, "Evaluating the Impact of Urban Transit Infrastructure: Evidence from Bogota's Trans-

                                                      40
  Milenio," 2019. Working Paper.

USDOT, "evised departmental guidance on valuation of travel time in economic analysis," 2015. US Depart-
  ment of Transportation,Washington, DC.

Verhoef, Erik T. and Herbert Mohring, "Self-Financing Roads," International Journal of Sustainable
  Transportation, 2009, 3 (5-6), 293­311.

Viard, V Brian and Shihe Fu, "The effect of Beijing's driving restrictions on pollution and economic activ-
  ity," Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 125, 98­115.

Vickrey, William, "Statement on the pricing of urban street use," Hearing of US Joint Committee on
  Metropolitan Washington Problems, 1959, 11, 42­65.

  , "Pricing in Urban and Suburban Transport," American Economic Review, 1963, 53 (2), 452­465.

Vickrey, William S, "Congestion theory and transport investment," The American Economic Review, 1969,
  59 (2), 251­260.

Walsh, Randy et al., "Endogenous open space amenities in a locational equilibrium," Journal of urban
  Economics, 2007, 61 (2), 319­344.

Wang, Songtao, Su Han Chan, and Bohua Xu, "The Estimation and Determinants of the Price Elasticity of
  Housing Supply: Evidence from China," Journal of Real Estate Research, 2012, 33 (3), 311­344.

Wang, Wen, "Environmental Gentrification," Working Paper, 2020.

Wasi, Nada and Michael P. Keane, "Estimation of Discrete Choice Models with Many Alternatives Using
  Random Subsets of the Full Choice Set: With an Application to Demand for Frozen Pizza," Working Paper,
  2012.

Waxman, Andrew, "The Long Road to Work: The Divergent Effects of Transportation Policies by Worker
  Skill in a Locational Sorting Model," working paper, 2017.

Winston, Clifford, "Efficient Transportation Infrastructure Policy," The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  1991, 5 (1), 113­127.

Wolff, Hendrik, "Value of time: Speeding behavior and gasoline prices," Journal of Environmental Eco-
  nomics and Management, 2014, 67 (1), 71­88.

Xiao, Junji, Xiaolan Zhou, and Wei-Min Hu, "Welfare Analysis of the Vehicle Quota System in China,"
  International Economic Review, 2017, 58 (2), 617­650.

Yang, Jun, Avralt-Od Purevjav, and Shanjun Li, "The Marginal Cost of Traffic Congestion and Road
  Pricing: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Beijing," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  2019. forthcoming.



                                                    41
  , Shuai Chen, Ping Qin, Fangwen Lu, and Antung A Liu, "The effect of subway expansions on vehicle
  congestion: Evidence from Beijing," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2018, 88,
  114­133.

Zhang, Wei, C-Y Cynthia Lin Lawell, and Victoria I Umanskaya, "The effects of license plate-based
  driving restrictions on air quality: Theory and empirical evidence," Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management, 2017, 82, 181­220.

Zheng, Siqi and Matthew E Kahn, "China's bullet trains facilitate market integration and mitigate the cost
  of megacity growth," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110 (14), 1248­1253.




                                                   42
                     Figure 1: Traffic under Congestion Pricing and Driving Restriction


                   Cost
                   ($/km)                                                                   MSC
                                        Welfare loss from            Welfare gain from
                                        driving restriction         congestion reduction




                                                                                                          ASC
                                                                                           MEC

                     p
   Optimal road
                     p0
      pricing , 
                     p1
                                                                                                          MPB

                                                                       V            V0                           Volume
                                                                                                                    (cars/h)

Note: The figure illustrates the welfare impacts of optimal congestion pricing and driving restriction. The x-axis denotes traffic
volume (or throughput measured in the number of cars per hour passing the point). The marginal private benefit MPB curve
represents the demand curve for driving (willingness to pay for driving). The average social cost ASC curve reflects the private
cost of driving, which is experienced based upon the average time cost across the vehicles on the road. The difference between
ASC and the marginal social cost, MSC, is the congestion externality (or the marginal external cost of congestion, MEC). In the
absence of any intervention, equilibrium occurs at V 0 compared to the social optimal level of traffic volume is V  . The shaded
area on the right (red area) shows the deadweight loss due to excess congestion. A Pigouvian tax,  , can be imposed to achieve
the optimal level V  . Alternatively, a driving restriction can be adopted to achieve the same level of congestion reduction but
it would incur a welfare loss denoted by the shaded area on the left (blue area) assuming that the reduction of trips is random
among all privately beneficially trips. Therefore, the welfare impact of the driving restriction is ambiguous a priori.




                                                              43
                                                        Figure 2: Welfare Effects of Transportation Policies with Sorting
                                         (a) Congestion Pricing                                                                 (b) Driving Restriction
                p                                                                                      p




                                                                                                                          Rent gains


                                            Rent gains
                                                                                                                                              Rent losses
44




           pa                                                                                     p0
                                                                                                   a
                                                                                            x                                                                                      x
                       xA xA               xB x
                                                B
                                                                  xC      xC      ¯
                                                                                  x                              xA x
                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                                                 xB    xB                 xCx
                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                           ¯
                                                                                                                                                                           x
                               Poor Sub                                    Poor Car                                       Poor Sub                              Poor Car
                Rich Sub                                 Rich Car                                          Rich Sub                         Rich Car
     Note: This figure illustrates the capitalization of commuting cost changes into the housing market with sorting. A full exposition of the individual bid-rent curves in the diagram is
     provided in the Appendix as well as the underlying assumptions and equilibrium conditions. The left panel shows the effect of a distance-based congestion charge. Colored lines refer
     to the equilibrium bid rent functions lying along the envelope corresponding to rich subway, poor subway, rich driving, poor driving moving from the CBD to the urban boundary.
     Grey lines correspond to the no-policy baseline bid-rent envelope. The boundaries marked with a prime indicate the change in spatial structure induced by sorting, namely that fewer
     rich and more poor take the subway. The area between the policy and no-policy bid-rent envelopes reflects the capitalization effect of transportation policies, which corresponds to
     net welfare improvement. Congestion pricing induces a welfare increase for subway commuters, based largely on the effect of recycled revenues. It also induces a improvement
     in welfare for rich drivers reflecting the impact of lower congestion net of the cost of the congestion fee. It also induces an almost negligible decrease in welfare for poor drivers
     reflecting their smaller values of time. In contrast, the driving restriction in the right panel shows how the rich are induced to increase subway commuting and the poor do, albeit
     by a trivial amount. The driving restriction induces a gain for subway commuters, but a larger loss for those driving because of the time costs associated with using subway on long
     commuters during restricted days.
             Figure 3: Travel Patterns for Commuting Trips from Beijing Household Travel Survey
                                                         (a) 2010 vs. 2014




                                                 (b) High income vs. Low Income




Note: This figure plots trip share, time, and costs by different modes for work commuting trips in the Beijing Household Travel
Survey of 2010 and 2014. There are six main trip modes: walk, bike, bus, subway, car, and taxi. For bus and subway trips, they could
include segments with other modes but we characterize them as the bus and subway trips. Trips using both bus and subway are rare
(less than 3% in the data and we drop them in the analysis.) The mode shares are based on chosen modes in the data. Travel time,
cost (defined as % of hourly wage), and distance are constructed as shown in Appendix ??. The numbers in the figures are for the
chosen modes. High-income households are defined as households whose income level is greater than the median in the survey year.




                                                                45
                    Figure 4: Housing and Household Attributes from Housing Mortgage Data

                    (a) Housing Price (Y/m2 )                                          (b) Housing Size (m2 )




                     (c) Distance to Work (m)                                   (d) Monthly Household Income (Y)




Note: This figure plots the averages of key housing and household attributes by Traffic Analysis Zone (TAZ) based on mortgage data
from 2006 to 2014. The values are the averages across homes in the TAZ from the mortgage data during the data period. Distance
to work is the driving distance to work for all borrowers in the data (including primary and secondary borrowers when both are
present). Monthly household income is based on the income of the households at the time of purchase in the given TAZ. Values
are classified into five quintiles: the red color corresponds to larger values while the blue color for low values. The white color
represents no observations in the TAZ.




                                                                46
      Figure 5: Reduced Form Evidence: Housing Price Gradient before and after Driving Restriction


                                                                     Panel A: Raw Data




                                    14      12
                          Price (1000 ¥/m2)
                                  10                                             Pre-slope=-0.190

                                                                                Post-slope=-0.316
                                    8
                                    6




                                                 0                 5                    10                   15
                                                                   Distance (km) to subway

                                                     Pre-Driving Restriction      Post-Driving Restriction


                                                                   Panel B: Residualized
                                    12      11




                                                                                 Pre-slope=-0.192
                          Price (1000 ¥/m2)
                                     10




                                                                                 Post-slope=-0.287
                              9     8
                                    7




                                                 0                  5                    10                  15
                                                                   Distance (km) to subway

                                                     Pre-Driving Restriction      Post-Driving Restriction



Notes: These binned scatterplots show housing price per square meter against distance to subway before and after the driving
restriction goes into effect in Beijing. The sample spans 24 months before and after the policy starting point (July 2008). The top
panel is the binned scatter plot based on the raw data of price per m2 and the distance to the nearest subway station. The bottom
panel controls for neighborhood fixed effects, and year by month fixed effects. The slopes denoted on the figure are based on
quadratic fits.




                                                                          47
                  Figure 6: Changes in Commuting Distance from Simulated Policies (in meters)

                       (a) Driving Restriction                                              (b) Congestion Pricing




                       (c) Subway Expansion                                      (d) Subway Expansion+ Congestion Pricing




Note: This figure illustrates simulated changes in commuting distance under different counterfactual policy scenarios (relative to
the baseline scenario of no policy). The results are based on the simulations in Table 6. Each cell represents a TAZ. A warm color
corresponds to an increase in distance while a cold color represents a decrease. Cells in white have no observations in the simulation
sample period in the TAZ. Green lines represent new subway lines from year 2008 to 2014.




                                                                 48
                        Figure 7: Changes in Housing Prices from Simulated Policies (Y/m2 )

                       (a) Driving Restriction                                               (b) Congestion Pricing




                       (c) Subway Expansion                                       (d) Subway Expansion+ Congestion Pricing




Note: This figure illustrates simulated changes in home prices under different counterfactual policy scenarios (relative to the baseline
scenario of no policy). The results are based on the simulations shown in Table 6. Each cell represents a TAZ. Warmer colors
corresponds to an increase in price while a cold color represents a decrease. Cells in white have no observations in the simulation
sample period in the TAZ. Green lines represent new subway lines from year 2008 to 2014.




                                                                  49
                    Figure 8: Optimal Congestion Pricing under 2008/2014 Subway Network
                                                   (a) 2008 Subway Network




                                                   (b) 2014 Subway Network




Note: The plot shows the welfare change with respect to congestion pricing under 2008/2014 subway network, without sorting (PE
scenario, yellow dotted line), with sorting (GE scenario, orange solid line), or with sorting and supply adjustment (blue dashed
line). Without sorting, the optimal congestion pricing is Y1.4/km for 2008 subway system and Y1.2/km for 2014. Sorting shifts the
optimal toll to the right. The optimal congestion pricing is Y1.6/km for 2008 subway system and Y1.4/km for 2014 under sorting.
The difference of "with sorting" and "without sorting" welfare shows the welfare gain from household sorting. The difference of
"with sorting" and "without sorting and supply adjustment" welfare shows the welfare gain from supply adjustment.




                                                               50
                              Table 1: Summary Statistics of Household Travel Survey

                                                                    2010                       2014
                                                           N        Mean     SD         N      Mean        SD
                   Respondent characteristics
                   Income: <50k                         14780        0.48    0.50     20573     0.18      0.38
                   Income: [50k, 100k)                  14780        0.39   0.49      20573     0.44      0.50
                   Income: >=100k                       14780        0.13   0.34      20573      0.38     0.49
                   Having a car (=1)                    14780        0.44   0.50      20573     0.62      0.49
                   Female (=1)                          14780        0.44   0.50      20573     0.43      0.50
                   Age (years)                          14780       37.59   10.28     20573     38.47     9.84
                   College or higher (=1)               14780        0.61    0.49     20573     0.64      0.48
                   Home within 4th ring (=1)            14780        0.51    0.50     20573      0.41     0.49
                   Workplace within 4th ring (=1)       14780        0.59   0.49      20573      0.50     0.50
                   Trip related variables
                   Travel time                          30334       0.87     1.06     42820      0.74     0.98
                   Travel cost                          30334       2.47     5.55     42820      3.83     6.96
                   Distance<2km                         30334       0.25     0.43     42820      0.24     0.43
                   Distance within 2-5km                30334       0.27     0.45     42820      0.26     0.44
Note: The table reports respondent and trip characteristics of all work commuting trips within the 6th ring road from 2010 and
2014 Beijing Household Travel Survey.Travel time and travel cost variables are those associated with the chosen modes, and are
constructed as shown in Appendix ??. Distance<2km and Distance within 2-5km denotes straight-line distance and captures short to
medium-distance commuting trips. The travel mode shares are shown in Figure 3.


                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics of Housing Data

                                                                    Mean       SD       Min        Max
                       Housing attributes
                       Transaction year                            2011       1.89     2006        2014
                       Price/m2 (Y'000s)                           19.83      9.56      5.00       68.18
                       Unit size (m2 )                             92.68     40.13     16.71      400.04
                       Household annual income (Y'000s)           159.71    103.34      6.24     2556.90
                       Primary borrower age                       33.99      6.62      20.00      62.00
                       Housing complex attributes
                       Distance to key school (km)                  6.05      5.61      0.03      23.59
                       Complex vintage                              2004        8       1952       2017
                       Green space ratio                            0.32      0.06      0.03       0.85
                       Floor to land area ratio                     2.56      1.12      0.14      16.00
                       No. of units                                 1972      1521       24       13031
                       Home-work travel variables
                       Walking distance (km)                        14.10     9.51      0.00      62.92
                       Driving distance (km)                        16.13    10.87      0.00      85.22
                       Home to subway distance (km)                  2.13     2.31      0.04      28.37
                       Subway route distance (km)                   15.17    10.70      0.00      68.40
  Note: This table reports statistics from the mortage dataset over 2006-2014. The number of housing transactions is 79,884,
  all of which are within the 6th ring road. The dataset is weighted to match the statistics of real-estate listings. Housing
  complex is defined as a group of building in the same development. Distance to key school is the distance of home to the
  nearest elementary school with a key school designation. Distance to park is the distance to the nearest park or green space.
  Home-work travel variables are constructed following the same method as outlined in the household travel survey. Home to
  subway distance is the distance from home to the nearest subway station. Subway route distance is the distance between the
  two subway stations that are closest to home and work locations.




                                                               51
                                  Table 3: Estimation Results of Travel Mode Choices

                                                                 Logit                       Random Coefficient
                                                      (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
              Travel Time (1 )                 -1.194             -0.270      -0.191
                                              (0.082)            (0.006)     (0.006)
              Travel Cost/Hourly Wage (2 )     -1.578             -0.788      -0.565      -1.411     -1.424      -2.531
                                              (0.324)            (0.028)     (0.034)     (0.041)    (0.052)     (0.065)
              Random coefficients on travel time (µ )
              Travel Time                                                                 -0.955     -0.885      -0.931
                                                                                         (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.012)
              Random coefficients on mode-specific constants (m )
              Driving                                                                                3.394       3.391
                                                                                                    (0.049)     (0.054)
              Subway                                                                                             4.470
                                                                                                                (0.142)
              Bus                                                                                                3.851
                                                                                                                (0.056)
              Bike                                                                                               3.887
                                                                                                                (0.054)
              Taxi                                                                                               4.203
                                                                                                                (0.353)
              Mode*Year FE                            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
              Mode*Trip related FE                                 Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
              Mode*Demographic FE                                              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
              Log-likelihood                       -116287      -109929      -91119      -87353     -85099      -77706

              Implied mean VOT                       0.757        0.342       0.339      1.760       1.615       0.956
              Implied median VOT                     0.757        0.342       0.339      1.557       1.429       0.846
Note: The number of observations are 73,154. All six specifications include a rich set of fixed effects interacting with mode-specific
constants (travel model dummies). Trip related FE includes trip distance bins and the origin and destination dummies (e.g., if the
origin is within 2nd ring row). Demographics FE includes respondent's age, gender, education, and car ownership. The first three
specifications are multinomial logit while the last three add random coefficients to the model. 200 randomized Halton draws are
used to estimate the random coefficients in the last three specifications. The distribution of the preference on time in the last three
specifications is specified as a chi-square distribution (winsorized at 5th and 95th percentile) with degrees of freedom equals three:
µ  2 (3) so as to capture the long tail of VOT distribution. The estimates of µ are provided in the table. The random coefficients on
travel mode dummies (driving, subway, bus, bike, and taxi) are assumed to have normal distribution (walking is taken as the baseline
group). The estimates of m of those normal distributions for each travel mode are provided in the table. The last row provides the
implied median value of time for each specification. Standard errors clustered at the respondent level are below estimates:  p < 0.10,
 p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                                 52
                       Table 4: Estimation Results of Housing Choices - Nonlinear Parameters

                                                              No EV                 With EV            EV and Random Coef.
                                                           Para     SE            Para     SE           Para       SE
       Demographic Interactions
       Price (in 1 million RMB)*ln(income)                0.965       0.007      1.005       0.008      1.030          0.016
       Age in 30-45*ln(distance to key school)            -0.329      0.004      -0.391      0.005      -0.420         0.010
       Age > 45*ln(distance to key school)                -0.074      0.009      -0.111      0.010      -0.123         0.021
       Age in 30-45*ln(home size)                         1.343       0.014      1.443       0.015      1.486          0.029
       Age > 45*ln(home size)                             2.394       0.028      2.665       0.031      2.746          0.061
       EVMale                                                                    0.709       0.026      0.755          0.006
       EVFemale                                                                  0.833       0.026      0.893          0.006
       Random Coefficients
        (EVMale )                                                                                       0.379          0.013
        (EVFemale )                                                                                     0.482          0.012
       Log-likelihood                                    -206829                 -170057               -168808

Note: The estimation uses weighted mortgage plan data from Year 2008-2014. The number of observations is 79,884. The results
are from MLE. The first specification does not include EV (ease of commuting); the second specification does; the third specification
further controls random coefficients on EV terms. EV is constructed by taking observed household demographics into travel model
estimates (Column 6 of Table 3). The big decrease in log-likelihood from the first to the second specification indicates strong
explanatory power of EV term.



                         Table 5: Estimation Results of Housing Choices - Linear Parameters

                                           OLS            OLS            IV1          IV1+IV2            IV3            All
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)
         Price (million RMB)            -2.240***      -2.191***      -6.283***      -6.454***       -7.091***      -6.596***
                                         (0.186)        (0.184)        (0.867)         (0.583)         (1.640)       (0.534)
         Ln(home size)                  -3.648***      -3.797***       3.331**       3.631***           4.721       3.879***
                                         (0.257)        (0.261)        (1.505)         (1.022)         (2.927)       (0.969)
         Building age                   -0.043***      -0.029***      -0.125***      -0.129***       -0.144***      -0.132***
                                         (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.020)         (0.014)         (0.040)       (0.013)
         Floor to Area Ratio              -0.006         -0.009         -0.023          -0.023          -0.019        -0.023
                                         (0.034)        (0.025)        (0.032)         (0.033)         (0.036)       (0.034)
         Ln(dist. to park)              0.210***         0.074        -0.389***      -0.408***        -0.475**      -0.424***
                                         (0.069)        (0.057)        (0.117)         (0.101)         (0.222)       (0.103)
         Ln(dist. to key school)        0.950***       0.782***        0.323**         0.304**          0.210        0.288**
                                         (0.080)        (0.137)        (0.139)         (0.121)         (0.213)       (0.118)
         Year-Month-District FE              Y              Y              Y               Y               Y             Y
         Neighborhood FE                                    Y              Y               Y               Y             Y

         First-stage F                                                   10.5             14.2          9.9            14.2

         Avg. Price elasticity             2.96           2.96           -1.04          -1.34          -1.94          -1.44

Note: The number of observations is 79,884. The dependent variable is the mean utilities recovered from the first stage. The first two
columns are from OLS and the last four are from IVs. The floor-area ratio of the complex, a measure of complex density, is the size
of the total floor area over the size of the parcel that the complex is located on. Distance to key school is the distance to the nearest
key elementary school. Column (3) and (4) use IV1 as price instruments, i.e. the average attributes of homes (building size, age, log
distance to park, and log distance to key school) that are within 3km outside the same complex sold in a two-month time window
from a given home. Column (4) and (6) additionally use IV2, i.e. the interaction between the distance related instruments defined in
Column (3) and the winning odds of the vehicle licence lottery as instruments. The winning odds decreased from 9.4% in Jan. 2011
to 0.7% by the end of 2014. Column (5) uses number of homes transacted in the three-month time window in the real estate listings
                                                                   53
dataset. Standard errors clustered at the neighborhood-year level are in parentheses:  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                                                     Table 6: Simulation Results: with Sorting

                                                                          2008 Subway Network                                         2014 Subway Network
                                                            (1)                  (2)                 (3)                          (4)               (5)                        (6)
                                                        No Policy         Driving restriction Congestion pricing              No Policy      Driving restriction        Congestion pricing
                                                      Baseline levels        s from (1)          s from (1)                   s from (1)        s from (1)                 s from (1)
      Household Income Relative to Median             High      Low        High       Low     High       Low                 High     Low    High       Low             High       Low

      Panel A: Travel outcomes
      Drive                                           41.65 21.44         -6.07        -2.59      -2.90       -4.54          -2.14 -1.66        -7.44       -3.84       -4.59       -5.60
      Subway                                           9.02    10.77      1.09          0.66       0.75       0.89            4.62     6.06      5.59       6.42         5.12       6.70
      Bus                                             22.44 30.47         1.51          0.26       0.42       0.96           -1.54 -2.53        -0.06       -1.95       -0.92       -1.28
      Bike                                            15.96 24.01         1.54          0.63       0.63       1.48           -0.80 -1.64         0.52       -1.08       -0.27       -0.38
      Taxi                                             2.20     1.32      0.70          0.34       0.51       0.46           -0.16 -0.11         0.42       0.17         0.29       0.27
      Walk                                             8.74    11.99      1.23          0.70       0.59       0.74            0.02    -0.13      0.98       0.28         0.37       0.29
      Speed                                                21.49                   3.13                   3.13                    1.49                  4.44                    4.61

      Panel B: Housing market outcomes
      Male member's distance to work (km)             19.45     18.88      0.01        0.02       -0.15       -0.07           0.33      0.15     0.37        0.15        0.15        0.08
      Female member's distance to work (km)           17.54     11.95      0.01        0.01       -0.12       -0.05           0.39      0.21     0.43        0.21        0.24        0.17
54




      Distance to subway (km)                         5.33      4.30      -0.03        0.03       -0.02       0.02           -4.14     -3.44    -4.14       -3.44       -4.14       -3.44

      Panel C: Welfare analysis per household (thousand Y)
      Consumer surplus (+)                                                -165.3       -19.6     -76.8        -61.3          220.3     100.0     47.8        77.6       131.9        40.2
      Toll revenue (+)                                                                           115.9        115.9                                                     107.8       107.8
      Subway cost (­)                                                                                                        103.0     103.0    103.0       103.0       103.0       103.0
      Net welfare                                                         -165.3       -19.6      39.1        54.5           117.3      -3.0    -55.2       -25.4       136.7        44.9
     Note:Simulated results based on estimated model parameters in Column (6) of Table 3 and Column (6) of Table 5. The simulation shows counterfactual results for 2014 sample
     households and homes. The detailed simulation procedure can be found in F. This table shows results with sorting and supply adjustment. In particular, we allow housing supply to
     adjust with a price elasticity of two (implying that a Y1,000 price increase would induces a 0.12% increase in housing supply on average). Column (1) shows the baseline results
     while columns (2) to (6) shows the differences from column (1). Driving restriction prohibits driving in one of five work days. Congestion pricing is Y0.92 per km to generate same
     reduction as driving restriction. High-income household are those with income above the median household income. Subway cost per household includes the construction cost and
     the 30-year operating cost equally shared among 7.2 million households. We apportion 100% of it to work commute in our welfare analysis. Toll revenue is the revenue per household
     from congestion pricing during a 30-year period (to keep a balanced government budget, the toll revenue is recycled uniformly to each household). Net welfare is consumer welfare
     per household after revenue recycling or tax-funded subway construction and operation.
                                                   Table 7: Simulation Results: with Sorting and Housing-Supply Response

                                                                           2008 Subway Network                                          2014 Subway Network
                                                             (1)                  (2)                 (3)                           (4)               (5)                        (6)
                                                         No Policy         Driving restriction Congestion pricing               No Policy      Driving restriction        Congestion pricing
                                                       Baseline levels        s from (1)          s from (1)                    s from (1)        s from (1)                 s from (1)
      Household Income Relative to Median              High      Low        High       Low     High       Low                  High     Low    High       Low             High       Low

      Panel A: Travel outcomes
      Drive                                            41.65 21.44          -6.08       -2.60      -2.90       -4.52           -2.32 -1.80         -7.55       -3.93       -4.71       -5.72
      Subway                                            9.02    10.77       1.10         0.68       0.78       0.94             5.00    6.57        5.98       6.95         5.42       7.13
      Bus                                              22.44 30.47          1.52         0.27       0.38       0.87            -1.52 -2.48         -0.06       -1.91       -0.92       -1.25
      Bike                                             15.96 24.01          1.54         0.62       0.62       1.45            -0.86 -1.78          0.42       -1.26       -0.33       -0.51
      Taxi                                              2.20     1.32       0.70         0.34       0.51       0.47            -0.20 -0.15          0.38       0.13         0.27       0.24
      Walk                                              8.74    11.99       1.23         0.69       0.62       0.80            -0.10 -0.36          0.83       0.02         0.28       0.10
      Speed                                                 21.49                   3.13                   3.26                     1.13                   4.04                    4.39

      Panel B: Housing market outcomes
      Male member's distance to work (km)              19.45     18.88       0.02       0.03       -0.26        -0.19           0.76      0.61      0.84        0.63        0.47        0.44
      Female member's distance to work (km)            17.54     11.95       0.02       0.02       -0.21        -0.14           0.76      0.60      0.82        0.62        0.52        0.48
55




      Distance to subway (km)                          5.33      4.30       -0.04       0.01       -0.09        -0.06          -4.13     -3.45     -4.14       -3.44       -4.14       -3.45

      Panel C: Welfare analysis per household (thousand Y)
      Consumer surplus (+)                                                 -165.4       -18.7      -65.7       -59.1           187.4     105.3     18.3        84.8       108.4         45.9
      Toll revenue (+)                                                                             115.2       115.2                                                      108.9        108.9
      Subway cost (­)                                                                                                          103.0     103.0    103.0       103.0       103.0        103.0
      Net welfare                                                          -165.4       -18.7       49.5        56.0            84.4      2.3     -84.7       -18.2       114.3         51.9
     Note: Simulated results based on estimated model parameters using 2014 housing data. We allow housing supply to adjust with a price elasticity of two (implying that a Y1,000 price
     increase would induces a 0.12% increase in housing supply on average). Column (1) shows the baseline results while columns (2) to (6) show the differences from column (1). The
     driving restriction prohibits driving in one of five workdays. Congestion pricing is Y0.92 per km to generate the same reduction as the driving restriction. High-income household are
     those with income above the median household income. Subway cost per household includes the construction cost and the 30-year operating cost equally shared among 7.2 million
     households. We apportion 100% of it to work commute in our welfare analysis. Toll revenue is the revenue per household from congestion pricing during a 30-year period (to keep a
     balanced government budget, the toll revenue is recycled uniformly to each household). Net welfare is consumer welfare per household after revenue recycling or tax-funded subway
     construction and operation.
