                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ENTREPOT: HUBS, SCALE, AND TRADE COSTS

                                       Sharat Ganapati
                                      Woan Foong Wong
                                          Oren Ziv

                                      Working Paper 29015
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29015


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Treb Allen, Costas Arkolakis, Panle Jia Barwick, Bruce Blonigen, Johannes Boehm,
Mark Colas, Kerem Coar, Anca Cristea, Meredith Crowley, Carsten Eckel, Stefania Garetto,
Matthew Grant, Keith Head, Reka Juhasz, Steve Matusz, Ezra Oberfield, Nina Pavcnik, Andres
Rodriguez-Clare, Robert Staiger, Meredith Startz, and seminar participants at Stanford
University, University of Michigan, University of Virginia, Boston College, Georgetown
University, the Federal Reserve Board, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, Indiana
University, Syracuse University, University of Cambridge, University of Mannheim, and
University of Warwick as well as participants at the NBER Conference on Cities, Labor Markets,
and the Global Economy, 2019 Mid-Atlantic International Trade Workshop (Duke), 2020
CeMENT Mentoring Workshop, 20th Annual Nordic International Trade Seminars, and other
conferences for helpful comments. Andrew Castro, Ray McCormick, Giacomo Romanini, and
Philip Valtadoros provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sharat Ganapati, Woan Foong Wong, and Oren Ziv. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Entrepot: Hubs, Scale, and Trade Costs
Sharat Ganapati, Woan Foong Wong, and Oren Ziv
NBER Working Paper No. 29015
July 2021
JEL No. F10,F12,F14

                                            ABSTRACT

Entrepôts are hubs that facilitate trade between multiple origins and destinations. We study these
entrepôts, the network they form, and their impact on international trade. We document that the
trade network is a hub-and-spoke system, where 80% of trade is shipped indirectly--nearly all
via entrepôts. We estimate indirect-shipping consistent trade costs using a model where
shipments can be sent indirectly through an endogenous transport network and develop a
geography-based instrument to estimate economies of scale in shipping. Counterfactual
infrastructure improvements at entrepôts have on average ten times the global welfare impact of
improvements at non-entrepôts.

Sharat Ganapati                                 Oren Ziv
Department of Economics                         Michigan State University
Georgetown University                           Department of Economics
Edward B. Bunn, S.J. Intercultural Center       orenziv@msu.edu
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20057
and CESifo
and also NBER
sg1390@georgetown.edu

Woan Foong Wong
Economics Department
1285 University Of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
wongwoanfoong@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29015
1         Introduction
Exchanging goods over borders involves more than production and consumption: ship-
ping, transshipping, and distribution can include multiple agents and additional countries
beyond producers and consumers. These activities are concentrated at entrep^
                                                                           ots, trading
hubs which goods travel through--from other origins and bound for other destinations.
The idea that entrep^
                    ots are integral to the trade network and are engines of growth have
been the impetus behind many policies aimed at attaining or maintaining entrep^
                                                                              ot status
(Financial Times (FT) 2015, Reuters 2016, Wall Street Journal (WSJ) 2021).
        This paper studies entrep^
                                 ots, the trade network they form, and their impact on in-
ternational trade. We seek to answer the following questions: (1) How do goods move
from their origins to their destinations and what role do entrep^
                                                                ots play in facilitating this
process? (2) What trade costs can explain the observed routes that goods take and the
existence of entrep^
                   ots? and (3) How does this pattern of trade through entrep^
                                                                             ots impact
global and regional trade as well as welfare?
        Our first contribution documents that trade is indirect and flows from origins to desti-
nations through entrep^
                      ots. We construct and merge two new datasets that jointly map the
journeys of containerized shipments from their origins to US destinations including stops
in other countries. This microdata grants us a unique, comprehensive look at how goods
move through the global trading network. Previous work observed origin-destination
trade alone or aggregated ship movements, and was unable to examine indirect trade,
which we define as trade journeys that make stops with the shipment either on-board or
transshipped--transferred onto a ship--at additional countries (third-party countries ).
        We document two stylized facts. First, the majority of trade--80%--is shipped in-
directly.1 The median shipment stops at two additional countries before its destination.
On average, most countries trade with the US indirectly. We further show that indirect
trade increases shipping time and distance by 30%. Second, this indirectness is incred-
ibly concentrated, with over 90% of indirect trade channelled through a small number
of entrep^
         ots. This establishes that international trade takes place over a hub-and-spoke
network. These facts highlight an inherent trade-o. Indirectness increases the distance
and time costs of trade, but by revealed preference it lowers costs, especially for the
spokes of the network which disproportionately choose to ship via entrep^
                                                                        ots.
    1
        The majority of trade is also transshipped via a third-party country before its destination.




                                                       1
       Our second contribution estimates the trade costs that rationalize the documented
direct and indirect trade through the global trading network. To achieve this, we build
a general equilibrium model of trade with entrep^
                                                ots and endogenous trade costs which
flexibly accommodates input-output linkages. Producers choose shipping routes and com-
pete for consumers in destination countries in a generalized Ricardian setting. Low-cost
routes can involve shipments through third-party countries, and entrep^
                                                                      ots endogenously
arise at locations through which shipping costs are lowest. Crucially, we allow for both
scale economies and dis-economies to govern shipping costs on these network links.
       Expanding beyond the US to include global data on shipment flows, we estimate these
trade costs for each leg of the network, generating a new set of origin-destination trade
costs that is consistent with the global trade network. An advantage of our model is
that we need to make very few assumptions on the production and consumption settings;
we recover a trade cost matrix that best rationalizes the observed link-level tra c given
the observed origin-destination-level trade flows. An important contribution is that we
establish the validity of both our estimates and modeling approach by finding a tight
match between our estimated trade costs and external freight rate data, as well as be-
tween our predicted network flows and microdata on US-bound shipment journeys. Our
measures of indirectness, estimates of leg- and origin-destination-level trade costs, as well
as resulting market access measures are available online to researchers.
       Our estimation finds the presence of bilateral scale economies--the causal eect of
increasing shipping volumes on decreasing trade cost--using an instrumental variable ap-
proach. Embedded in our model is the intuition that some legs have inherently higher
tra c (higher demand) because they are geographically closer to the shortest path be-
tween origins and destinations. For example, Singapore lies along the Straits of Malacca,
close to the lowest-distance route between many European and Asian countries.2 We use
this variation to construct an instrument for shipping quantities: for each leg, we compute
the distance to and from the leg relative to the shortest distance between each origin and
destination, recovering a weighted average of each leg's proximity to global trade. We
find that increasing tra c volume on a leg by 1% would reduce costs by 0.06%. As the
median journey in our microdata has 3 legs, a 10% increase in overall origin-destination
trade translates into a 0.17% decrease in trade costs.
       Our third contribution is to quantify the global trade and welfare impact of the trade
   2
    The emergence of entrep^  ots as hubs in geographically advantageous locations is consistent with the
findings of Barjamovic et al. (2019).


                                                   2
network. Our main counterfactual quantifies the regional and global trade, and welfare
benefits of transport infrastructure improvements for each country in our sample. We
show that entrep^
                ots are pivotal to the global trade network: welfare impacts of infras-
tructure investment are on average ten times higher at entrep^
                                                             ots than non-entrep^
                                                                                ots.
Conflating transportation and non-transportation trade costs, or failing to account for
the endogenous response of the network to changes in non-transportation trade costs,
impact estimated eects by an order of magnitude on average. This is especially true
for entrep^
          ots, which dierentially concentrate the benefits of infrastructure improvements
regionally relative to non-entrep^
                                 ots. We find that scale economies amplify the concen-
tration of benefits, highlighting how scale economies in transportation can be a source
of agglomeration. We establish that Egypt (and the Suez Canal) is the most pivotal
location in the trade network, as reflected by the strain in global supply chains when it
was blocked in March 2021 (Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, AP News, 2021).
   Our next two counterfactuals illustrate the magnitude and distributional eects of
transportation network changes, first through the network's endogenous response to
non-transportation trade cost changes and then through direct changes to the trans-
portation network. Our second counterfactual investigates the ramifications of worsening
trade relations between one hub, the United Kingdom (UK), and its trading partners--
Brexit. In our baselines analysis which only considers the direct impact of increased
non-transportation trade costs, we find that outcomes are aected through direct trade
with the UK or multilateral resistance. When our analysis accounts for the interaction of
network trade costs and scale economies, we find that smaller countries like Ireland and
Iceland that use the UK as an entrep^
                                    ot to access all other trading partners are dispropor-
tionately hurt (as recognized in Financial Times, 2020), illustrating how such interactions
can lead to dierent distributional outcomes even when the initial changes are unrelated
to transport. Our third counterfactual studies the eects of opening up the Arctic Ocean
to regular year-round shipping, connecting countries in East Asia and Europe. We find
that the network structure of trade distributes gains beyond directly impacted countries
with pre-existing shipping routes. Network spillovers are an order of magnitude above
those observed from input-output linkages, and global welfare impacts are further tripled
by the feedback loop imposed by scale economies.
   This paper ties two broad literature together, combining detailed microdata on the
flow of goods through the trade network with a structural model of trade and trans-


                                            3
portation. The first dives deeply into the technology underpinning the fundamentals of
international trade, such as container shipping and infrastructure investment (Co¸
                                                                                 sar and
Demir, 2018). The second considers the geography and cost structures of transporta-
tion networks (Allen and Arkolakis, 2019). After documenting novel aspects of the trade
network by tracing the path of shipments, we estimate the cost structures and scale
economies that are consistent with the technologies underpinning these fundamentals in
order to quantify the global and local welfare eects of the network.
       With regards to the technologies underpinning trade, a wide literature shows how
both containerization and infrastructure investments have local outcomes (Heiland et al.,
2019; Ducruet et al., 2019; Wong, 2020; Co¸
                                          sar and Demir, 2018; Bernhofen, El-Sahli
and Kneller, 2016; Rua, 2014).3 We model transport costs as part of a global network
of container shipping routes, a setting which accounts for two-thirds of annual trade
moved by sea (World Shipping Council).4 Using our general equilibrium spatial trade
framework, our counterfactuals show how endogenous changes in trade costs propagate
via the network and through entrep^
                                  ots as well as quantify their trade and welfare impacts.
       Our modeling embeds trade networks within a class of gravity models (Head and
Mayer, 2014). We provide empirical evidence for a growing quantitative literature inves-
tigating the role of trade networks (Allen and Arkolakis, 2019; Fajgelbaum and Schaal,
2017; Redding and Turner, 2015).5 We extend the Armington framework in Allen and
Arkolakis (2019)--where route cost shocks are born by consumers--to a general Ricardian
setting--where tra c volumes reflect both route choice and head-to-head competition on
prices at destinations and demonstrate how to estimate the model in a multi-industry
setting in the presence of unobserved tra c flows. Finding a tight match between our
model predictions and external cost estimates, ship sizes, and a sample of observed trade
routes, we establish that our estimates reflect actual costs and indirect flows in the trade
network in addition to serving as a check to the validity of our modelling approach as
   3
     Hummels, Lugovskyy and Skiba (2009),Grant and Startz (2020), and Asturias (2020) study transport
costs in the context of market power. While container shipping firms may hold market power, we
generalize away from the profits of the shipping companies. Models allowing for leg-level oligopoly, fixed
costs and endogenous entry competition fit within our framework (Sutton, 1991), but we leave the study
of how market power works through the hub-and-spoke network for future study.
   4
     Brancaccio, Kalouptsidi and Papageorgiou (2017) estimate endogenous trade costs arising from
search frictions for dry bulk ships carrying homogeneous commodities, where all trade is direct.
   5
     We provide the first and systematic documentation of indirect trade through the containerized ship-
ping network. Previous work have either imputed indirect trade or just used port of call data alone
(Heiland et al., 2019; Wang and Wang, 2011; Kojaku et al., 2019; Lazarou, 2016). Relative to these
papers, we also quantify the welfare and trade impacts of the trade network using a general equilibrium
model with endogeneous trade costs.


                                                    4
well as the Allen and Arkolakis (2019) framework.
        One important aspect of transportation technology in our model is the scale econ-
omy in shipping. For the median route into the US, our leg-level scale economy implies
that a 10% increase in volume leads to a 1.7% decrease in costs, which is about three-
quarters of the estimates in Asturias (2020) and Skiba (2017).6 While Lashkaripour and
Lugovskyy (2019) and Bartelme et al. (2019) both consider the trade consequences of
production scale economies, we consider scale in transportation. Our paper shows how
scale economies in transportation can interact with the global trade network to concen-
trate economic activity. In this respect, we are also related to a literature in economic
geography which considers the role of localized scale economies in the emergence of ag-
glomerations (Allen and Arkolakis, 2014; Allen and Donaldson, 2018). Scale economies
typically generate agglomerations by acting on the volume of economic activity at loca-
tions. Our counterfactuals show that scale economies can concentrate trade and welfare
gains at entrep^
               ots by acting on transportation costs over a network.


2         Data
We combine two proprietary data sets in this project: global ports of call data for con-
tainerships, which allows us to reconstruct the routes taken by specific ships, and United
States bill of lading data for containerized imports, which gives us shipment-level informa-
tion on US imports. Independently, these datasets partially describe the global shipping
network. Merged, they reconstruct the journey of individual shipments as they navigate
the trade network, from their origin to their US port of entry. To our knowledge, we
provide the most comprehensive reconstruction of the global trading network and routes
undertaken by individual shipments into the US.7
        Our ports of call data captures vessel movements using Automatic Identification Sys-
tem (AIS) transponders.8 For each vessel, this data captures the vessel's characteristics,
time-stamped ports of call, capacity, and height in the water before and after stopping at
each port. The latter two pieces of information indicates the vessel's load at these ports,
allowing us to observe volumes shipped between port pairs.
    6
     Asturias (2020) reports an origin-destination country trade-volume trade-cost elasticity of 0.23 while
Skiba (2017) reports an elasticity of 0.26 using product-level import data from Latin America. See also
Alder (2015); Holmes and Singer (2018); Anderson, Vesselovsky and Yotov (2016).
   7
     Data Appendix A.1 explains both data sets and their merge procedure in detail.
   8
     Port receivers collect and share AIS transponder information (including ship name, speed, height in
water, latitude and longitude). Using Astra Paging data, we track global port entry and exit data.



                                                    5
                          Figure 1: Map of Global Port of Call Network




Notes: Each dot represents a port (total of 1,203 ports). Each line represents a journey between port
pairs undertaken by a containership (total of 4,986 ships).


       Our sample covers 4,986 unique container ships with a combined capacity of 18.1
million twenty-foot equivalent shipping units (TEUs)--over 90% of the global container
shipping fleet--making 429,868 calls at 1,203 ports from April to October 2014. Figure 1
shows the coverage of the shipping network in our port of call data. Each line represents
a containership journey. We use this global data along with CEPII global trade data
when estimating our model in Section 5.
       With this port of call data alone, shipment journeys within the trading network remain
unobserved. To remedy this, we merge the port of call data with US bills of lading data,
which captures shipment-level information for all containerized imports. We observe
each shipment's origin country, the port where they are loaded onto containerships (also
known as port of lading), and the US port where they are unloaded (port of unlading). We
observe the name and identification number of the containership which transported the
shipment as well as the shipment's weight, number of containers (TEUs), and product
information. Over the same six months period, we see a total of 14.8 million TEUs
weighting 106 million tons were imported into the US from 227 origin countries and
loaded onto US-bound containerships (laded) in 144 countries.
       Using details on containerships, ports, and arrival times, we reconstruct each ship-
ment's journey from its foreign origin to US destination by matching each shipment to
the containership that it was transported on. Over 90% of containerized TEUs entering
the US can be matched to routes using this method (Appendix Figure A.1 visualizes this
merge).9 While the shipments' exact journey between origin and the first stop (the port
   9
       See Appendix A.1 for further details on each of these datasets as well as the merge process.



                                                      6
where they are loaded onto containerships) remain unobserved, this initial portion can
either take place overland (by trucks or rail) or by sea on another containership because
they are containerized. Not observing this portion in fact leads us to under-count the
overall level of indirectness. We empirically deal with unobserved transit in Section 5.


3        Stylized Facts
We analyze the international trade network and the routes taken by goods entering the US
along that network. We find that the majority of trade takes place indirectly in a manner
which is costly--increasing both shipping time and distance travelled. We further show
that the global trade network is a hub and spoke system, concentrating a large number
of shipments through a small number of entrep^
                                             ots.

3.1       The Majority of Trade is Indirect
Panel (A) in Figure 2 reports the distribution of the number of observed country stops
made by each shipment, weighted by TEU containers. Only 20% of containers are ex-
ported to the US directly from their origin countries--making no stops in third-party-
countries. The average container entering the US stops at around two third-party-
countries.10 The map in Figure 2, Panel (B) shows that this is also true at the country
level: the majority of US trading partners export to it indirectly. Only shipments from
9 countries typically enter the US directly.11 Similarly, the average shipment from a ma-
jority of US trading partners is transshipped in a third-party country--over 60% of US
trading partners transship more than 90% of their US-bound goods.12 Figure A.5 reports
the percent of goods that are transshipped at third-party countries.
       We explore the high degree of variation in connectivity in Appendix B.4, showing that
this variation is in part explained by traditional gravity variables. We show that there
is substantial variation in routes from unique origins into the US, which is an important
assumption in our model and is used in our validity checks (Figure A.9, Panel (B)).
  10
      Mean of 1.5 and s.d. of 1.3. Landlocked countries are excluded. The average number of port stops
is higher (Figure A.3, mean of 4.6 and standard deviation of 3.5). This result is robust for shipment
weight and value (Figure A.4). Multiple stops at the same third-party country are not counted.
   11
      These countries are Canada, Mexico, Panama, Japan, South Korea, Spain, Portugal, South Africa,
and New Zealand. We treat Mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Macau as separate locations.
   12
      Both on-board stops and transshipment are important measures of indirect trade. For completeness,
all results are broken out here or in the appendix using transshipment only. Examples of countries
transshipping more than 90% of goods include Denmark, Bangladesh, Cambodia, and Ecuador.




                                                  7
                  Figure 2: Indirect Trade Distributions, by Container and Country
   (A) Country Stops per Container            (B) Average Stops between Origin and the US

            40




            30
  Percent




            20




            10



                                                                    1 (direct)                (1,2]
                                                                    (2,3]                     >3
             0                                                      Destination (US)          No data
                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                  Number of Country Stops

Notes: Panel (A) shows the distribution of containers by the number of unique third-party countries
the containers visited. In Panel (B), for each origin country, we calculate the average number of
third-party country. The destination country (US) is excluded (in white). Plots are at the shipment
level and weighted by the aggregate exported containers (TEU). Landlocked countries are also excluded
(in white), since they would mechanically need to stop at a coastal country. 34 of the shipment origin
countries are landlocked accounting for 1.6 percent of total TEUs. The missing remaining countries are
excluded either due to lack of overall trade with the US (e.g. Somalia) or due to the merge process (e.g.
Namibia).


     Indirect trade increases shipping distances and time. Are the additional coun-
try stops simply incidental stops along the way, or do they constitute a trip that is distinct
from a "direct" path? As an example, do goods transiting the Straits of Malacca stop
at Singapore since it is "on-the-way," or are goods making lengthier detours during their
stops? One possibility is that the observed indirectness is optimal but only incidental--
perhaps additional stops only have small eects on costs, and so may be optimal even if
the benefit of indirectness is small. However, the significant additional distance and time
incurred by indirect travel, documented here, implies this is unlikely to be the case.
        On average, the actual traveled distance between a shipment's origin and its US des-
tination is 31% more than its direct ocean distance (Panel (A) in Figure 3). Panel (B)
shows the actual traveled distance between the location where the shipment was last
loaded onto a ship and its final destination. Here the remaining gap is still substantial


                                                   8
at 14%. Table A.1 further evaluates the relationship between indirectness and journey
length. Controlling for direct journey length or origin-by-destination fixed eects, dou-
bling the number of stops adds 10% to distance travelled and 33% to time travelled. These
distance and time costs do not include pecuniary costs of transshipment. Consequently,
this indirectness is meaningful in the sense that it is costly. These longer shipping routes
imply a cost reduction from indirectness that is over and above the additional time and
distance costs. From these results, we can summarize our first stylized fact:

Stylized Fact 1. The majority of containerized trade into the US is indirect and results
in a significant increase in shipping distance and time.

          Figure 3: Dierence Between Traveled Distance and Direct Distance
      (A) Shipment Origin to Destination               (B) Place of Loading (Stop 1) to Destination




Notes: These figures show only indirect shipments, with dierent direct and observed distances. Dots
are shipments, shaded by TEU. Panel (A) compares the direct shipping distance from the shipment's
origin country to the US, to the actual route travelled. Panel (B) compares the direct distance from the
place a shipment was last loaded onto a US-bound ship (Stop 1 in Appendix Figure A.1), to the actual
route travelled. Sea distances for observed and direct routes are calculated using Dijkstra's algorithm.
The local linear fit line is a locally weighted regression of the observed on direct pair-wise distance.


3.2     Indirect Trade Is Routed Through Entrep^
                                               ots
When shipments stop in third-party-countries, how are they routed? We show that the
stops along indirect shipping routes are not arbitrarily distributed throughout the world.
Instead, they are channelled through a small number of hubs, which disproportionately
service shipments originating in other countries.
    Panel (A) of Figure 4 plots each country's share of total third-party-country stops
against its share of total US trade. Some locations are both popular stopping points
and major countries of origin for goods like China, Germany, and Japan. Key countries



                                                   9
like Korea, Singapore, Panama, and Egypt disproportionately participate as third-party-
countries in US-bound shipments.13 This leads to our measure of entrep^
                                                                      ot activity:

                                                     l
                                              ^tl,j  j
                                        Entrepo                l,j                                      (1)

                                                                               l
where country j 's usage of entrep^
                                  ot l for its imports is the dierence between j , the
share of j 's imports flowing through l, and l,j the share of j 's imports originating at l.
This captures the use of location l above and beyond its role as an exporter to j .14
       Panel (B) of Figure 4 repeats the exercise in (A) using global tra c minus trade
shares.15 Results are broadly consistent with the microdata in Panel (A), while some
countries such as Canada and Panama which are specifically integral to the US network
                                                                                       ots.16
are now below or closer to the 45 degree line. We define the top 15 countries as entrep^
In the microdata, 72% of all shipments pass through at least one entrep^
                                                                       ot. Of indirect
shipments, 90% pass through an entrep^
                                     ot. In both panels, third-party-country stops (the
Y-axes) are significantly more concentrated than trade (the X-axis).17
       Which countries disproportionately use entrep^
                                                    ots? We find that smaller origin coun-
tries are simultaneously more likely to go indirectly and more likely to use entrep^
                                                                                   ots (see
Appendix B.3 for further details). Jointly, these figures confirm that smaller countries
                                              ots for their trade.18 These relationships
are spokes which disproportionately use entrep^
can be summarized in our second stylized fact:

Stylized Fact 2. Indirect shipping routes are concentrated through entrep^
                                                                         ots. Interna-
tional trade occurs over a hub-and-spoke network.

       Our two facts outline an inherent trade-o: indirectness increases distance and time
  13
     Figure A.6 tabulates the percent of all goods entering the US stopping in that country, broken into
goods originated there and elsewhere.
  14
     Entrepo ^tl,j is directly proportional to the total volume of goods moving through l that do not
originate at l. Appendix C shows how this measure arises from our model as the dierence between l's
on-board marginal cost selling to j and its network relation to j , and that lowering location l's leg-level
transport costs to other origins increases Entrepo ^tl,j . Our results here and throughout are be robust to
other functional forms--for example log dierences.
  15
     We subtract country l's share of observed global containerized trade l from its observed share of
global container tra c  l , with an adjustment for unobserved overland tra c as described in Section 5.
Appendix C clarifies how this is a consistent aggregation of the country-level measure in Equation 1.
  16
     Our set of global entrep^  ots are: Egypt, Singapore, Netherlands, Hong Kong, Belgium, Taiwan,
Spain, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, the United Arab Emirates, Morocco, Panama, Malta, Portugal, and
the United Kingdom.
  17
     Table A.2 reports the concentration ratios for trade, transshipment, and third-party-country stops,
which are high by most standards. The 99-50 ratio is 400 for third-country stops, 480 for transshipment,
and 96 for trade. For comparison, the same ratio for employment in the concentrated IT-sector across
US cities is 300 (Moretti, 2019).
  18
     Section 5 addresses the extent to which exogenous characteristics like geography are responsible for
lower costs at, hence higher concentration of shipments through, entrep^    ots.


                                                    10
                                                         Figure 4: Concentration of Indirect Shipments
(A) US Microdata: Transit Volume vs Percent (B) Global Data: Percent Transit Volume vs
                Originated                              Percent Originated
           15




                                                                                                    15
                                                         KR
                   10




                                                                                                            10
                                                                                           Percent of Traffic
  Percent of traffic




                                                                            HK
                                   PA     SG                                                                                                                                         DE
                                                                                                                                          NL                                    CN

                                                                                                                                SG                                                        US
                              EG
                                                                                                                      EG
                                                                                                                                                        GB
 5




                                                                                           5
                                           CA
                                                                                                                            HK BE                       FR
                                                              TW                                                                 ES
                                        FR NL
                                          ES                                                                                      KR
                                                         DE                                                                                    IT
                                         GB    JP
                                             MX
                                       BE
                                       MY
                                                                                                                           TW       RU   CA JP
                               PT
                               JMBS                                                                                        SA
                                  IL                IT                                                                    AE
                                                                                                                      MA PT TR  MYMX
                                  DOCO                                                                               PA
                                                                                                                     MT       PL
                                                                                                                               TH
                                                                                                                               BRSE
                                                                                                                                 IN
                             GR
                            ME   NZ         TH                                                                         GR
                                                                                                                      PKIL FI
                                                                                                                          ZA
                                                                                                                          AUIDDK
                                                                                                                              ECH
                                                                                                                             ICZ
                                                                                                                             NO  AT
                            AN
                            HT
                            PR
                            CW
                             LK
                            SA
                            LC
                            AG
                             HN
                            JR
                            VZ
                            UY
                            LY
                            MA
                            NG
                            IQ
                            SR
                             AW
                            VC
                            BB
                            MQ
                            BH
                            CU
                            MT
                            GY
                            KN
                            OM
                            DM
                            SI
                            GD
                            VI
                            NC
                            DR
                            BZ
                            GI
                            MH
                            CY
                            DJ
                            UA
                            EE
                            LB
                            CG
                            SY
                            NA
                            GP
                            LA
                            DZ
                            GU
                            TN
                            MU
                            BG
                            LV VE
                              GT
                              AE
                              TT
                              AR
                               ZA
                              PE
                              RU
                              IE
                              FI
                             RO
                             LT
                              EC PK
                                SE
                                 PL
                                 DKCL
                                  PHAU   BR
                                     TR INVN
                                         ID                                                                          BS
                                                                                                                     LB
                                                                                                                     LK
                                                                                                                     UY
                                                                                                                      LT
                                                                                                                     DO
                                                                                                                      OM
                                                                                                                     JM
                                                                                                                      EE
                                                                                                                      BG
                                                                                                                      QA
                                                                                                                      PE
                                                                                                                     LV
                                                                                                                      IQ
                                                                                                                      AO
                                                                                                                      HR
                                                                                                                     TT
                                                                                                                      TN
                                                                                                                     GH
                                                                                                                      BD
                                                                                                                     LY
                                                                                                                     BH
                                                                                                                     SY
                                                                                                                     SN
                                                                                                                     ME
                                                                                                                     CY
                                                                                                                     GT
                                                                                                                     EC
                                                                                                                     DJ
                                                                                                                     CR
                                                                                                                     CU
                                                                                                                     CG
                                                                                                                     MO
                                                                                                                     BO
                                                                                                                     KE
                                                                                                                     HN
                                                                                                                     CI
                                                                                                                     YE
                                                                                                                     PY
                                                                                                                     IS
                                                                                                                     CM
                                                                                                                     GY
                                                                                                                     BJ
                                                                                                                     TG
                                                                                                                     GE
                                                                                                                     MG
                                                                                                                     MU
                                                                                                                     BN
                                                                                                                     BY
                                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                                     PG
                                                                                                                     KH
                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                                     MN
                                                                                                                     TZ
                                                                                                                     AL
                                                                                                                     MZ
                                                                                                                     MR
                                                                                                                     GN
                                                                                                                     NI
                                                                                                                     SR
                                                                                                                     KP
                                                                                                                     HT
                                                                                                                     LA
                                                                                                                     SL
                                                                                                                     BB
                                                                                                                     AW
                                                                                                                     LR
                                                                                                                     MV
                                                                                                                     BZ
                                                                                                                     ER
                                                                                                                     GM
                                                                                                                     AG
                                                                                                                     GL
                                                                                                                     KY
                                                                                                                     CV
                                                                                                                     SOSI
                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                       NG
                                                                                                                       NZ
                                                                                                                       KCL
                                                                                                                        RO
                                                                                                                        VE
                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                        KW
                                                                                                                       VNZPH
                                                                                                                          AR
                                                                                                                         UA
                                                                                                                         IR
                                                                                                                          Z
           0




                                                                                                    0
                        0                   2            4              6   8    10                              0                                  5                           10             15
                                                         Percent of trade                                                                                    Percent of Trade
Notes: Panel (A) uses US microdata to compare, for each country, the share of shipments to the US
that originated in a country (x-axis) to the the share that passed through that country (y-axis),
weighted by TEU. For readability, China is omitted in Panel (A). Panel (B) replicates Panel (A) using
global port of call and trade data with adjustments made for unobserved overland tra c as discussed
in Section 5.


costs of trade, but by revealed preference should imply lower costs, especially for the
spokes of the network which disproportionately choose to send goods indirectly through
      ots.19 The goal of our empirical estimation is to measure this trade-o within the
entrep^
context of the full global trading network by finding a set of node-to-node costs which
describe the shipping network and is consistent with the indirect trade we observe.
                  These facts also trace the existence of a size-cost relationship: shipment along high-
concentration entrep^
                    ots routes appears by revealed preference to be cost-reducing. As
with any scale-cost relationship, both directions of causation may be operational. We
model the shipping decision in a way which allows for but does not impose a reduced-
form scale economy, and in our estimation, identify the causal impact of scale on costs.


4                           Theoretical Framework
We present a model of global trade where shipments are sent indirectly through an en-
dogenously formed transport network. We embed the Allen and Arkolakis (2019) route
selection model in a generalized Eaton and Kortum (2002) framework where production
technologies in each industry and country are non-stochastic, but idiosyncratic variation
in the products' optimal route generates random variation in product-origin pair prices.
     19
     While some entrep^
                      ots lie along lowest-cost routes, routes stopping at entrep^
                                                                                 ots are 3-8% longer. This
is true even when comparing shipments sent from the same origin, to the same destination, and using
the same total number of stops, and comparing total distance travelled as well as distance from port of
lading to US destination.


                                                                                      11
       Entrep^
             ots emerge as locations where goods pass through, but are neither the goods'
origin nor their destination. Throughout, we maintain a production and consumption
setting that is as general as possible, allowing for any number of goods, industries, and
input-output linkages. This model is agnostic to scale economies or dis-economies in
transportation costs, which could work to either amplify or attenuate shipments through
entrep^
      ots. Restrictions on route cost heterogeneity generate moment conditions that can
be matched to the data to yield estimates of leg-specific shipping costs.

4.1       Setup
   Consumption and Production In each country j , consumers consume goods !n 2
n from each n of N industries according to function Uj = Uj (Cj ), where Uj (·) is a
continuous, twice dierentiable function and Cj is a matrix of quantities of an arbitrarily
large number of goods !n in industry n 2 N in country j .20 Within each industry and
product category, goods are homogeneous and normal.21
       Goods are produced using a variety of traded and non-traded inputs including labor,
capital, and traded and non-traded varieties from any industry. The production technol-
ogy for good ! is common for all goods in the same industry n, and includes a vector of
factor inputs L, as well as inputs of other goods.22 Production functions can vary across
industries and countries. Cost minimization results in identical production costs among
competitive firms within an industry in each country. The marginal cost of a good ! is

                                           cin  cin (zin , Wi , Pi ),

where Pi is the matrix of prices of all goods ! in industries n in country i and Wi is the
vector of factor prices in country i. Because producers in the same industry and country
share the same input prices and production function, costs are shared within country-
industries. These costs correspond to the classic Ricardian comparative advantage.

   Pricing To sell goods abroad at any destination j 2 J , a firm producing product
! in industry n must pay non-transport trade costs ijn and iceberg transport costs
  20
     We allow for the utility function to vary across destinations, and the number of goods in each industry
need not be a continuum but can be.
  21
     The model and empirics can accommodate arbitrarily fine industry classifications in order to ensure
this assumption holds.
  22
     The production function is given by qin (! ) = fin (zin , Lin , Qin ) where fin (·) is a continuous and twice
dierentiable country-industry-specific production function, zin is the production technology common to
industry n and country i, Lin is a vector of non-tradable factor inputs, and Qin is a country-industry
specific matrix of inputs of other goods ! from all industries. All inputs are treated as homogeneous.



                                                       12
ijnr (! ) after optimally choosing the route r between i and j to minimize the shipping
costs incurred. Competitive firms in i selling to j price their goods at marginal cost. The
observed prices for these products at j are

                                        pijn (! ) = cin ijn ijnr (! ),

where purchasers of good ! in industry n at j source the lowest cost supplier globally.

     Shipping Producers seek to minimize shipping costs, choosing the lowest cost ship-
ping route available. Shipping route r is comprised of Kr legs of a journey with Kr                                        1

stops along the way between the origin, i (or k = 1), and destination, j (or k = Kr ).
       Following Allen and Arkolakis (2019), moving from stop to stop involves iceberg
transport costs as well as product- and route-level idiosyncratic cost shocks ijnr (! ).23
We place minimal structure on these direct leg-level costs tkr                                 1 ,kr   (·) between locations
kr   1   and kr , allowing them to be a function of exogenous and endogenous variables:

                                          t kr   1 ,kr   = f (, "kr     1 ,kr   )                                        (2)

where  is a matrix of endogenous containerized tra c over the entire network and "kr                                    1 ,kr


reflects exogenous transportation cost elements such as distance.
       Route-specific idiosyncratic shocks are drawn from the Fr´
                                                                echet distribution such that
Fijn (), the cumulative distribution function of the idiosyncratic draws is as follows:24
                                                          n      o
                        Fijn ()  Pr{ijnr (! )  } = exp        

where shape parameter  > 0 captures the randomness or dispersion in the choice of
routes from i to j .25 Higher ijnr (! ) draws mean industry n has lower costs for route r.
       Accordingly, product ! 's shipping cost along route r from country i to country j is:
                                           Kr
                                           Y
                                    1                                                       1
                     ijnr (! ) =              tk           1 ,kr   (, "kr    1 ,kr   )             ~ijr ,
                                                                                                                         (3)
                                 ijnr (! ) k=1 r                                         ijnr (! )

where ~ijr is the product of all leg-specific costs tkr                     1 ,kr   (, "kr   1,kr )    and is common to all
products taking route r. Product ! in industry n's realized shipping cost from i to j
is that of the transport-cost minimizing route from the set of all routes from i to j .26
  23
     Because of the max-stable property of the Frech´    et distribution, an isomorphic specification would
have firm-specific cost shocks with a finite mass of potential competitive firms in each country. This would
aect the interpretation of the source of idiosyncratic variation (firm variation or product variation) and
of shape parameter .
  24
     This distribution is identical across industries so product-industry subscript n is dropped.
  25
     This dispersion assumption is reflected in our microdata (Panel (B) in Figure A.9, Appendix B.4)
Almost 70 percent of origin countries have fairly low concentration of routes (HHI less than 1500).
  26
     The price of a product ! in industry n from i to j conditional on route r is pijnr (! ) = cin ijn ijnr (! ).


                                                           13
The multiplicative functional form for tkr            1 ,kr   in Equation (3) allows for an analytical
solution to the routing problem. Section 7 subsequently establishes a tight fit between
our estimates and two sets of external data, helping alleviate misspecification concerns.
       This structure is consistent with a host of mechanisms, including but not limited to
port-level eects and leg-level scale economies.27 With regards to market power, we do not
directly model the decision of shipping firms. Instead, our equilibrium can be considered
as an overall industry equilibrium within a Sutton (1991) framework, where larger markets
induce more entrants and lower marginal costs, with profits being absorbed by fixed
costs.28 Dierences between these mechanisms will not impact the model estimation but
will manifest in the interpretation of scale economies and for counterfactual predictions.

4.2       Equilibrium
   Route volume Firms from origin i select the lowest-cost route before consumers in
j select the lowest-cost intermediate good supplier across all the origins countries. We
observe ! being shipped on route r from i to j only if the final price of ! , which includes
both the marginal cost of production and shipping cost on route r from i to j (pijnr (! )),
is lower than all other prices of good ! from all other origin country-route combinations.
       We then consider the probability that a given country and route r0 will be selected as
the lowest cost route-supplier combination for good ! conditional on price p:
              (                       )           8          2                     39
                                                  <       X                 X       =
Gjn! (p)  Pr        min pijnr (! ) > p = 1 exp         
                                                      p ·    4           
                                                               (cin ijn ) ·      5
                                                                              ~ijr    .
                i2I,r 2Rij \r0                    :                                 ;
                                                                         i                   r 2Rij

We can define the joint probability that a route r is the lowest-cost route from i to j for
good ! and that country i is the lowest-cost supplier of good ! to j as:
            (                                        )                                
                                                                     cin ijn ·  ~ijr
  ijnr!  Pr pijnr!  0 min                  pi0 jnr0 ! = P      h                  P                    i . (4)
                      i 2I \i, r 0 2Rij \r                                                          
                                                          i0 2I (ci0 n i0 jn )   · r 0 2Ri 0 j ~i0 jr0

By the law of large numbers, this is also the share of goods sold in j in industry n coming
                                                                   
from i and taking route r.29 Introducing auxiliary matrix An = [tijn (, "ij )] where each
element is a function of the leg-specific transport cost, we define the expected transport
  27
     It also allows for spatial correlation in link costs, say between tkl and tlm .
  28
     We omit discussion of the optimal shipping network from the perspective of a firm with market
power, and focus on leg-level scale instead.
  29
     Recall that the number of goods in each industry is set so the law of large numbers holds.




                                                     14
cost matrix as
                                              h                             1
                                                                                i   ( )
                                          ijn  I            An (, ")                      ,                                           (5)

where       is the element-by-element Hadamard power.30 Substituting the definition of ~ijr
(Equation (3)) into Equation (4) and summing across routes r that pass between leg k
to l, we can express the share of imports in industry n in destination j that come from
origin i which passes through leg kl as:

                        kl
                                                                                                          1
                        ijn = cin ijn · ikn (, ") · tkln (, ") · ljn (, ")                              jn ,                          (6)
                    P                                   
where      jn   =   i0   ci0 n i0 jn · i0 jn (, ")         is the key distinction from Allen and Arkolakis
(2019)--a multilateral resistance term that accounts for average costs, openness, and
connectivity of competitors from all other countries i0 . With optimal route selection and
competition on price both accounted for, Equation (6) is the realized and observable
share of tra c that flows through leg kl from i to j .
       Next, the model yields a gravity equation. The sum of products sold in j in industry
n from country i equals the share of products sold in j in industry n coming from i and
taking route r, summed across all r routes:
                                                                                                                          
                 X               cin ijn · ~ijr                         cin ijn · ij (, )
         ijn        P      h                  P                      i=                                                      .        (7)
                                            ·                    
                      i0 2I (ci0 n i0 jn )      r 0 2Ri 0 j ~i0 jr
                  r                                                0
                                                                                  jn


Equations (6) and (7) will jointly generate our estimation equation in Section 5.
       Finally, we derive an expression for the share of global shipping passing through kl:
                         XXX                   X                     
                                                                            X                                    kn
                 kl =                  kl
                                       ijn =            tkln (, ")      ·           jn ljn (, ")             ·        ,               (8)
                         n    j    i            n                           j                                    jn


where jn is j 's global consumption share of industry n. Because optimal route selection
and competition on price are both accounted for, Equation (8) corresponds to the observ-
able shares of all goods passing through leg kl, including shipments bound for l and those
continuing onward to other destinations. In Section 7, we compare our model-implied
leg-level trade flows to those observed in the US microdata. We find high correlations
which also hold true for higher levels of aggregation across origins and levels as well.
       In Appendix C.2, we show how a change in the leg cost between k and l (tkl (, "kl ))
                                                                                                    P                        1 /
  30                                                                                          1 /                 
     The expected transport cost from i to destination j is also ijn =                                  r 2Rij ~ijr                where
                      R1                                            
is the function (t) = 0 xt 1 exp x dx evaluated at (1 + ) /          .




                                                            15
can aect trade volumes between an origin i and destination j through the trade network.

    Closing the model In order to close the model, we require markets to clear for
factors and goods as well as the balanced trade condition. Unnecessary for estimation,
we defer them to Section 8 when we conduct counterfactuals.


5     Estimation
We now show how to link our model to real world data, use the model to recover the trade
costs underlying the global shipping network, and estimate a scale elasticity in shipping.

5.1     Linking the Model with Data
Using equations (6) and (7) we can calculate the probability of any good traveling through
leg kl conditional on being sold from origin i to destination j . With the total value of
trade between i and j in industry n (Xijn ), we can express the total volume of tra c
between k and l in a given industry n as:
                               XX                                                   
                        kl
                        n                       Xijn · ikn tkln ljn ijn     1
                                                                                       .        (9)
                                   i       j

Equation (9) is identical to Allen and Arkolakis (2019), despite dierences in framework.
In particular, expensive trade routes here suer from Ricardian selection at destina-
tion markets, where the route's impact on prices make them less competitive. Yet, this
does not impact the trade cost estimation. Intuitively, while Ricardian selection, non-
transportation trade costs such as taris, and multilateral resistance all reduce total trade,
they do not dierentially favor one route from an origin i to a destination j , instead they
reduce tra c flows proportionally along all leg-level kl-pairs. Accordingly, conditioning
on the observed trade values Xijn , the contribution of trade between i and j to the tra c
between k and l is invariant to multilateral resistance, taris, or technology.
     Mapping our model into the data we make one final assumption: for a set of industries
 ¯ , trade costs are identical and all trade XN  P                            P        kl
N                                             ¯       ¯
                                                   n 2N X n and tra   c  N¯          ¯ n
                                                                                  n 2N

are observable. Summing Equation (9) over industries n 2 N  ¯ yields:
                              XX                                                       
                       kl
                       N¯                          ¯ · ikN
                                               Xij N               ¯ ij N
                                                         ¯ tkln lj N    ¯
                                                                                1
                                                                                           .   (10)
                               i       j

    Equation (9) tells us that to accurately measure transport costs, we only need data
on trade and tra c for all goods in an industry. Equation (10) tells us that we can use
tra c across multiple industries so long as we have the correct trade aggregate, we see

                                                      16
all tra c for those industries, and we can assume transport costs are identical in those
industries. We implement equation (10) using observed total containerized tra c and
trade in containerized industries, where transportation costs are likely similar, and apply
it in estimation only to legs where all tra c is observed.

5.2    Recovering Scale Elasticities
  The cost­scale relationship The existence of a scale economy in shipping implies
that perturbations to the global shipping network that aect tra c volumes will in turn
impact the leg cost matrix estimated in the next section. Such eects must be accounted
for in order to correctly estimate counterfactual adjustments.
   Using leg-level trade costs from Equations (5) and (10), we consider the regression:

                      ln(tkl   1) = 0 + 1 · ln kl + 2 · ln dkl + "kl ,                (11)

where 0 is a constant, 1 is the relationship between price and quantity, 2 · ln dkl is the
coe cient and measure of log sea-distance from k to l respectively. (tkl      1) allows us
to interpret 1 as the elasticity between cost and tra c volumes to a trade elasticity .
That is, to interpret results from Equation (11) as elasticities, they must be deflated by
trade elasticity .
   Of course, this relationship cannot be taken as causal. Lower cost legs may face larger
demand precisely because unobserved cost-reducers induce higher levels of demand on
those legs. Essentially, we wish to observe the supply elasticity, but we have only market-
clearing prices and quantities. We therefore need a demand shifter.

  Geography-Based Instrument We use the intuition of our model to construct a
geography-based instrument for demand. Demand for a given leg will be higher, all else
equal, if the leg lies along the most direct route between an origin and a destination.
For example, consider routes from origin South Korea to destination the Netherlands.
Routes that include the leg China-Singapore are closer to the direct Korea-Netherlands
route compared to routes that include the leg China-Australia. As such, more Korea-
Netherlands trade should flow through the China-Singapore leg than the China-Australia
leg, which would involve a longer detour. Links that are eectively out of the way for
most journeys should, all else equal, face lower demand, such as Singapore vs Australia
on routes between East Asia and Europe.
   Operationalizing this intuition, we relate the direct sea-distance between an origin


                                            17
and a destination to the distance of two legs as part of a three-leg journey, where the
omitted middle leg is the object of interest. We calculate the instrument zkl as:
                                 X                     X                           d2
                                                                                    ij
                         zkl =           P opi,1960              P opj,1960                 ,       (12)
                                                                              (dik + dlj )2
                                 i\k,l                j \{k,l}

where dij is the sea distance between origin i and destination j , and the square of the
relative excess distance between legs ik and lj (dik + dlj ) is weighted by the year 1960
population at each origin i and destination j , P opi,1960 and P opj,1960 .31 Figure 5 shows
the robust first-stage relationship between our instrument and tra c.
         Figure 5: Residualized Plot of Correlation Between Instrument and Tra c
                          




Notes: The figure shows a binned scatter plot of 1,947 observations of link kl with the natural log of
sea distance between k and l is included as a control. The x-axis is the natural log of the instrument
zkl . The y-axis is the natural log of tra c on leg kl. The standard error printed is clustered two ways
by nodes k and l.


       For plausible identification, our demand shifter instrument has to be generally uncor-
related with unobserved changes in cost determinants for a particular leg controlling for
its sea-distance (corr("kl , ln zkl ) = 0). Locations that are close in sea distance are also
close in land distance and may have easier access to other modes of transportation like
road or rail. As a robustness check, we recalculate our instrument in equation (12) in a
simplified setting by omitting the shortest 10 percentile distances for each origin i and
destination j respectively and find similar results.
       As previously noted, the observed scale economy in our setting can be generated by a
number of mechanism, including but not limited to internal or external scale economies
and market power. These mechanisms may generate dierent out of sample results, and
  31
    1960 Population here stands in place of GDP, which may be endogenous to the trade costs in our
model. The year is chosen both because immigration and populations prior to 1960 could not plausibly
be impacted by 2014 containerized shipping costs.


                                                          18
further work should be done to isolate and test for these. In order to accommodate this
multitude of mechanisms simultaneously, we implement a model-consistent and agnostic
approach in our estimation of scale. Formally, we construct moments m1 () = Z " based
on Equation (11). First, however, we need to recover leg-level trade costs tkl .

5.3       Recovering Trade Costs
We require two observable objects in order to recover trade costs: trade values and
tra c volumes (Equation 10).32 Our tra c data comes from our global port of call
AIS shipping data.33 We use aggregate trade data from Centre d'´
                                                               etudes Prospectives et
d'Informations Internationales (CEPII) and their BACI international database for 2014,
segregating containerized and non-containerized commodities.34
       In an ideal world, estimation would recover the trade costs that directly rationalize
observed bilateral containerized tra c flows--a just identified case. While we directly
observe ocean containerized tra c, our data omits movement of containers overland,
across and within borders. We overcome this limitation by assuming a functional form
that allows for estimation without requiring the direct observation of overland links. We
consider the mapping:35
                                          1
                                              tij =
                                                 2 [0, 1] ,
                                    1 + exp (Y )
where the matrix Y is a vector defined as

                 Y       =   0   +   1   log sea distanceij +           2   log tra cij +       3   log tra ci

                         +   4   log tra cj +         5 1backhaul   +       6 1 {i, j   2 Land Borders} ,

where      0   is an intercept,           1   considers the sea distance between the nearest principal
ports,36 and         2   considers port-to-port tra c.                       3   and     4   consider the total incoming
  32
     This procedure is agnostic to the exact specification of any particular trade model that generates
trade value flows X . We control for all origin, destination, and origin-destination factors by conditioning
our estimation on trade flows X . In particular, items such as all origin-destination taris and non-tari
barriers are accounted for. This does not mean that we can disentangle the two, rather we can directly
account for these factors collectively.
  33
     Units for tra c is in TEU. Recall we estimate ship-by-leg TEUs by combining reported ship draught
and maximum TEU. This process does not rely on the merged US Customs data.
  34
     We use 2014 US Customs data on containerized and non-containerized shipments to construct the
share of each HS 4-digit commodity code that is transported by container. All commodities with a
containerized share above 80% are labeled as containerized. This procedure shuts down the substitution
between containerized and non-containerized transport. In practice we find a bimodal distribution, with
some commodities being never containerized (e.g. oil and iron ore) and others always containerized (e.g.
washing machines and children's toys). This process is documented in Appendix A.3.
  35
     This functional form maps from the real numbers to the unit interval as is required by our theory.
  36
     For each country pair, we calculate the volume-weighted mean sea distance across all port pairs.
These data are available for download from our websites.



                                                              19
and outgoing tra c at ports i and j respectively.            5   considers the role of the backhaul
problem from Wong (2020), where ship capacity is fixed by the shipping direction with
the higher demand. Finally,        6   is an indicator for a shared land border.37
       It is crucial to note two things. First, while the equations above posit relationships
between observables, our objective at this stage is not the vector              of coe cients--which
may reflect endogenous variables--but the resulting predictions for tij . Instead, we seek to
fully saturate the variation in the data in order to generate the closest empirical prediction
for the matrix of trade costs relative to the just-identified case, which yields the model-
perfect estimates of trade costs for each link. This allows us to recover the trade costs
while remaining agnostic to their underlying determinants, including potential economies
of scale as well as possible geographic indicators. Secondly, while the parameters for
yield estimates of every trade cost tij , we need not discipline               by comparing tra c on
every link. This allows us to still recover estimates of tij although we do not observe
within-country tra c as well as between countries tra c that share overland routes.
   We create a moment m2 that finds the vector that minimizes the dierence between
expected tra c, ^ t( ); Y , and observed tra c data for countries that do not share a

land border:                                                                
                             m2 ( ) = ^ kl       | X, Y ,            data
                                                                     kl


where expected tra c is a function of , trade elasticity , as well as trade data X .
       As noted, we do not fully observe the tra c flows of containerized goods on geograph-
ically contiguous legs, and we do not perform our estimation procedure using tra c data
from these legs. Instead, our trade cost estimates, even for overland links, are disciplined
by the observed tra c flows of sea-only legs that do not share a land border.

5.4       Joint Estimation
We combine our scale estimation and recovery of trade costs into a single stage:

                                m1 (  , ) = Z "  , t( )
                                                             
                                  m2 ( ) =   ^ kl ( )   data
                                                        kl


We conduct a two-stage GMM procedure, using optimal instrumental variable weights
estimation for the first set of moments m1 , which accounts for our casual estimates of scale,
and the inverse of trade volumes on the second set of moments m2 , which rationalizes
  37
    We do not estimate within-country trade costs directly due to data constraints and assume that they
do not change in the counterfactual.


                                                  20
leg-level trade costs tkl conditional on observable world trade X and tra c flows . We
reiterate that we only conduct inference on the parameters . We treat                        as a set of
incidental parameters, important for estimation, but not for inference. The second stage
computes an optimal weighting matrix W using the first stage results.


6     Results
    Scale Economy Table 1 reports our instrumented scale elasticity from our scale
moments (Equation (11)). For the widely used trade elasicity value of  = 4 (Simonovska
and Waugh, 2014), the interpretation of our causal estimate is that increasing tra c
volume on a leg by 1% would reduce costs by 0.06%. As the median journey in our
microdata has 3 legs, this translates into a 0.17% decrease in overall origin-destination
trade costs.38 These results lend support to our initial hypothesis that a major role of
entrep^
      ots is their facilitation of scale through concentration of shipments.
                               Table 1: GMM Estimation Results

                                                         (1)
                                                      ln (ckl )
                                         ln (kl )       -0.29
                                                       (0.13)
                                         ln (dkl )       0.57
                                                       (0.03)
                                       Constant          4.24
                                                       (1.45)
Notes: We conduct a two-stage GMM procedure, first using optimal instrumental variable weights
estimation the first set of moments and the inverse of trade volumes on the second set of moments. The
second stage computes an optimal weighting matrix W using the first stage results. ln(ckl ) is the
natural log of transportation trade cost on leg kl. lnkl is the natural log of tra c volume on leg kl.
ln(dkl ) is the natural log of sea distance between k and l computed using Dijkstra's algorithm.



    Link and average bilateral trade costs Appendix Figure A.11 graphs our result-
ing matrix of pairwise trade costs. We present the vector                estimates in the Appendix
Table A.4 as purely predictive parameters, not fundamentals that we can alter in the
counterfactuals. Instead, we simply need to know if our                  estimates can predict con-
tainerized tra c that reflects the actual observed tra c volumes. With a full link-level
   38
      This leg-level elasticity is more modest, but broadly consistent with the strong scale economies
from ship size in Cullinane and Khanna (2000), which measure origin-destination elasticites that would
compound, on average, three leg level elasticites. Asturias (2020) reports an origin-destination country
trade-volume trade-cost elasticity of 0.23 while Skiba (2017) reports an elasticity of 0.26 using product-
level import data from Latin America. We search for but do not find evidence of a declining scale
elasticity at higher volumes.


                                                     21
trade cost matrix [tkl ], we also can generate an average bilateral transport cost between
locations [ij ]. We provide our network-consistent trade-link and origin-destination cost
estimates to researchers, and they are available for download on our websites. Appendix
Table A.8 compares these network-consistent bilateral trade costs to more commonly used
distance measures. Our cost measures have more predictive power than distance alone
and both are significant in a combined specification, implying that both measures have
distinct predictive power for trade.

   Model Fit Figure 6 compares our model-predicted tra c and trade values against
their observed counterparts in the data. In Panel (A), we compare actual observed global
container tra c shares with the our model-predicted shares using our estimated trade
costs. We include both a best fit line and a 45 degree line. We fit the data extremely well,
with a correlation between the observed and predicted shares (in logs) of 0.97. Panel (B)
compares our estimated trade shares to actual observed trade shares, which we do not
target.39 We fit the data well here as well with a correlation (in logs) of 0.73.

                                  Figure 6: Model Fit Comparisons
           (A) Tra c Volumes (Targeted)                         (B) Trade Value (Untargeted)




Notes: Panel (A) compares our targeted moment: predicted container tra c volumes from any two
ports (y-axis) to the actual container tra c volumes (x-axis, normalized as a share to total world
container tra c). Panel (B) compares untargeted aggregate trade shares (x-axis) versus predicted
trade shares for containerized tra c (y-axis), where predicted trade shares are computed using the full
model described in Section 8.



   Alternative Data Definitions Our estimates of trade costs tij are at the country-
level. Estimation of a port-level cost matrix is possible. However, that requires a global
set of sub-national trade data X , which is not broadly available. Using port tra c
and national trade data, we can impute bilateral port-to-port trade data and run a
  39
       To generate trade flows, we close the model using the full setup in Section 8.


                                                      22
version of the estimation above. Results from the port-level estimation are broadly in line
with results of our main estimation, with a correlation between weighted port-pair costs
and country-pair costs of 0.6. However, due to the speculative assumptions required to
generate sub-national trade flows, we view the country-level estimates as more accurate.


7     Comparison of Model-Predicted Estimates to Data
We compare our model's results with three separate sets of data external to our estima-
tion. First, we link our results to ship size estimates to highlight a possible scale-economy
mechanism. Second, we compare our trade cost estimates with freight rates. Third, we
compare our model-predicted tra c flows for US-bound shipments to our US microdata.
In each, we find high correlations between our model estimates and these external data.

7.1     Symptoms of Scale Economies: Ship Size
Using our model-guided estimation, we recovered leg-level shipping scale economies. A
number of mechanisms can generate the cost reductions that coincide with the concentra-
tion of shipments through entrep^
                                ots. Internal or external scale economies in shipping and
competition among shippers could all generate a negative relationship between volume
and costs, as could factors such as port infrastructure.40 Lacking data to directly test
these mechanisms, we turn to one symptom of a scale economy observable in our US
microdata which lends further credibility to our results: ship size. Relying on the idea
that larger ships enable lower shipping costs (Cullinane and Khanna, 2000), we consider
the correlations between ship sizes, trade volumes, and our recovered leg-level trade costs
and then investigate the relationship between indirect shipping and ship size.

    Ship Sizes, Tra c Volumes, and Recovered Trade Costs In Panel (A) of
Figure 7, we show a strong positive relationship between the average containership size
on a route and the tra c volume on that route, controlling for the distance between
origin and destination. Using the route-level containership size measure, we show a
strong positive link between ship size and our corresponding recovered trade costs (Panel
(B), Figure 7). Routes with more container tra c use larger ships; a 10% increase in
route volumes correspond to a 2% increase in ship size. Routes with lower trade costs
use larger ships. A 10% decrease in our estimated iceberg trade costs corresponds to 6%
  40
     High-tra c routes are served by many carriers, using ships capable of carrying 25,000 containers
with automated loading and unloading.



                                                 23
increase in ship sizes.41
                                   Figure 7: Link Between Recovered Trade Costs and Ship Size
                              (A) Route Volume and Ship Size                                              (B) Shipping Cost and Ship Size
                            25K                                                                         25K




                            10K                                                                         10K
  Average Ship Size (TEU)




                                                                              Average Ship Size (TEU)
                             5K                                                                          5K



                            2.5K                                                                        2.5K




                             1K                                                                          1K



                            500                                                                         500
                                    1K    10K      100K       1M   10M                                         1       2          4          8        16
                                         Route Volume (TEU)                                                        Estimated Iceberg Leg Trade Cost

Notes: Figures are bin-scatter plots over all observed containership routes, with 100 bins. We control
for the log(sea distance) between origin and destination ports, but add variable means back for the
plots. Panel (A) plots the relationship between the total containers on a route and the average
containership's size on that route (weighted by utilized capacity). Panel (B) plots the relationship
between the estimated trade cost tkl with  = 4 and the average containership's size on that route.
Containership size reflects the size of the ship for the average container on that route.



       Ship Size and Indirect Trade Figure 8 further investigates the relationship be-
tween entrep^
            ot usage and ship size, ploting ship size (x-axis) against US-bound tra c
volume (y-axis) by country of origin, separately for tra c that is routed through an en-
trep^
    ot and tra c that is not, such that each origin country is associated with two data
points. Larger origins transport goods to the US on larger ships. However, shipments
from smaller origins routed through entrep^
                                          ots also arrive on large ships, such that indirect
                       ots appears to close the ship-size gap for smaller origins.42
shipping through entrep^

7.2                            Cost Estimates with Freight Rates Data
Next, we compare our expected trade cost estimates ij at the origin-destination level
with container freight rates from Wong (2020). These rates are the costs paid by firms to
  41
     Appendix Section D.2 reports shipment-level regressions controlling for origins, destinations, and
without route distance controls. Results are similar.
  42
     For shipments with the same origin, US destination, and controlling for the total number of stops,
shipments stopping at entrep^ots arrive on ships that are on average 15% larger. For shipments with
the same origin and US destination, shipments sent directly arrive on ships that are on average 8%
smaller ships. Further shipment level analysis in Appendix Section D.3 confirms the positive relation-
ships between shipment volume and ship size and robustness to dierent notions of origin, lading, and
transshipment.


                                                                         24
                    Figure 8: Link Between Indirect Trade and Ship Size




Notes: The x-axis shows the total exports from an origin country to the United States. The y-axis
shows the average ship size which arrives from an origin country to the United States. Each country is
represented by two data points, a blue and a red circle. The red circle indicates the corresponding
information for trade from an origin that is routed through an entrep^ ot while the blue circle is for trade
that is not. Circle size denotes shipping volume. Note that trade that is not routed through an entrep^   ot
(blue circle) could either be shipped directly to the United States or shipped via a non-entrep^  ot.


transport a standard full container load between port pairs and include the base ocean
rate, fuel surcharge, as well as terminal handling charges at both origin and destination.
They are for the largest ports globally which handle more than 1 million containers
annually and account for about 73 percent of global container volumes during this time
period (World Bank). While we are only comparing a subset of the cost estimates from
our entire sample with these freight rates, we find a correlation of 0.71 (Figure 9).

       Figure 9: Correlation Between Cost Estimates With Actual Freight Rates




Notes: Data points compare origin-destination predicted costs ij to average freight rates from Wong
(2020) (210 observations). Circle size are weights for container volumes (TEU). The slope of line is the
weighted regression coe cient.


                                                    25
7.3     Tra c Estimates with US Microdata
In order to assess our model's ability to capture actual shipment journeys and trade
indirectness, we compare our model predictions for the paths of US-bound shipment
tra c to the actual observed paths in our US microdata. Our estimation, which uses
global tra c data rather than the US microdata, delivers predictions for how US-bound
shipments travel through the shipping network. Equations (6) and (7) imply

                                         d
                                          kl                  1    
                                          iU S = [ik tkl lj ij ]                                          (13)

as the ratio of all shipments from i to the US that are observed flowing through leg k, l.
    We compare our model-predicted value of Equation (13) to the proportion of goods
                                                              kl
coming into the US from any origin i on leg kl, which we call iU S,Data , by aggregating

shipments using link kl in our microdata. Note that while our microdata is described in
Section 2 and used to generate our stylized facts in Section 3, it is not used to estimate our
trade costs in Section 5. Column (1) of Table 2 reports the univariate regression outcome
between these two measures, weighted by total origin TEU. We find that a significantly
positive relationship, with a coe cient of 1 in the confidence interval. Over half of the
variation in the observed distribution can be explained using the predicted probabilities.
             Table 2: Correlation Between Tra c Estimates With Microdata

                                 (1)       (2)          (3)             (4)      (5)           (6)
                                 d
                                iUkl       c
                                             kl     l
                                                   bU     bl,U S
                                                                        d
                                                                       iUkl
                                                                                 c kl      l
                                                                                          bU     bl,U S
                                     S                S                     S                S
      kl
      iU S,Data                 0.846                                  0.872
                               (0.119)                                (0.121)
      kl
      Data                                1.225                                  1.241
                                         (0.128)                                (0.126)
      l
      U S,Data    l,U S,Data                           0.945                                 0.967
                                                      (0.111)                               (0.115)
      Observations             13813       652          95            366010    2153          186
      Data                                                              All      All          All
      R2                       0.513      0.659        0.410           0.513    0.669        0.415
      F                        50.54      91.60        22.91           51.75    96.88        22.53

Notes:   [kl
          iU S is the model-predicted share of goods from origin i to US destination flowing through leg
k, l, ckl is the model-predicted total US-bound tra c on a given leg k, l, and    bUl
                                                                                          bl,U S is the
                                                                                          
                                                                                      S
model-predicted total excess US-bound tra c through node l. Their corresponding variables observed
                                                                     kl
in the compiled microdata are indicated with subscript "Data": iU       S,Data , kl,Data , and
  l
U S,Data l,U S,Data . Columns (1) to (3) are restricted to nonzero tra c volumes in the US microdata
while Columns (4) to (6) include journeys with zero tra c volumes in the US microdata (All Data).
Columns (1) and (4) results are robust to tobit specifications which allow for lower and upper censoring
limits. Standard errors clustered by origin and destination countries.


    Next, summing the predicted probabilities in Equation (13) across all origins i, the

                                                    26
model delivers a prediction for the total amount of US-bound tra c on a given leg kl:
                                               X
                                       c
                                        kl =        XiU S · dkl
                                                             iU S
                                                i

where XiU S is the total trade flow from origin i to the US. Column (2) compares this to
the total volume of shipments moving between a given leg in the microdata, which we call
kl
Data , again finding a positive, significant coe cient with 1 in the confidence interval.

       Finally, summing probabilities in Equation (13) across origins i and nodes k , we
obtain the total tra c through node l. Subtracting volume of exports from l, we obtain
the entrep^
          ot usage of l for US-bound shipments:
                                   X                     XX
                 bU
                  l
                        bl,U S /       ckl   Xl,U S =            XiU S · dkl
                                                                                 Xl,U S
                    S                                                     iU S
                                   k                     k   i

                                                                            l
Column (3) compares this to its counterpart in the microdata, which we call U S,Data

l,U S,Data , finding a positive and significant result with 1 within the confidence interval
as well.
       In the microdata, a number of legs have zero tra c volumes. However, our model
predicts that there should be some small amount of tra c on every leg. Columns (4)
through (6), re-run the regressions for each corresponding predicted tra c estimate in-
cluding legs with zero observed volumes. Accordingly, there is a big jump in the number
of observations. Including these links do not significantly change our results because our
model predicts extremely low volumes on these legs.
       Our paper provides a new set of global trade costs which accounts for the trade
network. The tight fit between our estimates--trade costs and tra c--and separate
sets of observed data external to our estimation demonstrates that our estimates reflect
actual costs and indirect tra c flows in the trade network. Additionally, these results
serve as a check to the validity of our modeling approach and the Allen and Arkolakis
(2019) framework. Allen and Arkolakis (2019) impute tra c and trade flows within the
US highway system for their estimation.43 Despite the strong structural assumptions
made and the limited data requirements, our checks curtail the risk that our estimates
are wildly o the mark. In addition to our leg and origin-destination cost estimates,
we provide model-implied indirectness measures for ocean shipping as well as resulting
market access measures to researchers on our websites.
  43
    They assume that the observed tra c for a link is proportional to the underlying value of trade on
that link. This assumption is later on verified by comparing their predicted trade flows to actual flows
from the Commodity Flow Survey.



                                                    27
8       Counterfactuals
We explore three sets of counterfactuals with the goal of quantifying the global trade and
welfare impact of the trade network. Our primary counterfactual highlights the impor-
tance of modeling network-consistent trade costs by comparing a reduction in transport
costs to and from a country--equivalent to an improvement to its local transportation
infrastructure--versus a reduction in traditional non-transportation costs for the same
country--like a unilateral tari liberalization or reduction in information frictions. We
then consider two illustrative scenarios. The first considers the role of a negative trade
shock, the United Kingdom leaving the European Union. The second studies the eects
of global warming decreasing trade costs, with the Arctic opening up to trade between
the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, bypassing the Suez and Panama canals.
      To estimate these counterfactuals, we first introduce structural assumptions into our
general framework as well as factor and goods market clearing and balanced trade con-
ditions in order to deliver a quantifiable general equilibrium model.

8.1       Counterfactual Methodology
    Closing the model We adopt the Caliendo and Parro (2015) framework. We assume
there are three sectors (N = 3): containerized tradables c, non-containerized tradables
nc, and nontradables nt (n 2 [c, nc, nt]), all three of which are used as final goods and
intermediates in roundabout production. See Appendix E for full details.

    Equilibrium in changes Defining the general equilibrium using hat algebra, we
                                                             ^kl = t0kl /tkl , which change
consider two sets of changes: (1) link-level transport costs t
                            0
expected trade costs ^ijn = ijn /ijn , and (2) changes in non-transportation trade costs
^ kl = 0kl /kl . Both alter the endogenous costs of production, price indices, wage levels,

                                                                            n         o
trade flows, and welfare.44 We solve for how wages and prices change w              ^i as a
                                                                               ^i , P
function of changes to model primitives, ^ijn , z
                                                ^in , ^ ijn , and compute changes in marginal
costs c
      ^in and trade volumes X^ ij .

    Additional Data We combine our trade volume data with country-level input-
output data from the EORA database aggregating over three sectors: non-traded goods,
container-shipped traded goods and non-container traded goods. We use country-level
consumption and production data to compute Cobb-Douglas shares  and . This gives
 44
      As in the literature we assume that trade is balanced up to a constant deficit shifter.


                                                     28
us a sample size of 136 countries. We follow the literature and conservatively set  = 4
(Simonovska and Waugh, 2014).

   Procedure Changes to transport costs are implemented as changes to link costs tkl ,
which, translated through the model, generate changes in the expected trade cost between
every bilateral trading pairs in our data--even those that are not directly connected with
each other. Once calculated, these bilateral changes enter isometrically to changes in
bilateral non-transportation costs. For analysis which includes the impact of scale, we
model a new equilibrium in the short-to-medium run, by following an iterated procedure
in Algorithm 1 in Appendix F.1. In this procedure, we start at today's equilibrium and
allow all shippers to optimize their transportation patterns. We then recalculate trade
costs at new volumes according to Equation (11). We iterate, allowing re-optimization
until a new stable equilibrium is reached. There may be alternative equilibria, however
we focus on the unique equilibrium from our current starting point--the world today.45

8.2     The Global Impact of Local Infrastructure Improvements
   Overview We consider the role of the shipping network in international trade and
the specific importance of entrep^
                                 ots in that network. We run two types of counterfactuals.
For all countries, we consider the impact of transportation infrastructure investment in
the form of a 1% reduction in transportation costs (tkl ) to and from a targeted country.
We contrast this with a 1% reduction in non-transportation trade costs (ij ) to and from
the targeted country, such as a unilateral tari reduction or reduction in information
frictions. For each type of counterfactual, we evaluate two cases--equilibrium changes
with and without accounting for the endogenous impact of scale economies on transport
costs throughout the shipping network. Reductions in ij without scale eects consider
changes in a manner which ignores the shipping network, while the other three cases
involve exogenous and/or endogenous changes to the shipping network. In each of these
4 cases, we consider welfare and bilateral trade changes to the targeted country as well
as to all other impacted countries, and focus specifically on dierences between entrep^
                                                                                      ots
and non-entrep^
              ots. With 136 targeted countries and 4 cases, we have 544 counterfactuals.
  45
    Kucheryavyy, Lyn and Rodr´    iguez-Clare (2019) establishes a common mathematical structure that
characterizes the unique equilibrium in multi-industry gravity trade models with industry-level external
economies of scale. Their structure requires that the product of the trade and scale elasticities to be not
higher than one, which is satisfied in our case.




                                                    29
   Which Countries are Pivotal to the Trade Network? Our general equilibrium
model yields a convenient metric for how pivotal a country or node is within the trade
network: the impact of changes at the country on global welfare excluding a country's
own. Pivotal locations are those which generate the largest adjustments throughout the
network. Panel (A) in Figure 10 lists the global welfare impact of infrastructure im-
provements at the 20 most pivotal nodes in the network excluding countries' own welfare
change, for both cases with and without scale responses. Our 15 entrep^
                                                                      ots dominate this
list. Egypt tops it, evocative of the strain in global supply chains when the Suez Canal
was blocked in March 2021 (WSJ, FT, AP). Scale economies' impact on the transporta-
                                                                                 ots.46
tion network (overlaid grey bars) further augment the dierential impact of entrep^
Infrastructure investments at entrep^
                                    ots generate on average 10 times the global welfare
impact relative to investment elsewhere.47
       Figure 10: Most Pivotal Countries in the Network: Change in Global Welfare

(A) Transportation Cost Reductions: Highest                                                      (B) Transportation Costs Reductions vs
          Global Welfare Changes                                                                  Non-Transportation Cost Reductions
                                                                                                              250




            Egypt
        Singapore
                                                                                World Welfare Increase from




                                                                                                                        EGY
  United Kingdom
                                                                                 Transport Cost Reduction
                                                                                                              200




      Netherlands                                                                                                               SGP
            China
             USA                                                                                                                                  GBR
         Germany
                                                                                                              150




           Taiwan                                                                                                                           NLD
            Spain                                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                                                          CHN
           France
                                                                                                              100




       Hong Kong
                                                                                                                            TWN                                         DEU
            Japan                                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                                              HKG                  FRA JPN
     South Korea                                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                                                                ITA
              Italy
                                                                                                              50




           Russia                                                                                                                   RUS
                                                                                                                                        BEL
                                                                                                                           ARE
                                                                                                                           SAU
     Belgium-Lux                                                                                                         MAR
                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                        PAN
                                                                                                                        MLT   TUR
                                                                                                                            PRT
             UAE                                                                                                           GRC BRA
                                                                                                                                  THAMEX
                                                                                                                                   SWE
                                                                                                                        BHS ZAF
                                                                                                                           ISR  AUS MYS
                                                                                                                                IDNIND
                                                                                                                              PHL
     Saudi Arabia                                                                                                        PAK
                                                                                                                        LBN
                                                                                                                        LKA
                                                                                                                        DOM
                                                                                                                         COL
                                                                                                                        JAM
                                                                                                                         VEN
                                                                                                                         DZA
                                                                                                                         LTU
                                                                                                                          IRN
                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                         VNM
                                                                                                                        EST
                                                                                                                        BHR
                                                                                                                        LVA
                                                                                                                        TTO
                                                                                                                        DJI
                                                                                                                        GHA
                                                                                                                         BGD
                                                                                                                        SEN
                                                                                                                        MNE
                                                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                                                          SVN
                                                                                                                         PER
                                                                                                                        OMN
                                                                                                                         TUN
                                                                                                                        COG
                                                                                                                        AGO
                                                                                                                        LBY
                                                                                                                        CUB
                                                                                                                        GTM
                                                                                                                        IRQ
                                                                                                                         HRV
                                                                                                                        KWT
                                                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                                                        KEN
                                                                                                                        ISL
                                                                                                                        TGO
                                                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                                                        HND
                                                                                                                        MUS
                                                                                                                        MDG
                                                                                                                        NCL
                                                                                                                        BEN
                                                                                                                         BGR
                                                                                                                        CMR
                                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                                                                        ALB
                                                                                                                        SYR
                                                                                                                        GUY
                                                                                                                        MOZ
                                                                                                                        MRT
                                                                                                                        KHM
                                                                                                                        URY
                                                                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                        GIN
                                                                                                                        SUR
                                                                                                                        BRN
                                                                                                                        GAB
                                                                                                                        LBR
                                                                                                                        QAT
                                                                                                                        HTI
                                                                                                                        BRB
                                                                                                                        GRL
                                                                                                                        ABW
                                                                                                                        CYM
                                                                                                                        BLZ
                                                                                                                        MDV
                                                                                                                        CPV
                                                                                                                        ATG
                                                                                                                        GEO
                                                                                                                        GMB
                                                                                                                        SLE
                                                                                                                        BOL
                                                                                                                        SOM
                                                                                                                        ERI
                                                                                                                        LAO
                                                                                                                        NIC
                                                                                                                        MNG
                                                                                                                        PRK
                                                                                                                        BLR
                                                                                                                        PRY
                                                                                                                        MAC
                                                                                                                        CRI
                                                                                                                          KAZ
                                                                                                                           CHLFIN
                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                                                            ROU
                                                                                                                           NZL
                                                                                                                            UKR
                                                                                                                            ARG
                                                                                                                               DNK
                                                                                                                                POL
                                                                                                                               CZE  CHE
                                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                              0




         Morocco                                     No Scale Response
          Canada                                     With Scale Response                                            0                         20             40               60
                      0          2          4         6            8                                                                   World Welfare Increase from
                          Change in Aggregate Welfare, basis points                                                                   Non-Transport Cost Reduction

Notes: Panel (A) shows absolute values for aggregate net change in global welfare after infrastructure
investment in the targeted country, excluding the country's own welfare change, for the 20 countries
with the largest global impact calculated without scale economies. Overlaid grey bars represent welfare
changes allowing for the network's endogenous response to scale economies. Panel (B) compares, for
each country, the change in world welfare, excluding the country's own welfare, from a 1% decrease in
non-transportation costs (X-axis) vs a 1% decrease in transportation costs (Y-axis). Markers are ISO
Country codes. Entrep^  ots are in red.



   When Does Accounting for the Transportation Network Matter? Panel
(B) of Figure 10 plots the average welfare impact, excluding the targeted country's own
  46
     Panel (A) of Appendix Figure A.14 repeats the exercise for cases with non-transportation cost
reductions, finding that the top 20 list is dominated by the largest economies instead.
  47
     Appendix Tables A.9 and A.10 examines raw and conditional mean dierential impact of targeting
entrep^ots.



                                                                           30
welfare change, of a transportation cost reduction (as in Panel (A)) against the same
for non-transportation trade costs. While, driven by gravity, there is a strong overall
relationship between the two counterfactuals, the average dierence is roughly an order
of magnitude (100-160 log points): the eects of one type of counterfactuals will be a
poor predictor of the other for any given country. For entrep^
                                                             ots, (red in Panel (B)), the
1-to-1 relationship is violated. At the extreme, while the eect of non-transportation
cost reductions in Egypt has a similar global welfare eect to that of Colombia, Egypt's
impact is larger than that of the US in the transportation cost reduction exercise.48 The
pivotal nature of the entrep^
                            ots are specific to their role in the trade network.
       Ignoring the trade network impacts of policy rolls the quantitatively large network
impacts into the eects of non-transportation cost changes. On the one hand, the impact
from any one individual trade cost change will be highly non-predictive. On the other
hand, this may not qualitatively impact analysis at the spokes of the network--those
origins or destinations which do not significantly participate in trade as third countries--
but substantially obfuscates the role of entrep^
                                               ots in trade.

   The impact of entrep^
                       ots are localized To account for the dierential impacts
of entrep^
         ots, we drill down to one particular margin at which the impact appears most
distinct: locally. Figure 11 is a binned scatter plot considering the welfare eects on
the impacted country (y-axis) relative to its distance from the targeted country (x-axis),
adjusting for the impacted country fixed eects. Nearly overlapping blue and green dots
in Figure 11 Panel (B) show a nearly identical distance gradient for non-entrep^
                                                                               ots and
entrep^
      ots respectively for counterfactual non-transportation cost reductions without scale
economies. The blue and green dots in Figure 11 Panel (A) show the overall larger impact
of infrastructure investments at entrep^
                                       ots is relatively more localized--decaying at 5 times
the rate. Scale economies amplify the localization, with orange dots decaying at 7-times
the rate compared to red.49

   Scale economies concentrate gains to entrep^
                                              ots Finally, we turn our attention
to how these cost reductions dierentially aect the impacted countries when they are
entrep^
      ots versus non-entrep^
                           ots. Figure 12 plots the dierential welfare gains to entrep^
                                                                                      ots
  48
     Panel (B) Appendix Figure A.14 finds similar results comparing non-transportation cost reductions
with and without an endogenous scale response. Country-pair bilateral trade results are qualitatively
and quantitatively similar.
  49
     The orange dots in Panel (B) which include the endogenous scale response through the transportation
network, echo these results.



                                                  31
                                                Figure 11: Spatial Decay of Benefits By Entrep^
                                                                                              ot Status

                              (A) Decrease in Transportation Costs                                         (B) Decrease in Non-Transportation Costs




                                                                                                                                .0002
 from Transport Improvement
                              .0008
  Impacted Welfare Increase




                                                                                                    Impacted Welfare Increase
                                                                                                      from Tariff Improvement
                                                                                                                                .00015
                              .0006




                                                                                                                                .0001
                              .0004




                                                                                                                                .00005
                              .0002
                              0




                                                                                                                                0
                                      1,100             3,000               8,100          22,000                                        1,100             3,000               8,100          22,000
                                         Impacted Distance from Targeted Country                                                            Impacted Distance from Targeted Country
                                              Non-Entrepôts     Non-Entrepôts with Scale                                                         Non-Entrepôts     Non-Entrepôts with Scale
                                              Entrepôts         Entrepôts with Scale                                                             Entrepôts         Entrepôts with Scale



Notes: Panel (A) shows binned scatter residual for welfare eects on impacted countries of
transportation infrastructure in targeted countries vs distance between the targeted and impacted
countries. Blue and red dots are the no-scale and scale cases for counterfactuals where targeted
countries are not entrep^ots, respectively. Green and orange dots are no-scale and scale cases,
respectively, for counterfactuals where the targeted countries are entrep^
                                                                         ots. Panel (B) presents the
same for reductions in non-transportation trade costs.


relative to non-entrep^
                      ots, as impacted countries, controlling for impacted country size,
distance between targeted and impacted countries, as well as targeted country fixed ef-
fects. Without scale economies, we find that the welfare gains for both entrep^
                                                                              ots and
non-entrep^
          ots are not significantly dierent (in blue). However, the dierential bene-
fits to entrep^
              ots is significant and large when allowing for scale economies (in red). Scale
economies disproportionately accrue gains to entrep^
                                                   ots as impacted countries. The coe -
cient on the entrep^
                   ot dummy is 0.15 (SE of 0.06) and 0.13 (SE of 0.05) for transportation
and non-transportation counterfactuals, respectively. The pairwise dierence between
the two cases (in green) is statistically significant. These results--that scale economies in
transportation concentrate gains locally at and around hubs--highlight scale economies
in transportation as a source of agglomeration.

8.3                                   Brexit
Further illustrating the trade network consequences of bilateral trade cost changes, we
study the eects of Brexit--as a 5% increase in trade costs for goods that originate or
are destined for the UK. We assume these increases will not be charged to goods that
temporarily stop or are transshipped at British ports. For example, Irish exports destined
for Britain will face higher tari costs, while Irish exports destined for the United States
will not--even if those goods stop in Felixstowe en route.


                                                                                               32
   Figure 12: Dierential Welfare Gains of Impacted Countries by Entrep^
                                                                      ots Status




Notes: Figure plots the coe cients (dots) and confidence intervals (lines) for indicators for entrep^
                                                                                                    ot
status from a country-pair level regression of impacted countries' log percent welfare gains from a
transportation cost reduction or an infrastructure improvement (left panel) or non-transportation trade
cost reduction (right panel) at targeted countries. Regressions control for impacted country GDP,
distance to targeted country, and targeted country fixed eects. Standard errors are clustered by the
targeted country. The blue dots represent the welfare gains for cases without scale economies. The red
dots represent the welfare gains allowing for the network's endogenous response to scale economies.
The green dots use the dierence in logs between the two cases on the left-hand side.


    We model two cases: first without, then with the impact of scale on the trade network.
In our first case, as in a traditional model, outcomes are only aected through changes in
trade with the UK or multilateral resistance. However, with scale economies, the decrease
in UK trade will raise trade costs of neighboring countries through the transportation
network. Lower trade volumes lead to increased transport costs, not only for the UK,
but also countries that use the UK as an entrep^
                                               ot. Irish exports to the US will now be
more costly, as they will either pay the increased costs of travelling through Britain, use
an alternative entrep^
                     ot, or take a low-volume, more costly direct trip.
    Panel (B) of Table 3 reports aggregate eects. The direct eect decreases global
welfare by 2.3 basis points. The introduction of scale economies leads to a more than
4 times decrease of 10 basis points. Trade volumes follow a similar pattern. Figure
13 highlights the distributional eects in terms of welfare (see Appendix Figure A.16
for trade volumes). Scale economies amplify the Brexit impact, especially for Europe.
Notably, the impact of scale is not well-predicted by the non-scale case. We document
significant negative welfare impacts on Ireland, Iceland and other Nordic countries, many
of which rely on UK feeder routes to get their goods to large vessels that ply transoceanic

                                                  33
                Table 3: Aggregate Counterfactual Outcomes, Basis Points

                                         Welfare                           Container Trade
                               kl       kl         tkl     tkl      kl        kl       tkl      tkl
                                      Scale              Scale              Scale             Scale
                              (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)
                                              (A): Local Trade Cost Reductions
  Global Changes
    Mean                     0.08     0.26      0.20      0.58     0.87     2.93     2.31     6.62
    Standard Deviation      (0.20)   (0.59)    (0.47)    (1.41)   (2.22)   (6.74)   (5.31)   (16.00)

                                                          (B): Brexit
  Global Changes             -2.3     -10.0                      -24.5     -112.7

                                              (C): Opening of the Arctic Passage
  Global Changes              1.5               3.3      8.9     17.4                38.2     101.8

Notes: Columns (1)-(4) present aggregate welfare changes. Columns (5)-(8) present changes to
aggregate container trade. Odd columns correspond to cases where no scale economy feedback loops
are allowed. Even columns present results allowing for scale economy feedback. Panel (A) reports
results for our first counterfactual, transportation and non-transportation cost declines for each of 136
countries. Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) present results for cases where non-transportation trade costs
are reduced. Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8) present results for cases where transportation costs are
reduced (infrastructure improvements). Panel (B) presents results for Brexit, a 5% increase in
non-transportation trade costs ij between the UK and its trading partners. Case 1 of Brexit
corresponds to Columns (1) and (5), while Case 2 corresponds to Columns (2) and (6). Panel (C)
presents results for the Arctic Passage counterfactual. Case 1, naive impacts on origin-destination
pairs, corresponds to Columns (1) and (5). Case 2, allowing for network trade, corresponds to Columns
(3) and (7). Case 3, adding in the impact of the scale, correspond to Columns (4) and (8).


trade with Shanghai and New York (Table A.15). Its trade not easily routed through
alternatives, Ireland is most aected outside of the UK (as recognized in FT 2020).

8.4     Opening the Arctic Passage
To consider the role of the trade network in reflecting physical trade route changes,
we model the opening of the once-fabled Northeast and Northwest Passages through
the Arctic Ocean between North America, Northern Europe and East Asia as a viable
shipping route due to global warming. For example, a ship traveling from South Korea
to Germany would take roughly 34 days via the Suez Canal but only 23 days via the
Northeast and Northwest Passages (Economist, 2018). For every kl pair, we compute
the dierence in sea distance using Dijkstra's algorithm between world maps with and
without arctic ice caps (Appendix A.2). Panel (A) of Figure 14 compares the top 150
existing shipping routes today and shortest ocean-going distance of these routes after the
Arctic sea passage is viable. New routes going through the Arctic passage are in red,



                                                    34
                               Figure 13: Welfare Changes - Brexit
                             (A) Tari Change, No Network Scale Eects




                         (B) Full Trade Network Eects and Scale Economies




Notes: These two plots show the percent change in welfare (the relative price index) of a simulated 5%
increase in trading costs with the United Kingdom for all countries in our dataset. Darker reds reflects
a greater increase and blue represents no change. Omitted countries are white. Panel (A) reflects
changes if shipping costs remain constant, reflecting only welfare changes due to changes in prices.
Panel (B) allows for a scale economy feedback loop on transportation costs for all countries.


non-changing routes are in brown, and abandoned routes are in blue.
       We compare three dierent cases. First, we consider a network-naive case where we
only allow for changes in origin-destination trade costs between country pairs for which
the direct bilateral distance decreased.50 Second, we lower tkl for all observed links with
positive tra c according to 2 in Equation (11) calculating new distances with the option
of traveling through the Arctic Passage. Here, even countries that do not ship directly
to each other--e.g. China and Ukraine--experience changes in expected transport trade
costs.51 Third, we repeat the second case accounting for the impact of scale: as trade
costs change, trade volumes change, reducing trade costs further.
       Column (1) of Table 3 Panel (C) shows that the direct eects of the Arctic Passage are
positive, with aggregate welfare increasing 1.5 basis points, and container trade volumes
  50
       We do not allow third-party-countries to take advantage of these reductions.
  51
       For countries aected in cases one and two, the magnitude of changes are mechanically identical.


                                                    35
                            Figure 14: The Opening of the Artic Passage

(A) Shipping Routes: Before and After              (B) Welfare Changes for Top 20 Countries




  Notes: The red lines in Panel (A) indicate counterfactual shipping. Blue lines in indicate existing
  shipping. Their overlap is brown. Route width reflects the number of containers (TEU). Panel (B)
  shows the percent change in welfare of the simulated opening of the Nordic Passage for the 20 countries
  with the largest welfare changes. The first bar reflects only the trade cost changes on routes that are
  directly aected from the opening. The second bar allows for the trade costs to aect indirect trade
  with network eects while the third bar allows for the endogenous response to scale economies.


  increasing 17 basis points. Case two, accounting for the full trade network impact of
  the passage including indirect shipping, doubles the aggregate welfare eect to 3.3 basis
  points and increases worldwide container volumes by 38 basis points. Allowing for scale
  economies triples and doubles the welfare and trade impact relative to the network results
  (9 basis points welfare gain and 102 basis points increase in trade).
         Panel (B) in Figure 14 plots the top 20 most impacted countries, showing gains are
  particularly pronounced in East Asian entrep^
                                              ots like Hong Kong and Singapore which
  disproportionately benefit from the scale economy. Scandinavian countries also gain due
  to their geography. Denmark and Finland, which in the baseline first case have zero or
  a small trade diversion impact, gain due to the ability to leverage the trade network and
  scale response from the opening.
         Figure 15 show changes in the relative wage-adjusted price index (interpreted as na-
  tional welfare, if we omit the costs of climate change) across the three cases.52 In the
  baseline scenario in Panel (A), we see increases from trade between countries that are
  along the Northeast passage, and spillover impacts at countries not directly impacted--
  reflecting classic multilateral resistance and cascading eects from value chains. Some
  countries see small trade diversion eects (Panel (B), Figure 14). Figure 15 Panel (B)
    52
         Appendix Figure A.18 shows related changes in country-by-country containerized exports.


                                                     36
                        Figure 15: Welfare Changes - Arctic Passage
                                 (A) Only Directly Aected Routes




                                   (B) Full Trade Network Eects




                       (C) Full Trade Network Eects and Scale Economies




Notes: Plots show the percent change in welfare (the relative price index). Darker reds reflects a
greater increase and blue represents no change. Omitted countries are white. Panel (A) reflects changes
only allowing trade costs to decrease on routes whose distance is directly reduced to the Arctic Passage.
Panel (B) reflects changes allowing all countries to indirectly access the Arctic Passage through the
trade network. Panel (C) allows for the network's endogenous response to scale economies.


shows how, through indirect trade, the benefits of the passage pass on to nearby countries
not directly impacted. In Panel (C), scale economies amplify these eects.




                                                   37
9        Conclusion
This paper studies entrep^
                         ots, the trade network they form, and their impact on interna-
tional trade. We characterize the global container shipping network as a hub-and-spoke
system by documenting that the majority of trade is indirect and flows from origins to
destinations through entrep^
                           ots (hubs). To rationalize these novel and salient facts, we
develop a general equilibrium model of world trade with endogenous trade costs and en-
trep^
    ots, estimating both the underlying trade costs on all routes, and scale economies.
We quantify the impact of the trade network on global trade and welfare, highlighting
how changes at nodes operate through the network, entrep^
                                                        ots, and scale economies to
create widespread impacts.
       While the focus of this paper is on the general equilibrium eects of the trade network,
there are two aspects that lend themselves to further study. First, while we are singularly
focused on containerized shipping because containerized trade accounts for the majority
of global seaborne trade, the hub and spoke network is not specific to just containerized
trade (Rodrigue, Comtois and Slack, 2013). Such networks are also prevalent in freight
services like UPS or DHL in addition to air transport. Second, our estimates of scale
economies are agnostic to underlying mechanisms. Future work should especially be
done to consider mechanisms the roles of fixed costs in enabling the scale economies
in containerized shipping, such as the costs incurred by potential oligopolies in setting
shipping networks and the endogenous creation of firm-specific hub-and-spoke networks.53
While sector-specific research has been done on these networks, fruitful research should
take into consideration a tractable general equilibrium framework to be able to quantify
welfare eects.



References
Alder, Simon. 2015. "Chinese roads in India: The eect of transport infrastructure on
 economic development." Working Paper.
Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. 2014. "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial
 Economy." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1085­1140.
Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. 2019. "The welfare eects of transportation
 infrastructure improvements." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Allen, Treb, and Dave Donaldson. 2018. "The geography of path dependence." Work-
 ing Paper.
  53
    In particular, we can account for leg-level monopolies and variable markups, but we cannot account
for within-firm spillovers in sea route selection.


                                                 38
Anderson, James E, Mykyta Vesselovsky, and Yoto V Yotov. 2016. "Gravity
  with scale eects." Journal of International Economics, 100: 174­193.
Asturias, Jose. 2020. "Endogenous Transportation Costs." European Economic Review.
Barjamovic, Gojko, Thomas Chaney, Kerem Co¸              sar, and Ali Horta¸  csu. 2019.
  "Trade, merchants, and the lost cities of the bronze age." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 134(3): 1455­1503.
Bartelme, Dominick, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andres
  Rodriguez-Clare. 2019. "The Textbook Case for Industrial Policy: Theory Meets
  Data." Mimeo.
Bernhofen, Daniel M, Zouheir El-Sahli, and Richard Kneller. 2016. "Estimat-
  ing the eects of the container revolution on world trade." Journal of International
  Economics, 98: 36­50.
Brancaccio, Giulia, Myrto Kalouptsidi, and Theodore Papageorgiou. 2017.
  "Geography, Search Frictions and Endogenous Trade Costs." National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare
  Eects of NAFTA." The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1): 1­44.
Co¸sar, A Kerem, and Banu Demir. 2018. "Shipping inside the box: Containerization
  and trade." Journal of International Economics, 114: 331­345.
Cullinane, Kevin, and Mahim Khanna. 2000. "Economies of scale in large contain-
  erships: optimal size and geographical implications." Journal of transport geography,
  8(3): 181­195.
Ducruet, C´   esar, R´
                     eka Juh´ asz, D´avid Kriszti´ an Nagy, and Claudia Steinwen-
  der. 2019. "All aboard: The aggregate eects of port development." Working paper.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. "Technology, geography, and trade."
  Econometrica, 70(5): 1741­1779.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, and Edouard Schaal. 2017. "Optimal transport networks in
  spatial equilibrium." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grant, Matthew, and Meredith Startz. 2020. "Cutting Out the Middleman: The
  Structure of Chains of Intermediation." Working Paper.
Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2014. "Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit,
  and Cookbook." Handbook of International Economics, 4: 131.
Heiland, Inga, Andreas Moxnes, Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe, and Yuan Zi.
  2019. "Trade From Space: Shipping Networks and The Global Implications of Local
  Shocks." CEPR.
Holmes, Thomas J, and Ethan Singer. 2018. "Indivisibilities in Distribution." Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Hummels, David, Volodymyr Lugovskyy, and Alexandre Skiba. 2009. "The trade
  reducing eects of market power in international shipping." Journal of Development
  Economics, 89(1): 84­97.
International Maritime Authority. 2003. "AIS Guidelines."
Kojaku, Sadamori, Mengqiao Xu, Haoxiang Xia, and Naoki Masuda. 2019.
  "Multiscale core-periphery structure in a global liner shipping network." Scientific re-
  ports, 9(1): 404.
Kucheryavyy, Konstantin, Gary Lyn, and Andr´               es Rodr´  iguez-Clare. 2019.
  "Grounded by gravity: A well-behaved trade model with external economies." Working
  Paper.
Lashkaripour, Ahmad, and Vova Lugovskyy. 2019. "Scale economies and the struc-


                                           39
  ture of trade and industrial policy." mimeo Indiana University.
Lazarou, Nicholas-Joseph. 2016. "Endogenous Hub Formations in International
  Trade." Forum for Research in Empirical International Trade Working Paper 1144.
Moretti, Enrico. 2019. "The eect of high-tech clusters on the productivity of top
  inventors." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Redding, Stephen J, and Matthew A Turner. 2015. "Transportation costs and the
  spatial organization of economic activity." Handbook of regional and urban economics,
  5: 1339­1398.
Rodrigue, Jean-Paul, Claude Comtois, and Brian Slack. 2013. The geography of
  transport systems. Routledge.
Rua, Gisela. 2014. "Diusion of containerization." Finance and Economics Discussion
  Series Sta working paper 2014­88. Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Schott, Peter K. 2008. "The relative sophistication of Chinese exports." Economic
  policy, 23(53): 6­49.
Simonovska, Ina, and Michael E Waugh. 2014. "The elasticity of trade: Estimates
  and evidence." Journal of international Economics, 92(1): 34­50.
Skiba, A. 2017. "Regional economies of scale and regional welfare." Review of Interna-
  tional Economics, Forthcoming.
Sutton, John. 1991. Sunk costs and market structure: Price competition, advertising,
  and the evolution of concentration. MIT press.
Wang, Chengjin, and Jiaoe Wang. 2011. "Spatial pattern of the global shipping net-
  work and its hub-and-spoke system." Research in Transportation Economics, 32(1): 54­
  63.
Wong, Woan Foong. 2020. "The Round Trip Eect: Endogenous Transport Costs and
  International Trade." Working Paper.




                                          40
