                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          COULD VACCINE DOSE STRETCHING REDUCE COVID-19 DEATHS?

                                        Witold Wicek
                                        Amrita Ahuja
                                       Michael Kremer
                                   Alexandre Simoes Gomes
                                      Christopher Snyder
                                        Alex Tabarrok
                                       Brandon Joel Tan

                                      Working Paper 29018
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29018


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




The authors are grateful to Nora Szech, Ezekiel Emanuel, Marc Lipsitch, Prashant Yadav, Patrick
Smith, Frédéric Y. Bois, Virginia Schmit, Victor Dzau, Valmik Ahuja, Marcella Alsan, Garth
Strohbehn and seminar participants at Harvard, M.I.T., the University of Chicago, and the NBER
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Policy and the Economy conference for helpful comments and
to Esha Chaudhuri for excellent research assistance. This work was supported in part by the
Wellspring Philanthropic Fund (Grant No: 15104) and Open Philanthropy. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Witold Wicek, Amrita Ahuja, Michael Kremer, Alexandre Simoes Gomes,
Christopher Snyder, Alex Tabarrok, and Brandon Joel Tan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Could Vaccine Dose Stretching Reduce COVID-19 Deaths?
Witold Wicek, Amrita Ahuja, Michael Kremer, Alexandre Simoes Gomes, Christopher Snyder,
Alex Tabarrok, and Brandon Joel Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 29018
July 2021
JEL No. H0,I0,I15,O1
                                           ABSTRACT
We argue that alternative COVID-19 vaccine dosing regimens could potentially dramatically
accelerate global COVID-19 vaccination and reduce mortality, and that the costs of testing these
regimens are dwarfed by their potential benefits. We first use the high correlation between
neutralizing antibody response and efficacy against disease (Khoury et. al. 2021) to show that
half or even quarter doses of some vaccines generate immune responses associated with high
vaccine efficacy. We then use an SEIR model to estimate that under these efficacy levels,
doubling or quadrupling the rate of vaccination by using fractional doses would dramatically
reduce infections and mortality. Since the correlation between immune response and efficacy may
not be fully predictive of efficacy with fractional doses, we then use the SEIR model to show that
fractional dosing would substantially reduce infections and mortality over a wide range of
plausible efficacy levels. Further immunogenicity studies for a range of vaccine and dose
combinations could deliver outcomes in weeks and could be conducted with a few hundred
healthy volunteers. National regulatory authorities could also decide to test efficacy of fractional
dosing in the context of vaccination campaigns based on existing immune response data, as some
did for delayed second doses. If efficacy turned out to be high, the approach could be
implemented broadly, while if it turned out to be low, downside risk could be limited by
administering full doses to those who had received fractional doses. The SEIR model also
suggests that delaying second vaccine doses will likely have substantial mortality benefits for
multiple, but not all, vaccine-variant combinations, underscoring the importance of ongoing
surveillance. Finally, we find that for countries choosing between approved but lower efficacy
vaccines available immediately and waiting for mRNA vaccines, using immediately available
vaccines typically reduces mortality.

Witold Wicek                                        Christopher Snyder
WAW Statistical Consulting Ltd.                     Department of Economics
witold.wiecek@gmail.com                             Dartmouth College
                                                    301 Rockefeller Hall
Amrita Ahuja                                        Hanover, NH 03755
Douglas B. Marshall Jr. Family Foundation           and NBER
600 Jefferson Street, Suite 310                     chris.snyder@dartmouth.edu
Houston, Texas 77002
amrita.b.ahuja@gmail.com                            Alex Tabarrok
                                                    Department of Economics
Michael Kremer                                      George Mason University
University of Chicago                               Tabarrok@gmu.edu
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th St.                                    Brandon Joel Tan
Chicago, IL 60637                                   Harvard University
and NBER                                            btan@g.harvard.edu
kremermr@uchicago.edu

Alexandre Simoes Gomes
University of Chicago
asimoes@uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

Most of the world is facing a shortage of COVID-19 vaccines, and it is unclear how much produc-

tion capacity can be added in time to materially affect the pandemic. In this paper, we investigate

the public health impacts of dose stretching policies to vaccinate people more rapidly. In particular,

we consider: (1) alternative doses, (2) longer delays between first and second doses, and (3) uti-

lizing available vaccines rather than waiting for higher efficacy ones. We first discuss available

evidence on the potential impact of such policies on protective efficacy for individuals receiving

vaccines and then combine this evidence with an epidemiological model to assess overall impacts

on public health. We find that vaccinating more people using dose stretching policies yields large

reductions in mortality and infections if efficacy remains high, and potentially even if such policies

entail considerable loss of efficacy.

   For some dose stretching strategies, there is considerable evidence on efficacy from clinical

trials and real world data that can inform epidemiological modeling. For example, we can readily

examine the trade-offs that a country might face when choosing between a 70% effective vaccine

available immediately, and a 95% effective vaccine available in two months. Longer delays be-

tween first and second doses--i.e., "first doses first" (FDF)--which allow more people to get at

least one vaccine dose faster, have already been implemented by a number of countries. Clinical

and observational data suggests high first-dose efficacy for certain vaccines against some variants

of the virus, but lower efficacy for other vaccine-variant combinations.

   There is no clinical evidence, to our knowledge, of the efficacy of alternative doses of COVID-

19 vaccines. Therefore, to estimate the potential efficacy of alternative dosing, we combine existing

data showing a high correlation between immune response and efficacy across vaccines (Khoury



                                                  1
et al. 2021) with early-stage clinical trial data on immune responses produced by different vaccine

doses. While sample sizes are low, the results suggest that lower doses may be highly effective. For

example, clinical trial data for mRNA-1273 (the vaccine developed by Moderna and manufactured

by Moderna and GC Pharma) suggests that half doses produce an immune response associated

with close to 95% efficacy, very similar to that of the standard dose. This evidence, while far from

dispositive, suggests that half (or even quarter) doses of some vaccines could plausibly provide

efficacy comparable to that of currently used doses.

    We then use an SEIR model to assess the potential impact of dose stretching strategies when

the immunization rate is constrained by available supply. The immunization rate in our base case

scenario corresponds to the global vaccination rate as of early May 2021, which is roughly 0.25%

of the population per day.1 At this baseline speed, a 95% effective vaccine averts 18­50% of

infections compared to not vaccinating.2 Doubling the vaccination rate by moving to a half dose

of a COVID-19 vaccine averts 41­70% of infections if there is no loss in efficacy. Even if half

doses are only 70% effective, moving to a half dose and doubling the pace of vaccination would

substantially reduce infections and deaths relative to the status quo policy.

    If first-dose efficacy is 80%, as suggested by UK data on BNT162b23 (the vaccine developed

by BioNTech/Pfizer and manufactured by Pfizer and Fosun Biotech), then FDF reduces mortality

by 29% and infections by 39% in a fast-growing epidemic scenario (R = 2) with vaccination speed

of 0.75% of the population per day. The magnitude of benefits depends on epidemic and baseline
   1 The  number of doses administered daily per 100 people. See Mathieu et al. (2021).
   2 The  range of results correspond to the various scenarios simulated, ranging from a slowly decreasing epidemic
(effective R = 0.99) to a fast-growing epidemic (R = 2) peaking three to four months after the start of the simulation.
Under the maintained assumption that high-risk groups are prioritized for vaccination, we find that faster vaccina-
tion typically has more impact on preventing deaths than infections. We also vary model parameters to account for
uncertainty about efficacy of alternative dosing and FDF.
    3 This includes efficacy against the variants prevailing in the UK in the early part of 2021.




                                                          2
speed, but even if efficacy in the period between the first dose and second dose is as low as 50%

(allowing time for immunity from the first dose to develop), we find that FDF reduces infections

and mortality in all epidemic scenarios, as long as supply constraints limit the vaccination rate to

1% of the population per day or less.4 We also find that using a less effective vaccine available

immediately instead of waiting for a more effective one reduces infections and mortality. If a

70% effective vaccine is available immediately while a 95% effective vaccine is available in two

months, starting vaccinations with the immediately available vaccine would reduce infections by

11­22% and deaths by 20­37%.

    Trials to assess the impact of alternative doses on immune response for a variety of vaccines

and doses would involve a few hundred people each and could yield preliminary results within

weeks. One such trial is currently underway in Belgium (ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT04852861).

Additional trials could be conducted in settings with little or no disease transmission, and among

low risk populations. Armed with information from such trials, or even with the data currently

available from early stage clinical trials, some jurisdictions might decide to try alternative dosing

at scale accompanied by rigorous data gathering, just as the UK and a few other countries decided

to implement FDF before complete data on first-dose efficacy was available. For example, a city in

Brazil has recently begun an experimental roll-out of half-doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (the vaccine

developed by Oxford and AstraZeneca, and manufactured by multiple organizations: AstraZeneca,

FIOCRUZ, R-Pharm, SK Bioscience, and Serum Institute of India (Covishield)) to non-elderly

adults (Governo ES, 2021). If alternative doses were found to have sufficiently high individual

efficacy based on observational data, these pilots could be scaled up. If not, those who received
   4 Hybrid stretching policies, using status quo dosing regimens for seniors at greatest mortality risk and stretched

dosing for younger people, can sometimes dominate the "pure" FDF approach, especially for averting deaths.




                                                          3
alternative doses could receive full doses, either of the original vaccine or of another vaccine (as

was done for some viral vector vaccines, or vaccines found to be less effective).5 Because tests of

alternative dosing are largely reversible and the potential benefits are so great, the costs of these

tests would be tiny relative to the expected benefits if there is even a modest chance such policies

could succeed. Additionally, alternative dosing can be implemented among some age groups only

(e.g. in non-elderly populations), which would further reduce any risks.

    Accelerating vaccination with dose-stretching policies would not only reduce infections and

deaths, but also promote equity between groups or countries at opposite ends of the global queue

for vaccines. For example, if people at the end of the queue would currently wait two years to

be vaccinated, doubling supply would reduce their wait time by a full year. For someone near

the front of the queue expecting to be vaccinated in a single month, doubling supply would move

their vaccination forward by only two weeks. Additionally, rapidly vaccinating as many people as

possible could reduce the likelihood of more dangerous variants emerging globally.

    Finally, it is worth noting that switching to smaller doses might not just yield an equivalent

vaccine, but could also potentially reduce side effects, yielding a superior vaccine.

    Our paper adds to a recent literature studying optimal vaccine prioritization,6 which focuses

on the order in which different groups of people should be served by a fixed supply of vaccine

under different epidemic scenarios and efficacy assumptions. Our methods are similar, but our

question is different: we focus on ways that a fixed supply can be stretched to protect more people
   5 Effectiveness   of mixing different vaccines has already been established in practice. For example, an ongoing trial
in Spain found strong antibody response when combining ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and BNT162b2 (ClinicalTrials.gov ID
NCT04860739).
    6 See Akbarpour et al. 2021; Bubar et al. 2021; Gallagher et al. 2020; Hogan et al. 2020; Matrajt et al. 2020; Paltiel

et al. 2020. Our model only considers scenarios in which an older population cohort must finish vaccinations before
the next cohort becomes eligible. In practice, however, logistical constraints often mean it is not possible to maintain
strict prioritization. In some cases it may also be more beneficial to vaccinate age groups in a different order. We will
examine this in future work.



                                                            4
while potentially sacrificing some individual efficacy. Under normal circumstances, when there

is no constraint on vaccine supply, public health is well served by designing vaccine regimens

to maximize individual health. In a pandemic, however, vaccination rates may be constrained

by vaccine supply, and there may be a race to vaccinate people before they get infected. In this

scenario, the vaccine regimen maximising individual protection might differ from the socially

optimal one. Individuals may benefit more from lower efficacy regimens if they allow for an

increase in vaccination rates and, consequently, a decrease in overall infection risk. This paper

uses simulations to provide quantitative results for impact of dose stretching in realistic epidemic

scenarios calibrated to the COVID-19 pandemic. In a companion paper (in progress), we provide

qualitative theoretical results on the optimality of dose stretching that hold generally for a more

abstract epidemiological model.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses available data on the poten-

tial impact of dose stretching policies on efficacy; Section 3 and Section 4 respectively present

the epidemiological model and simulation methods; Section 5 estimates the public health im-

pact of speeding up vaccination; Section 6 analyzes a series of specific dose-stretching policies--

alternative dosing, longer delays between first and second dose, and utilizing available vaccines

rather than waiting for higher efficacy ones--under a variety of assumptions regarding efficacy.

We discuss next steps for testing dose stretching policies and the option value of undertaking such

testing in Section 7 and conclude in Section 8.




                                                  5
2. Evidence on Efficacy Under Dose-Stretching

In this section we consider evidence on the efficacy of various dose stretching policies, both from

clinical trials and from real world vaccination roll-outs.

   Alternative dosing for COVID-19 has not yet been tested outside of early stage clinical trials.

However, we do have evidence from previous epidemics that very small doses can prove effective

in some cases. For example, Brazil successfully used 1/5-doses of yellow fever vaccine to combat

an epidemic in 2018 based on advice from the WHO (Pan-American Health Organization 2018).

Alternative dosing has also been considered for seasonal influenza (Antony et al., 2020; Pan-

American Health Organization, 2009).

   Existing evidence from clinical trials suggests that alternative doses of some vaccines could

yield high immune responses, comparable to those for standard doses of the same vaccines, and

greater than those for some other, already approved vaccines. For example, a trial using ChAdOx1

nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca) found that "differences in normalized titre levels [of neutralizing

antibody (nAb)] for the standard dose and a low dose [of approximately 1/2 of the standard dose]

within [18-55, 56-69, and 70+] age groups were not statistically significant" (Ramasamy et al.

2020). A trial with mRNA-1273 (Moderna) likewise found similar immune responses for both 50

and 100µg (standard) doses (Chu et al. 2021). This suggests significant scope for flexibility in vac-

cine dosage. This was acknowledged by the scientific advisor to the US's Operation Warp Speed,

Moncef Slaoui, who in January 2021 suggested giving half doses of mRNA-1273 to some adults

(Wu, 2021). Recent comments from some vaccine manufacturers agree: Melissa Moore, Chief

Scientific Officer for Moderna, discussing vaccine boosters, said that the high dose of mRNA-

1273 was used to "guarantee effectiveness" but that she is confident doses would decrease in the



                                                  6
future, "reducing side effects without compromising protection" (Weintraub 2021).

    Recent research also suggests that immune response, as measured by neutralizing antibody

(NAb) levels, is highly predictive of protection from symptomatic infection, both among conva-

lescent patients and among the vaccinated. Khoury et al. (2021) find a "remarkably predictive"

logistic relationship between NAb levels and vaccine efficacy (Spearman  of 0.905).7

    In Figure 1 we use Khoury et al.'s model (fitted to standard doses of vaccines) and then, as-

suming the relationship between immune response and efficacy holds, plot additional points based

on immune response for different doses of currently used vaccines to add points for alternative

doses. Underlying data are given in Table 2 in Appendix A.8 Despite the exploratory nature of this

approach, the results strongly illustrate the potential benefits of adopting alternative doses. We ob-

serve that for some vaccines, immune responses associated with high efficacy can be obtained even

with much smaller doses. For mRNA-1273 (Moderna), for example, doses 1/2 and 1/4 of the stan-

dard both have immune response levels associated with 90-95% efficacy. For BNT162b2 (Pfizer)

there is no significant decrease in NAb level for a 2/3 dose in non-elderly populations (albeit with

a very small sample size), while NAb levels are associated with efficacy between roughly 70% and

85% for other dose-age combinations. For other vaccines, we also sometimes observe unexpected

trends, where lower doses lead to NAb levels associated with higher efficacy (e.g., NVX-CoV2373

(the vaccine developed by Novavax and not yet approved for distribution) and ChAdOx1 nCoV-

19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca)). While these results are not necessarily unrealistic (AstraZeneca, 2020),

they may be a consequence of limitations of the Khoury et al. modeling approach, or of uncertainty
   7 Data  are based on phase 1-3 clinical trials for subsequently approved vaccines, which are publicly available. A
similar relationship has also been reported by Earle et al. (2021).
    8 Where available, we used the same studies referenced by Khoury et al. to derive ratios of alternative dose to

standard dose immune response. The exceptions were: the 25µg dose of mRNA-1273 (Moderna), for which we used
Chu et al. (2021); for BBV152 (the vaccine developed and manufactured by Bharat Biotech, sold as "Covaxin"), Ella
et al. (2021); for ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca), Ramasamy et al. (2020).


                                                         7
                                                                                            mRNA-1273 50µg             50% of Standard Dose
                                        mRNA-1273 25µg 25% of Standard Dose                 Adults 18-55 (N=78) · Elderly 55+ (N=63)
                         100            Adults 18-55 (N=15)




                         90                                                                      NVX-CoV2373 25µg 500% of Standard Dose
                                                                                                 Adults 18-59 (N=50)
                                                   Convalescent
                                                                                BNT162b2 20µg             67% of Standard Dose
                         80
 Protective E cacy (%)




                                                                                Adults 18-55 (N=12) · Elderly 65-85 (N=12)

                                                                          BNT162b2 10µg              33% of Standard Dose
                         70                                               Adults 18-55 (N=12) · Elderly 65-85 (N=12)

                                                                       JNJ-78436735 1e11v.p.         200% of Standard Dose
                                                                       Adults 18-55 (N=24) · Elderly 65+ (N=50)
                         60
                                                              ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 2.2e10v.p.           44% of Standard Dose
                                                              Adults 18-55 (N=41) · Elderly 56+ (N=62)
                         50
                                                BBV152 3µg       50% of Standard Dose
                                                Adults 12-65 (N=190)
                         40




                               0.1                                      1.0                                            10.0

                                                          Mean Neutralizing Antibody Level


                          Alternative Doses (Elderly)          Standard Dose
                          Alternative Doses (Adults)               mRNA-1273 (Moderna) 100µg                   BBV152 (Covaxin) 6µg
                          Standard Doses                           NVX-CoV2373 (Novavax) 5µg                   ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (AstraZeneca)
                                                                                                               5e10v.p.
                                                                   BNT162b2 (Pfizer) 30µg
                                                                                                               JNJ-78436735 (Johnson &
                                                                   CoronaVac (Sinovac) 3g                      Johnson) 5e10v.p.

                                                                   rAd26-S+rAd5-S (Sputnik) 1e11v.p.



Figure 1: Efficacy Associated with Mean Neutralization Levels for Alternative Doses. The curve follows the
model derived by Khoury et al. linking NAb levels to protection from symptomatic infection for standard doses
of eight vaccines and in convalescents, with the shaded area corresponding to the 95% confidence interval of the
model. Lighter data points represent the mean (normalized) immune response and clinical efficacy of specific vaccines
(referred to by colors) at standard doses, following Khoury et al.; response in convalescents is also plotted. NAb levels
for vaccines are normalized to those of convalescents using clinical trial data for each vaccine. We calculate the ratios
of mean NAb responses for alternative versus standard doses using data from clinical trials that tested different doses.
We then plot the alternative doses on Khoury et al.'s immunogenicity-efficacy curve as darker shapes. Doses for the
elderly are represented by diamonds while doses for non-elderly adults (or all adults, where data is not available by
age) are represented by circles. For consistency, if multiple age groups were compared, we use the immune response
to the standard dose in younger adults to normalise mean NAb levels. We note small sample sizes, typical of early
stage trials, and do not include measures of uncertainty.
inherent in early-stage clinical trials (including small sample sizes), or both.

    As discussed by Khoury et al., a comparison across clinical trials of different vaccines may

be biased. Moreover, the relationship that holds across vaccines may not hold across doses of a

given vaccine. The entire curve traced by Khoury et al. may be shifted downward for some viral

variants. This could potentially change the relative benefits of using reduced versus standard doses

for some vaccines, but would most likely not change that reduced doses of some vaccines may be

more protective than full doses of others. More research is needed to establish the absolute level

at which there is protection from infection or severe outcomes, how NAb levels affect efficacy

against variants, and how decreases in NAb levels impact longevity of protection (Hall et al. 2021,

Krammer 2021).9 On the other hand, another analysis in the same paper by Khoury et al. also

suggests that even small NAb responses are protective against severe disease and death, potentially

increasing the value of alternative dosing. Regardless, our analysis suggests that within-vaccine

variations in efficacy are in many cases small compared to differences across vaccines. We return

to the discussion of these results in light of our simulation analysis in Section 6.

    In contrast to alternative doses, there is considerable evidence on the potential efficacy of a

delayed dosing interval between first and second doses--or "first dose first" (FDF)--as such poli-

cies have already been enacted in several countries. For example, the default three- to four-week

delay for BNT162b2, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19, and mRNA-1273 has been stretched to 12 weeks in the

United Kingdom and 16 weeks in Canada.10 India also recently decided to delay second doses,
   9 In  addition, there are other determinants of vaccine effectiveness; for example, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 has been
shown to elicit a much stronger T cell response than BNT162b2 among the elderly (Parry et al. 2021).
   10 In a joint statement the four UK Chief Medical Officers wrote: "We agree with [the Joint Committee for Vaccina-

tion and Immunisation] that at this stage of the pandemic prioritising the first doses of vaccine for as many people as
possible on the priority list will protect the greatest number of at risk people overall in the shortest possible time and
will have the greatest impact on reducing mortality, severe disease and hospitalisations and in protecting the NHS and
equivalent health services" (UK Department of Health 2020).




                                                            9
first to 6-8 weeks and now to 12-16 weeks (The Times of India 2021).

    The UK decision was initially motivated only by clinical trial evidence, including immune

response data (see Appendix A for a non-comprehensive summary of clinical trial evidence on

first doses). Subsequent large-scale observational studies, including from vaccination campaigns

in the UK and Israel, estimate that a first dose of BNT162b2 is approximately 75% effective at

preventing infections (Appendix A presents details of the evidence discussed here). Related studies

which also include data for ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca) find that first doses are 78­

94% effective at preventing hospitalizations. Additionally, a recent study suggests that the second

dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 is more effective (82.4%) when it comes at 12 weeks, rather than at

four weeks (54.9%) as tested in the initial clinical trial (Voysey, et al. 2021).

    However, first dose efficacy is much lower for other vaccine-variant combinations. First doses

of BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 have been significantly less effective against the variants

of concern originating in South Africa (B.1.351), the UK (B.1.1.7), and India (B.1.617.2) (Burn-

Murdoch et al. 2021). A study of CoronaVac (the vaccine developed by Sinovac and manufactured

by multiple organizations: Sinovac, Instituto Butanta, Bio Farma, and Pharmaniaga) in Chile re-

ported good efficacy against the standard variant after two doses, but very low efficacy after one

dose (Dyer 2021, Taylor 2021).11 We also note, however, that as the number of natural infections

in a community increases, the risk of providing just a single dose decreases, since some evidence

suggests that a single shot provides as much protection for those who have been previously infected

as two doses in those never infected (Ebinger et al. 2021; Stamatatos et al. 2021; Willyard 2021).
  11 We  provide references and summarize information from these trials in Appendix A. We note that efficacy of first
doses is also broadly consistent with the relationship between immune response and efficacy against symptomatic
infection as laid out by Khoury et al.. nAB levels from two doses are typically several times higher than for one dose,
so while single doses may be sufficient for high efficacy against the original SARS-CoV2 virus, they may be less
effective against variants with some degree of immune evasion.



                                                         10
   Some countries have also decided to use vaccines that were available immediately rather than

waiting for more effective ones. For example, the UK, Europe, and Canada rolled out vaccina-

tions with a combination ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and BNT162b2, rather than waiting for more mRNA

vaccines to be available. Chile and Seychelles have relied significantly on CoronaVac, with less ro-

bust efficacy data, to start vaccination campaigns earlier. Case rates remain high in both countries

(Mathieu et al. 2021), although the vaccine does appear to be protective against hospitalization and

death (as suggested in a recent study in Serrano, Brazil, where almost the entire adult population

has been vaccinated (e.g., Pearson 2021)).

   The epidemiological modeling that follows excludes the potential impact of dosing stretching

polices on immune escape through mutation. Some have argued that dose stretching policies might

exacerbate this risk due to a prolonged period of partial immunity increasing the risk of immune

escape. However, many epidemiologists now believe that dose stretching may instead reduce the

probability of immune escape (e.g., Cobey et al. 2021). We expand on the current evidence in

Appendix A.

   In summary, FDF approaches and using available vaccines early rather than waiting for more

effective ones have been tested as vaccination campaigns rolled out. We therefore have good

information on their effectiveness. We do not yet have efficacy data for alternative doses, but

immune response data suggests that smaller doses of some vaccines may be very effective.



3. Epidemiological Model

Since the evidence on alternative dose efficacy is not dispositive, we model the potential impact

on the pandemic of a range of efficacy levels using a standard epidemiological model. The model



                                                11
we use extends the canonical susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (SEIR) model, which is

widely used in mathematical epidemiology to characterize the spread of an infectious disease in a

closed population (Kermack and McKendrick 1991, Anderson and May 1992). The SEIR model

assumes individuals flow between disease and vaccination states over time, with sizes of population

in each state changing according to a set of differential equations. We extend the canonical SEIR

model to allow for death and vaccination (which is ineffective for some individuals), yielding the

following equations:



                                i (t ) = -i (t )Si (t ) - vi (t )i S
                                S                                  ~i (t )                           (1)

                               i (t ) = i (t )[Si (t ) + Ni (t )] -  Ei (t )
                               E                                                                     (2)

                                i (t ) =  Ei (t ) - i Ii (t )
                                I                                                                    (3)

                                i (t ) = pi  Ii (t )
                               D                                                                     (4)

                                i (t ) = (1 - pi ) Ii (t ) - vi (t )i R
                               R                                      ~ i (t )                       (5)

                                                   ~i (t ) + R
                                i (t ) = vi (t )i eS
                                P                            ~ i (t )                                (6)

                                                         ~i (t ) - i (t )Ni (t ).
                                i (t ) = vi (t )i (1 - e)S
                               N                                                                     (7)



   Dots denote derivatives with respect to time. Uppercase letters denote population compart-

ments (i.e., the fraction of the population in a given state): S for susceptible, E for exposed (in-

dividuals carrying the virus, but who are not yet contagious), I for infectious, R for recovered,

D for dead, P for protected by vaccine, and N for vaccinated but not protected. The population is

divided into G age cohorts, indexed by i = 1, . . . , G, with respective sizes ni . Subscripting compart-

ments by i allows for different epidemic evolution across age cohorts. Tildes denote the size of the



                                                       12
                                                                                D
                               S              E                    I

                                                                                R




                                       P                                    N
                                                   Vaccinated



Figure 2: Compartment Flows in Epidemiological Model. Model described by Equations (1)­(7). Solid black lines
reflect virus model and dashed lines vaccination. The full model has separate compartments for each age group i.


compartment in proportion to both compartments receiving vaccines (susceptible and recovered)

i.e.,



                                            ~i (t ) =         Si (t )
                                            S                                                               (8)
                                                        Si (t ) + Ri (t )

                                           ~ i (t ) =         Ri (t )
                                           R                              .                                 (9)
                                                        Si (t ) + Ri (t )


    Figure 2 depicts the population flows between the compartments described in equations (1)­(7).

Our initial model assumes a single vaccine, either with a single dose, or where efficacy does not

change between two doses. Lowercase letters denote model parameters governing the evolution of

compartments. All parameters except e are age-specific, as denoted by subscript i.  and  are,

respectively, the hazard rates of moving from exposed to infected and from infected to recovered

or dead. These are estimated as the reciprocals of the durations of the virus's incubation period and

of the infectious period, respectively. The rate of new infections equals i (t ), described in further



                                                         13
detail below. Parameter pi is the mortality risk. Vaccine efficacy, denoted e, is the probability the

vaccine protects from infection. The model makes no distinction between the vaccine's efficacy

(performance measured in clinical trials) and effectiveness (performance in practice in the popula-

tion); e is used to denote both interchangeably. We assume recovered individuals (compartment R)

are perfectly protected by vaccination and that exposed or infectious individuals (compartments E

and I ) are not vaccinated.

    To account for vaccine prioritization, we introduce an indicator variable vi (t ), switching from

0 to 1 on the day age cohort i becomes eligible for vaccination and to 0 again at the point where all

willing members of the cohort have been vaccinated. Reflecting common practice, we assume older

cohorts must finish vaccinations before the next cohort becomes eligible.12 When vi (t ) = 1, age

cohort i is vaccinated at a constant rate i , drawing on a continuous stream of vaccine production

from a given capacity. To keep track of cumulative doses distributed, we introduce the auxiliary

                      i (t ) = i vi (t ), and where V (t ) is the proportion vaccinated in the entire
compartment V , where V

population.

    The rate of new infections, i (t ), depends on the number of daily contacts a susceptible in-

dividual has with currently infectious individuals. To reflect differences in interaction across age

cohorts, we use a contact matrix C, where entry c(i, j)  0 denotes the number of contacts made

by an individual in cohort i with an individual in cohort j. To derive the proportion of each age

group infected at time t , each contact is scaled by the probability of virus transmission on contact,
  12 Most  recent studies, e.g. by Bubar et al. (2021), find that vaccination of those aged 60 and older reduces the
health burden more than for other age groups under a wide range of scenarios, especially in high-income countries.
On the other hand, Matrajt et al. (2020) find that vaccinating high-transmission groups (including children) first can be
optimal if the vaccine is highly effective and supply is very large, conditions that often apply to infectious diseases such
as seasonal influenza outside of a pandemic. We will investigate different prioritization strategies in future versions of
this work.




                                                            14
q, and probability that the contacted person is infected, I j (t ), yielding


                                                        G
                                            i (t ) = q  c(i, j)I j (t ).                                        (10)
                                                       j=1



For a given C, q can be adjusted to match any desired reproductive number R for the virus (i.e., the

number of secondary cases produced by a single infection).

    The initial conditions of the system (1)­(7) require specifying the proportion of the population

that is susceptible S(0), immune R(0), and infectious I (0) at the outset of the epidemic. We take

I (0) to be small and for simplicity take E (0) = I (0). We assume that the proportion of each age

cohort in each initial compartment is the same as in the overall population.



4. Simulation Methods and Parameters

This section discusses some of the main assumptions of the model and parametrization. A complete

list of the parameters used in the simulations is provided in Table 3 in Appendix D. Here we

highlight the most critical parametric assumptions. We discuss initial conditions in Section 4.1, the

time horizon covered by the simulation in Section 4.2, assumptions related to disease spreading

and burden in Section 4.3, assumptions concerning vaccination efficacy and constraints in Section

4.4, and the simulation methods in Section 4.5.



4.1. Initial Conditions

We run simulations for three illustrative epidemic scenarios. The slow decrease scenario sets the

initial effective reproduction rate to R = 0.99 and initial infectious proportion to I (0) = 1%.13 This
  13 Since
         we will assume 20% of pre-existing protection in people aged 20 and over, the initial effective reproductive
number R is lower than R0 , the basic reproductive number in a fully susceptible population.


                                                         15
scenario may capture a situation in which non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) are introduced

following an epidemic wave but are only effective enough to decrease cases slowly. The slow

growth scenario sets R = 1.1 and I (0) = 0.5%, perhaps reflecting a situation in which NPIs are

not effective enough to prevent a subsequent wave of infections, such as the one experienced by

the United States in late 2020. The fast growth scenario sets R = 2 and I (0) = 0.1%, e.g., a case

when a new virus strain suddenly emerges, thwarting previously effective NPIs (such the one as

observed in the United Kingdom in December 2020, or the emergence of the P.1 variant in Brazil

in late 202014 ). In both growth scenarios, I (0) is adjusted so that the peak of infections occurs

three to four months from the start of vaccinations.15

    We choose parameters for initial immunity that broadly reflect the state of the COVID-19

pandemic in early 2021. We assume 20% of people aged 20 and over have immunity acquired

from infection, leaving 80% susceptible. To reflect the lower clinical case rate in the younger

population (Davies et al. 2020; Goldstein, Lipsitch, and Cevik 2020), we assume only 50% of

under 20s are susceptible.



4.2. Time Horizon

Each simulation runs for T = 365 days. This is sufficient time for the epidemic to die out in

the scenarios considered but, we assume, not long enough for unmodeled factors to come into

play, such as the alleviation of supply constraints with expanded capacity or the waning of vaccine

protection from initial doses, perhaps warranting booster shots.16 Similarly, we assume that there is
  14 See  Sabino et al. 2021.
  15 Assuming   that the epidemic peaks earlier or that vaccinations start in the declining phase of the epidemic would
decrease measured vaccine benefits, as discussed in Section 6.1.
   16 The choice of T might play a bigger role in models where the reproductive number is close to 1, for example, due

to behavioral responses to risk, as in Gans (2020).



                                                         16
no natural loss of immunity (no flow from recovered to susceptible) during the simulation period.17



4.3. Infections and Deaths

We use a social contact matrix c(i, j) based on a large cross-country study of contacts between dif-

ferent age groups, primarily in European countries (Mossong et al. 2008). Our matrix is therefore

more representative of high-income countries, but we are not aware of comparable data on social

mixing in low-income countries. For most of the paper, cohort size (ni ) and mortality risk ( pi )

for different age cohorts is based on data for high-income countries, although we also perform a

separate analysis for low-income countries (see Appendix C). Throughout the age distribution, the

risk of death from COVID-19 increases rapidly with age, about three-fold per decade (Manheim et

al. 2021).

    The model assumes that contact frequencies are independent of infection risk, precluding be-

havioral changes in response to changes in infection risk as the epidemic progresses. Since we

abstract from the emergence of viral variants, epidemics always have a single peak and fade out

when the virus's effective reproductive number satisfies R  1, which happens when a sufficiently

high fraction of population is protected, either by vaccination or recovery from natural infection.



4.4. Vaccination

The base case for vaccination is a 95% effective vaccine, when used as tested in Phase 3 trials

(standard dosing, with a delay between two doses). We assume that those under 20 (constituting

22% of population in our base case simulations) receive no vaccination. To account for vaccine
  17 Muena  et al. (2021) show that neutralizing antibody responses can persist up to 12 months after infection. Hall et
al. (2021) show high levels of protection at six months after infection. In both cases, the upper limit is due to the lack
of longer-term data at the time of publication.



                                                           17
hesitancy, we assume 20% in each age group refuse vaccination. We assume that the vaccine

becomes effective 10 days after it is administered.18

    As of early May 2021, the world is vaccinating at a rate of approximately 0.25% of the pop-

ulation per day (Mathieu et al. 2021), our base case immunization speed.19 At the high end, the

United Kingdom, United States, Canada, Chile and Israel have all managed to vaccinate at rates

well above 0.8% of the population per day;20 however, the current median global rate of vacci-

nation (as of May) is only 0.27% of the population per day (Mathieu et al., 2021). Thus, at a

global level, supply rather than delivery logistics or demand (e.g., vaccine hesitancy) seem likely

to constrain full vaccination well into 2022, and perhaps for considerably longer.

    Accordingly, our model is intended to apply to contexts in which vaccination rates are con-

strained primarily by the available supply.21 While this may not apply for some countries, this

seems broadly to be the case globally. The model could be extended to consider other scenarios

where, for example, delivery constraints might at some point be binding.

    Additionally, while we treat efficacy as a scalar, in reality it is multidimensional: vaccines may

differ in efficacy against different variants, in duration of protection, or in their protection against

infection and disease.
  18 We    achieve this by treating vaccinated compartments in the model as "effectively vaccinated". Hence if vaccina-
tions in a given age group start of day t1 and end of t2 , we start the flow into vaccinated compartments on date t1 + 10
and stop it on t2 + 10.
    19 The world rate of vaccination has been increasing since early May, driven in part by China.
    20 Over two weeks in April and May, Mongolia was vaccinating 2% of its population per day.
    21 In general, we are also agnostic as to whether shortages are due to shortages in drug substance or, for example,

fill and finish capacity. With alternative dosing, the number of doses in each vial increases, so it alleviates constraints
wherever they are in the production system. FDF and using lower efficacy vaccines early are more about the timing
of vaccine use, and hence are orthogonal to where the constraints in vaccine supply are. If the constraints are in fill
and finish capacity only, then another option - filling more doses in each vial - also becomes an option to alleviate
constraints. However, this is also likely to increase waste to some extent, and force more centralized, camp-style
vaccination approaches rather than vaccine delivery where people usually get health care, and so may eventually, in
some contexts, make it hard to drive high take-up. This may also be true of alternative dosing - which effectively
increases the number of doses per vial.




                                                           18
4.5. Simulation Method

We generate a simulation run for each configuration of parameters by finding the deterministic

solution of the differential-equation system consisting of these equations (1)­(7) using standard

numerical methods.22

    Figure 3 illustrates the evolution of vaccinations and infections for the various epidemic sce-

narios and vaccination rates analyzed. We will discuss the impact of vaccination below. With no

vaccination, we find that from 8% (slow decrease scenario) to 55% (fast growth scenario) of the

population get infected during the simulation period. Individuals aged 20 to 49 are responsible

for between 55% and 59% (depending on the scenario) of all infections, assuming no vaccine.

This is consistent with recent findings by Monod et al. (2021), who estimated that three quar-

ters of infections in the US originated from individuals in that age bracket (albeit in a period with

school closures). Figure 13 in Appendix D illustrates the age-specific dynamics of vaccination and

infection in the model.

    The outcome variables for our simulations are the burden of infection, defined as the proportion

of the total population that develop new infections during the simulation period, and the burden of

death, defined as the proportion of the total population that die during the simulation period. We

focus on these rather than alternative outcomes to present a reasonable number of results.23
  22 We  solve all differential-equation systems using the odin package, version 1.0.8, and generate exhibits using R,
version 4.0.2. All code used in this project is available at https://github.com/wwiecek/covstretch.
   23 Additional outcome variables could include hospitalizations and severe infections, both of which are correlated

with age. Our focus on counts of infections and deaths allows us to abstract from the delay between infection and
illness or death, which would have to be parametrized in an analysis of healthcare use.




                                                         19
 Cumulative vaccinations (% pop.)                       Vaccinated per day                                      None            0.25%               0.50%         1.00%

                                         Vaccinations                                                  Infections




                                                                   Current infections (% pop.)
                                    60                                                                  Slow-decrease epidemic                  Slow-growth epidemic             Fast-growth epidemic
                                                                                                                                      0.3                                5
                                    40                                                           0.3                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                 0.2                                                                     3
                                    20                                                                                                0.1                                2
                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                     0                                                           0.0                                  0.0                                0
                                         0    120    240     360                                       0     120     240        360         0       120     240    360       0       120     240        360
                                              Time (days)                                                                                         Time (days)

Figure 3: Evolution of Vaccinations and Infections under Baseline Epidemic Scenarios. Colors indicate different
vaccination rates  with a 95% effective vaccine. While the population is vaccinated at a constant rate, age priori-
tization leads different age cohorts to start being vaccinated at different times. Cohorts aged 20 and above achieve
80% vaccination coverage by time T = 365 days. Please note that the scales of the vertical axes vary according to the
epidemic scenario. Figure 13 in Appendix D provides a finer breakdown of vaccination and infection dynamics by age
cohort.


5. Benefits of Speeding Vaccination, Holding Efficacy Constant

In this section we examine the potential impact of accelerating vaccination through a dose stretch-

ing policy if it entails no loss of efficacy. Section 5.1 considers increasing the rate of vaccination,

while Section 5.2 considers starting the vaccination campaign earlier. Subsequent sections consider

the case when dose stretching policies come at the cost of reduced efficacy.



5.1. Faster Vaccination Rate

Increasing vaccination rates without sacrificing efficacy would dramatically reduce disease bur-

dens, as shown in Figure 4. For example, the bottom left panel indicates that vaccinating 0.25% of

the population daily averts 18­50% of infections and 46­71% of deaths across epidemic scenar-

ios. In contrast, if the vaccination rate was doubled to 0.5%, 41­70% of infections and 58­80%

of deaths could be averted. The top panels show that increasing vaccination rates reduces disease

burdens considerably more in absolute terms in the fast-growth scenario than in other epidemic



                                                                                                                           20
                                         Epidemic scenario           Slow-decrease        Slow-growth     Fast-growth


                                      Burden (log scale)
                                                   Infections                                           Deaths
          Burden (% pop.)


                             30                                                   0.30


                             10                                                   0.10


                                                                                  0.03
                              3

                                                                                  0.01
                                       0. 0
                                          25

                                          50

                                          75

                                          00




                                                                            00




                                                                                          0. 0
                                                                                             25

                                                                                             50

                                                                                             75

                                                                                             00




                                                                                                                        00
                                          1




                                                                                             1
                                       0.


                                       0.

                                       0.

                                       1.




                                                                           2.




                                                                                          0.


                                                                                          0.

                                                                                          0.

                                                                                          1.




                                                                                                                        2.
                                                                Percentage of pop. vaccinated daily

                                      Reductions
                                                    Infections                                          Deaths
                             100                                                  100
          % burden averted




                              75                                                     75


                              50                                                     50


                              25                                                     25


                                  0                                                   0
                                        0. 0
                                           25

                                           50

                                           75

                                           00




                                                                             00




                                                                                          0. 0
                                                                                             25

                                                                                             50

                                                                                             75

                                                                                             00




                                                                                                                        00
                                           1




                                                                                             1
                                        0.


                                        0.

                                        0.

                                        1.




                                                                            2.




                                                                                          0.


                                                                                          0.

                                                                                          0.

                                                                                          1.




                                                                                                                        2.
                                                                Percentage of pop. vaccinated daily

Figure 4: Benefits of Faster Vaccination. The top panels show simulation results for burdens under various vaccina-
tion rates. The bottom panels show simulation results for the percentage reduction in burdens relative to no vaccination.
In the left panels, we refer to the burden from infection, while in the right panels we refer to the burden from death. In
all scenarios we assume a 95% effective vaccine and sequential age prioritization.


scenarios. This is not surprising since disease burdens are highest in this scenario.

    Typically, faster vaccination reduces burden at a decreasing rate. This pattern is depicted by

the concavity of most of the burden reduction curves, especially for deaths. This effect is a conse-

quence of age prioritization: vaccinating the highest mortality risk people first allows more deaths

to be averted with relatively fewer vaccines. Higher vaccination rates mainly speed the vaccination

of lower mortality risk people. The biggest departure from decreasing returns to faster vaccination


                                                                             21
is observed with infections in the fast-growth scenario, where some convexity can be seen in the

bottom panel. The pattern of the results across infections and deaths is roughly similar to that

found in other recent models of COVID-19 vaccination (Bubar et al. 2021; Hogan et al. 2020;

Matrajt et al. 2020).



5.2. Earlier Vaccination Start

Another way of speeding vaccinations is to start the vaccination campaign earlier. Figure 5 presents

results from simulations in which the start of the campaign is varied from four months before the

peak of the epidemic to three months after. We restrict attention to a fast-growth epidemic.

   Consistent with the results in the previous section, for any start date, the higher the vaccination

rate, the greater the burden averted. Additionally, for any vaccination rate, the earlier the campaign

is started, the greater the burden averted. Faster and earlier vaccination campaigns allow more

people to be protected before they are exposed to infection.

   If the campaign starts early enough in the epidemic, the disease burden can be almost entirely

averted, even for low daily vaccination rates. Such behaviour is typical in deterministic com-

partmental models such as SEIR. At the other extreme, if the campaign does not start until the

population is close to herd immunity, the campaign hardly reduces disease burden, regardless of

the vaccination rate, since most infections and deaths will have already occurred.



6. Impact of dose stretching policies with efficacy trade-offs

This section provides simulation results on the health impact of a series of alternative dosing poli-

cies relative to the status quo, under a range of plausible assumptions regarding potential trade-offs



                                                 22
                                     Vaccinated per day          0.10%       0.25%                       0.50%     1.00%    2.00%

                              Infections                                                                Deaths
                        100                                                                       100
 % infections averted




                         75                                                                        75




                                                                               % deaths averted
                         50                                                                        50




                         25                                                                        25




                          0                                                                         0
                               -4   -3     -2   -1     0     1     2     3                              -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3

                                                     Vaccination start (months after infection peak)

Figure 5: Burden Averted Varying Start of Vaccine Campaign. Simulation results for burden averted relative to no
vaccine with vaccination campaign having start dates before or after infection peak (horizontal axis). Different curves
correspond to different vaccination speeds. Maintains baseline assumptions including 95% effective vaccine.


between these policies and individual vaccine efficacy. We analyze alternative dosing in Section

6.1, FDF in Section 6.2, and using an inferior vaccine that is available sooner in Section 6.3.



6.1. Alternative Dosing

Alternative dosing involves giving less than the standard dose of a vaccine to obtain more doses

from limited capacity.

                        Because we consider the case in which the pace of immunization is subject only to a supply

constraint, the vaccination rate is proportional to the reciprocal of dose size. So, for example,

using half rather than full doses would double the vaccination rate. In this section, we analyze the

impact of alternative dosing on the burden of infections and deaths while varying three variables:

dose fractions, efficacy reductions associated with moving to alternative dosing, and epidemic



                                                                             23
scenarios.

   We return to the baseline assumption that the vaccine is available from t = 0 and maintain the

other baseline assumptions, including that a full dose has 95% efficacy and can be supplied at a

rate of 0.25% of the population per day. We now assume that a dose fraction   (0, 1] can be used,

increasing the vaccination rate to 0.25%/ . We initially consider dose size to be uniform across

age groups, but we discuss potential alternatives at the end of this section.

   Figure 6 presents the simulation results, comparing the impact of alternative versus full dosing.

Using the estimated efficacies suggested by our exploration in Figure 1, we can estimate the

potential benefits of alternative dosing. For illustration, we consider the cases of three of the

vaccines with largest production: mRNA-1273 (Moderna), BNT162b2 (Pfizer), and ChAdOx1

nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca). For mRNA-1273, a half dose leads to NAb levels associated with

an efficacy of approximately 95%. In this case, moving to half doses would avert 24­29% of

infections and 22­47% of deaths. For BNT162b2, a 1/3 dose produces NAb levels associated with

approximately 80% efficacy, so moving to 1/3 doses would reduce 34­52% of infections and 25­

49% of deaths. Although not shown in our results (efficacy of a standard dose is not 95%), halving

the dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 would also lead to reductions in infections and deaths, as there is

no observed impact on immune response and therefore no associated loss of vaccine efficacy in

comparison to the standard dose.

   Significant gains are possible even if the expected efficacies of alternative doses are not as high

as those presented above. For the epidemic scenarios that we consider, moving from a full to a half

dose (thereby doubling vaccination speed to 0.5% per day) reduces the burden of infections and

death as long as efficacy is at least 70%. Moving from a full to a quarter dose (thereby increasing

speed four-fold, to 1% per day) decreases the burden of infections and death even if efficacy drops

                                                 24
                                             Slow-decrease epidemic                     Slow-growth epidemic                       Fast-growth epidemic

                               0.95   1.00    0.90   0.76   0.63   0.55   0.41   1.00   0.81   0.60   0.44   0.36   0.24   1.00    0.91   0.71   0.43   0.27   0.13

                                0.9   1.01    0.91   0.77   0.64   0.56   0.42   1.02   0.83   0.61   0.45   0.37   0.25   1.01    0.92   0.73   0.46   0.29   0.14




                                                                                                                                                                      Infections
                                0.8   1.03    0.93   0.79   0.66   0.58   0.44   1.06   0.87   0.64   0.48   0.39   0.26   1.03    0.95   0.77   0.51   0.35   0.19
 Efficacy of fractional dose




                                0.7   1.05    0.96   0.82   0.69   0.61   0.46   1.10   0.91   0.68   0.51   0.42   0.29   1.05    0.98   0.82   0.57   0.42   0.27

                                0.6   1.07    0.98   0.85   0.72   0.64   0.49   1.16   0.96   0.72   0.55   0.46   0.32   1.07    1.01   0.87   0.65   0.50   0.37

                                0.5   1.10    1.01   0.88   0.76   0.68   0.54   1.22   1.03   0.78   0.60   0.51   0.36   1.09    1.04   0.92   0.73   0.60   0.50


                               0.95   1.00    0.90   0.78   0.68   0.63   0.53   1.00   0.83   0.64   0.52   0.46   0.36   1.00    0.79   0.53   0.31   0.20   0.09

                                0.9   1.03    0.93   0.80   0.70   0.65   0.55   1.05   0.87   0.68   0.54   0.48   0.38   1.08    0.87   0.61   0.37   0.24   0.12




                                                                                                                                                                      Deaths
                                0.8   1.08    0.98   0.86   0.75   0.69   0.58   1.16   0.97   0.75   0.60   0.53   0.41   1.24    1.04   0.77   0.51   0.36   0.20

                                0.7   1.14    1.04   0.91   0.80   0.74   0.63   1.29   1.08   0.84   0.67   0.59   0.46   1.40    1.21   0.96   0.68   0.51   0.33

                                0.6   1.21    1.11   0.98   0.86   0.79   0.68   1.44   1.21   0.94   0.76   0.66   0.52   1.57    1.40   1.16   0.88   0.71   0.54

                                0.5   1.28    1.18   1.05   0.93   0.86   0.74   1.61   1.36   1.08   0.87   0.76   0.60   1.75    1.60   1.38   1.12   0.96   0.81
                                      1

                                              4

                                                     2

                                                            3

                                                                   4

                                                                          8


                                                                                 1

                                                                                        4

                                                                                                2

                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                                                               8
                                             3/

                                                     1/

                                                            1/

                                                                   1/

                                                                          1/




                                                                                        3/

                                                                                               1/

                                                                                                      1/

                                                                                                             1/

                                                                                                                    1/




                                                                                                                                  3/

                                                                                                                                          1/

                                                                                                                                                 1/

                                                                                                                                                        1/

                                                                                                                                                               1/
                                                                                             Dose fraction

                                                      Fractional dose better by >5%            Comparable (within 5%)             Full dose better by >5%



Figure 6: Burden Averted under Full Relative to alternative dosing. Entries present simulation results for the ratio
of burden averted under full relative to alternative dosing; greater than 1 (emphasized by darker background) favors full
dosing and less than 1 (emphasized by lighter background) favors alternative dosing. Each tile represents a different
combination of epidemic growth, level of efficacy of alternative dose, and size of alternative dose, proportional to
reciprocal of vaccination rate. The same baseline assumptions hold, including that the full dose is 95% effective and
the vaccination rate is 0.25% of population per day. These results also apply to the comparison of a less effective
vaccine with greater supply against a smaller supply of a more effective one.


to 50%. The health benefits can be substantial: for example, moving from a full to a half dose that

is 80% as effective reduces the burden of infection by 21­36% relative to that of using the full dose

regimen, depending on the epidemic scenario, while reducing deaths by 14­25%.

                               We find that alternative doses generally reduce infections more than deaths. For example,

moving from a full to a half dose that is 50% as effective reduces infections across all epidemic

scenarios, but increases deaths. The reason is that the baseline vaccination rate of 0.25% per day is

already fast enough to protect older cohorts with high mortality risks, given they receive priority in

vaccination. Therefore, further speed gains do not offset the decrease in efficacy for older groups.

The potential for increasing the burden of deaths by reducing efficacy is particularly apparent in

                                                                                                25
the fast-growth scenario, where a half dose increases death burden unless its efficacy is at least

70%. Hence, trade-offs between efficacy and speed are sensitive to both epidemic context and the

burden measure prioritized by the policymaker.

    Our base case assumed a daily vaccination speed of 0.25% per day. We replicate our analysis

for vaccination speeds between 0.1% and 2%, with results presented in Figure 14 in Appendix D.

Predictably, we find that adjusting dose size is sensitive to all factors that we investigate (epidemic,

vaccine supply, loss of efficacy from alternative dosing). However, alternative dosing is preferred

in most situations, with the exception of fast-growing epidemics combined with a large vaccine

supply.24

    The alternative dosing policies we have discussed here are uniform across age cohorts. In sim-

ulations, we found that switching from uniform to age-varying doses produces only small gains

relative to switching from full doses to the optimal uniform alternative dose.25 However, as evi-

denced by clinical trial data, it is likely that for some vaccines, efficacy will vary across age groups.

In such situations, the additional benefits from using age-varying an alternative dosing strategy will

be larger.

    The three vaccines discussed above (mRNA-1273, BNT162b2, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19) are among

those with the largest production levels, with total manufacturing of approximately 5-6 billion

doses projected for 2021 (Burger 2021, Moderna 2021, AstraZeneca 2021). The majority of these

doses have not yet been delivered to people's arms, and so could potentially be available for al-
  24 For  example, if a half dose is 80% effective, then it would reduce deaths and infections relative to a 95% effective
dose under all scenarios, except if the epidemic is growing fast (R = 2) and daily vaccinations with full dose are at 1%
of the population or more.
   25 For example, in a fast-growing epidemic, vaccinating 30% of the population (with age prioritization) averts 82%

of deaths suffered under no vaccination. The optimal uniform alternative dose is 3/10 of a full dose, averting 93.3%
of deaths under no vaccination. The optimal age-varying alternative dosing scheme averts 93.6% of deaths under no
vaccination, only 0.3% more.




                                                           26
ternative dosing. Moderna has also announced plans to increase production to 3 billion doses in

2022. Although it is hard to accurately predict the number of extra doses that would be generated

from alternative dosing, these figures give us an idea of the huge potential for extra supply that

could come at no or little cost to efficacy. These benefits could also be available quickly, unlike the

benefits of expanding production, which occur with some delay.



6.2. First Doses First

Next, we consider the effect of delaying the second dose of a two-dose vaccination course so that

more people can receive their first dose sooner. Here too we vary assumed efficacy of the first dose

to understand under what range of efficacies the alternative policies are preferred.

    The basic model in equations (1)­(7) needs to be extended to allow one or two doses to have

differing efficacy and to connect the delay between doses to the rate of vaccination. We maintain

the assumption that a single vaccine candidate is available. Figure 7 provides a schematic diagram

of the compartment flows in the extended two-dose model. Differential equations are provided in

Appendix B.

    Subscripts 1 and 2 indicate variables associated with the first and second doses. Thus, compart-

ments P1 and N1 contain people protected or not, respectively, following their first vaccine dose.

First doses are administered at a rate of 1i in age group i, and efficacy for those vaccinated with

a single dose is e1 . Individuals in compartments P1 and N1 receive a second vaccine dose at a rate

of 2i . With probability e2 , the second dose is effective and the recipient flows into compartment

P2 ; otherwise, the second dose is ineffective and the individual flows into N2 . Let the auxiliary

variable Vi (t ) = P1i (t ) + N1i (t ) + P2i (t ) + N2i (t ) denote cumulative vaccinations, counting both first

and second doses (so a cohort is double counted if all members receive both doses).

                                                      27
                                                                                              D
                                       S                  E                  I
                                                                                              R



                            Dose1     P1                                    N1




                            Dose2      P2                                   N2


Figure 7: Compartment Flows in Model with Two Doses. Model described by equations (B1)­(B9) in Appendix B.
Additional notes from Figure 2 apply.


    We take the status quo policy, second doses first (SDF), as requiring a four-week gap between

doses.26 Setting aside the ten days required to develop immunity, the effective gap is 2i = 18

days for all age cohorts under a SDF policy.27 For the first doses first (FDF) policy, we assume

a delay of 12 weeks until second dose (2i = 74). We also consider a class of hybrid policies

(HDF-a), with a 12-week delay for those under age a and a 4-week delay for those a and over.

Hybrid policies maintain high levels of protection for older cohorts while prioritizing speed over

efficacy in younger cohorts. All simulations fix e2 = 0.95 but vary e1 . As in previous sections, we

consider a range of vaccination speeds. Here, however, delicate calculations are required to ensure

the consistency of speed across alternative policies.28
  26 For  BNT162b2 (Pfizer) and mRNA-1273 (Moderna), gaps of three and four weeks, respectively, are recom-
mended. Using the longer of the two gaps for the SDF baseline makes SDF look more like FDF and thus leads to a
more conservative measure of the difference between the policies.
   27 Same as in the earlier model, to account for this delay we set indicators v (t ) to correspond to effective vaccination
                                                                                 i
times, not time of injection.
   28 Fixing the target speed under examination, we first compute the  needed to generate that speed under SDF as a
                                                                          1
baseline. We then compute the 1 under FDF so that the time series of doses used matches that under SDF as closely
as possible. Since an exact match is impossible, we use the value of 1 for FDF that minimizes the mean squared error.


                                                              28
                                              Second-dose delay policy:                SDF        HDF-60          FDF



                         Had one dose, protected                       Had two doses, protected                         Cumulative doses
                20
                                                         60

                15
 Population %




                                                                                                        100
                                                         40
                10

                                                                                                        50
                                                         20
                 5


                 0                                       0                                               0
                     0      120         240        360        0            120         240        360         0         120         240    360
                                                                            Time (days)

Figure 8: Vaccine Coverage under Various Delays in Second Dose. Proportion of population protected by one dose
(first panel) or two doses (second panel) under various policies, assuming e1 = 0.8 and e2 = 0.95. Note that the first
two panels do not show the total number of people that received one or two doses but rather the number of people that
received one or two doses and became protected. SDF refers to second doses first, the status quo policy of delaying
four weeks until the second dose; FDF refers to first doses first, delaying 12 weeks until the second dose; HDF-60
refers to a hybrid policy of delaying four weeks for age 60 and over and 12 weeks for under 60. For SDF, we set
1/1 = 0.25% vaccinated each day with the first dose and 2 = 1/18. Then 1 is adjusted for FDF and HDF-60 so
that the time series of total vaccinations across policies match (third panel). Note cumulative doses can exceed 100%
as all individuals eventually receive two doses.


                Figure 8 shows the evolution of vaccine protection provided by one and two doses under SDF,

FDF, and HDF-60 policies for baseline parameters. FDF quickly provides protection to a greater

share of the population with the first dose than SDF; HDF-60 does not diverge from SDF until

all individuals aged 60 and over receive their first dose. The third panel verifies that the overall

speed of vaccinations is consistent across policies, as the paths of cumulative doses used virtually

overlap.

                                                                  T
                                                                   [V FDF (t ) - V SDF (t )]2
                                                              t =1

between the cumulative number of vaccine doses administered under FDF in each period, V FDF (t ), and under SDF,
V SDF (t ), over the entire time period (T = T = 365) or while vaccinations are happening (in case all those eligible and
willing to get vaccinated do so in less than one year). We compute V FDF (t ) via simulation for a grid of integer values of
1/1 and select the value minimizing the expression above. A similar procedure is used for HDF-a, with the exception
that the status quo vaccination rate is maintained for those aged a and over. For example, setting 1 = 1/180 under
SDF, the mean-squared-error minimization leads to 1 = 1/145 under FDF. Under HDF-60, we maintain 1 = 1/180
for cohorts age 60 and over. The mean-squared-error minimization leads to 1 = 1/155 for cohorts under age 60.




                                                                              29
                                                      Slow-decrease epidemic                            Slow-growth epidemic                                 Fast-growth epidemic

                                       0.95   0.98   0.93   0.86   0.84   0.84    0.89   0.96    0.87       0.79   0.78   0.79      0.87         0.99   0.94     0.68   0.54    0.58     0.81

                                        0.9   0.98   0.94   0.87   0.85   0.85    0.90   0.96    0.88       0.80   0.79   0.80      0.88         0.99   0.95     0.70   0.56    0.60     0.84




                                                                                                                                                                                                Infections
 Efficacy following first dose (e 1)




                                        0.8   0.99   0.95   0.88   0.86   0.86    0.92   0.97    0.89       0.81   0.80   0.82      0.90         0.99   0.96     0.74   0.61    0.65     0.91

                                        0.7   0.99   0.95   0.89   0.88   0.88    0.94   0.98    0.91       0.83   0.82   0.84      0.93         1.00   0.97     0.78   0.66    0.71     1.01

                                        0.6   1.00   0.96   0.91   0.89   0.90    0.96   0.99    0.92       0.85   0.85   0.86      0.96         1.00   0.98     0.82   0.73    0.79     1.05

                                        0.5   1.00   0.98   0.92   0.91   0.92    0.99   0.99    0.94       0.88   0.88   0.90      1.00         1.00   0.99     0.86   0.80    0.88     1.07


                                       0.95   0.96   0.93   0.90   0.90   0.91    0.95   0.93    0.87       0.84   0.85   0.87      0.93         0.94   0.82     0.61   0.52    0.56     0.78

                                        0.9   0.97   0.94   0.91   0.91   0.92    0.96   0.94    0.89       0.86   0.87   0.89      0.95         0.95   0.86     0.67   0.58    0.62     0.85




                                                                                                                                                                                                Deaths
                                        0.8   0.98   0.96   0.93   0.93   0.94    0.98   0.97    0.93       0.89   0.90   0.92      0.97         0.98   0.93     0.80   0.71    0.76     1.00

                                        0.7   1.00   0.98   0.96   0.96   0.96    1.00   0.99    0.97       0.93   0.94   0.95      1.00         1.00   0.98     0.91   0.85    0.90     1.02

                                        0.6   1.00   1.00   0.98   0.98   0.99    1.00   1.00    0.99       0.97   0.98   0.99      1.00         1.00   1.00     0.95   0.93    0.98     1.03

                                        0.5   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00    1.00   1.00    1.00       0.99   0.99   1.00      1.00         1.00   1.00     0.98   0.98    1.00     1.04
                                               10


                                                      25


                                                             50


                                                                    75


                                                                           00


                                                                                   00




                                                                                          10


                                                                                                   25


                                                                                                             50


                                                                                                                     75


                                                                                                                               00


                                                                                                                                     00




                                                                                                                                                  10


                                                                                                                                                          25


                                                                                                                                                                  50


                                                                                                                                                                          75


                                                                                                                                                                                    00


                                                                                                                                                                                          00
                                              0.


                                                     0.


                                                            0.


                                                                   0.


                                                                          1.


                                                                                  2.




                                                                                         0.


                                                                                                 0.


                                                                                                            0.


                                                                                                                   0.


                                                                                                                           1.


                                                                                                                                    2.




                                                                                                                                                 0.


                                                                                                                                                        0.


                                                                                                                                                                 0.


                                                                                                                                                                        0.


                                                                                                                                                                                1.


                                                                                                                                                                                         2.
                                                                                         Percentage of pop. vaccinated daily


                                                                                          FDF for all              FDF under 70            FDF under 50
                                                                               policy
                                                                                          FDF under 80             FDF under 60            SDF




Figure 9: Burden Averted under SDF Relative to Best Alternative Policy. Entries present simulation results for
ratio of burden averted under status quo SDF policy to best alternative. Greater than 1 favors SDF, and less than 1
favors an alternative. Color indicates optimal policy, ranging from dark green when FDF is optimal to light purple
when SDF is optimal, with an HDF policy optimal for colors in between. Each tile represents a different combination
of epidemic growth, level of efficacy of first vaccine dose, and speed of vaccination campaign. For a comparison of the
burden averted under various vaccine policies relative to no vaccination rather than relative to each other, see Figure 16
in Appendix D.


                                       Figure 9 presents results on the ratio of benefits under the status quo SDF policy to benefits

under the best alternative policy, whether FDF or HDF-a. Benefits in the top panels are averted

infections and in the bottom panels are averted deaths. Each tile represents a different combination

of epidemic growth, level of efficacy of first vaccine dose, and speed of vaccination campaign.

                                       For most entries, a policy involving some stretching, either "pure" FDF or a hybrid (HDF)

policy, averts more infections and deaths than SDF. SDF does better only when the vaccination

rate is extremely high (2% of population per day receiving first doses under SDF) and the efficacy

of a single dose low (e1  0.7 for the fast growth scenario and e1  0.5 for slow growth). SDF does

better under those limited circumstances because such a rapid vaccination rate reduces scarcity and


                                                                                                             30
the need to trade off efficacy versus speed.

   FDF for all age groups is nearly always better at reducing infections than other policies. One

or another HDF policy is better at reducing mortality than FDF at the lowest levels of e1 . FDF

increases protection for younger individuals, achieving reductions in community transmission, but

at the cost of reducing efficacy in the elderly, who face the greatest mortality risk.

   The relative benefit of delaying first doses varies with the vaccination rate in an inverted U-

shape. When the vaccine is rolled out very slowly, say, 0.1% first doses per day under SDF, FDF

averts no more than a few percentage points of disease burden, even if delay results in little to

no loss of efficacy. For intermediate vaccinate rates, FDF can avert substantially more burden

than SDF. For example, averted infections are 46% higher and averted deaths 48% higher for a

vaccination rate of 0.75% first doses per day under SDF under the fast-growth scenario. At very

high vaccination rates, the advantage of FDF shrinks or disappears as the supply constraint that

FDF was meant to relax effectively disappears.

   In practice, FDF may be better than SDF or hybrid policies in reducing the burden of infection

and death in the population, provided the efficacy from the first dose is sufficiently high for some

COVID-19 vaccines. For vaccines for which efficacy following first dose drops below 80%, a

hybrid policy may be best. Conclusions about the relative benefits of FDF policies are sensitive to

assumptions about efficacy, epidemic growth, and vaccination rate.




                                                  31
6.3. Using Available Vaccines Immediately Versus Waiting for More Effective

      Vaccines

Some countries may face a choice between using a vaccine available immediately or waiting in a

queue for a more effective vaccine.

   If the planner has to choose one vaccine or the other and cannot switch later when the more

effective vaccine becomes available, analysis of the optimal country decision is straightforward

using simulations based on the basic model. The trade-offs are similar to those involved in alterna-

tive dosing: speeding supply at the cost of lower efficacy. Formally, suppose there are two possible

vaccines. Vaccine 1 with efficacy e1 is available starting at time t1 = 0. Vaccine 2 with efficacy

e2 becomes available at time t2 > 0. Once either vaccine becomes available, it can be produced

at constant rate of 1 = 2 = 0.25% of the population daily. We will fix e2 = 95% and analyze a

range of efficacies for vaccine 1, e1  95%.

   Figure 10 presents results comparing the ratio of burdens averted by the vaccines in simula-

tions. Predictably, the longer the delay in availability of the more-effective vaccine, starting with

the less effective vaccine becomes relatively more beneficial. We find that a delay of two months

or more tips the balance toward immediate use of the less effective vaccine. Although their ex-

act magnitudes depend on assumed parameter values and epidemic scenarios, the results can be

stark. If the immediately available vaccine is 70% effective (comparable to ChAdOx1 nCoV-19

(Oxford/AstraZeneca)) and a 95% effective vaccine is available two months later, then starting vac-

cinations with the immediately available vaccine would reduce infections by 11­22% and deaths

by 20­37%.

   If the planner can start with the immediately available vaccine and freely switch to the more


                                                 32
                                                              Slow-decrease epidemic                        Slow-growth epidemic                       Fast-growth epidemic

                                                 0.95   1.00 0.89 0.83 0.79 0.77 0.75 0.74      1.00 0.82 0.70 0.63 0.58 0.55 0.53          1.00 0.91 0.85 0.83 0.83 0.82 0.82
 Efficacy for the less effective vaccine (e 2)


                                                  0.9   1.01 0.90 0.84 0.80 0.77 0.76 0.75      1.02 0.83 0.72 0.64 0.59 0.56 0.54          1.01 0.92 0.86 0.84 0.83 0.83 0.83




                                                                                                                                                                                      Infections
                                                  0.8   1.03 0.92 0.86 0.81 0.79 0.77 0.76      1.06 0.87 0.74 0.67 0.62 0.58 0.56          1.03 0.93 0.88 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85

                                                  0.7   1.05 0.94 0.87 0.83 0.81 0.79 0.78      1.10 0.90 0.78 0.70 0.64 0.61 0.58          1.05 0.95 0.89 0.87 0.87 0.87 0.87

                                                  0.6   1.07 0.96 0.89 0.85 0.82 0.81 0.80      1.16 0.95 0.82 0.73 0.67 0.64 0.61          1.07 0.97 0.91 0.89 0.88 0.88 0.88

                                                  0.5   1.10 0.99 0.92 0.87 0.85 0.83 0.82      1.22 1.00 0.86 0.77 0.71 0.67 0.65          1.09 0.99 0.93 0.91 0.90 0.90 0.90


                                                 0.95   1.00 0.80 0.70 0.64 0.60 0.57 0.56      1.00 0.73 0.57 0.47 0.40 0.36 0.34          1.00 0.65 0.45 0.38 0.37 0.36 0.36

                                                  0.9   1.03 0.82 0.72 0.65 0.61 0.59 0.57      1.05 0.76 0.60 0.49 0.43 0.38 0.35          1.08 0.70 0.48 0.41 0.39 0.39 0.39




                                                                                                                                                                                      Deaths
                                                  0.8   1.08 0.87 0.75 0.69 0.65 0.62 0.60      1.16 0.85 0.66 0.54 0.47 0.42 0.39          1.24 0.80 0.55 0.47 0.45 0.45 0.45

                                                  0.7   1.14 0.92 0.80 0.73 0.68 0.66 0.64      1.29 0.94 0.73 0.60 0.52 0.47 0.43          1.40 0.91 0.63 0.53 0.51 0.51 0.51

                                                  0.6   1.21 0.97 0.84 0.77 0.72 0.69 0.68      1.44 1.05 0.82 0.67 0.58 0.52 0.48          1.57 1.02 0.70 0.59 0.57 0.57 0.57

                                                  0.5   1.28 1.03 0.89 0.81 0.77 0.74 0.72      1.61 1.17 0.91 0.75 0.65 0.58 0.54          1.75 1.14 0.78 0.66 0.64 0.64 0.64

                                                         0    1    2    3    4     5     6        0     1       2        3   4     5    6    0     1      2     3    4        5   6
                                                                                         Months until 95% effective vaccine available


                                                                         Less effective better by >5%          Comparable (within 5%)       95% effective better by >5%



Figure 10: Burden Averted Using Immediately Available Vaccine Relative to More Effective Vaccine Available
with Delay. Entries are simulation results for ratio of burden averted using a 95% effective vaccine available after
delay t2 indicated on horizontal axis, to that from an immediately available vaccine with efficacy e1 indicated on the
vertical axis. Entries greater than 1 favor waiting for the 95% effective vaccine, while entries less than 1 favor use of
the less effective vaccine. Only the situation where it is not feasible to switch to the more effective vaccine later, when
it becomes available, is considered here.


effective vaccine when it becomes available later, switching dominates continuing to use the first

vaccine. Anyone who would have received the immediately available vaccine after time t2 can

be given the more effective vaccine instead, providing more protection. Comparing switching to

waiting for the more effective vaccine requires analysis; being vaccinated with an immediately

available vaccine that is less effective may do little to quell the epidemic and prevents the indi-

viduals from receiving more protection later (unless re-vaccination with a booster shot of a more

effective vaccine is feasible).

                                                 Formally, we need to modify the single-vaccine model given by equations (1)­(7) to account

for sequential use of two vaccines. We can do this by adding protected compartments, P1i and


                                                                                                                    33
                                                                                     D
                              S                  E                  I
                                                                                     R




                               P1                    N1        P2                   N2
                                     Vaccine 1                          Vaccine 2



Figure 11: Compartment Flows in Model with Two Vaccines. Differential equations provided in equations (B10)­
(B18) in Appendix B. Additional notes from Figure 2 apply.


P2i , not-protected compartments, N1i and N2i , vaccination rates, 1i and 2i , and vaccine access

indicators v1i (t ) and v2i (t ) for each of the two vaccines. Differential equations for the model

with two vaccines are provided in equations (B10)­(B18) in Appendix B. Figure 11 provides a

schematic diagram of the compartment flows for the two-vaccine model.

    The results are relegated to Figure 15 in Appendix D because they are easy to summarize

in words. The few cases in which delay dominated immediate vaccination in Figure 10 have

disappeared. Starting vaccination immediately and switching later strictly dominates waiting in all

cases with any nontrivial delay period.

    It is important to acknowledge important limitations. Our analysis has a T = 365 day hori-

zon and is restricted to a single epidemic outbreak, thus abstracting from subsequent epidemic

waves and benefits of reaching herd immunity. We omit these factors in the belief that beyond this

period, it is reasonably likely that additional supply could come online, and policy could be ad-

justed accordingly. Moreover, uncertainty involving booster shots or seasonal vaccination makes a


                                                          34
calculation of longer-term benefits too speculative at this point.



7. Options for Obtaining More Information on the Impact of

     Alternative Dosing

As discussed in Section 2, existing immunogenicity data from clinical trials suggest that effec-

tiveness for alternative doses of at least some vaccines could potentially be high (see Figure 1).

Simulations in Section 6.1 show that alternative dosing policies would dramatically reduce mor-

tality and infections if efficacy is at the levels associated with the current data on immunogenicity,

and would still substantially reduce mortality even if efficacy fell significantly, for example to the

level of some existing approved vaccines. However, the evidence of immune response is limited,

and the projected impacts of such policies are subject to model uncertainty and may vary across

vaccines, variants, and epidemic settings.

   The high potential benefits, combined with remaining uncertainty, make information on the im-

pact of alternative dosing very valuable. However, despite promising clinical trial data on immuno-

genicity of different doses of COVID-19 vaccines being available since autumn of 2020, we are

aware of only one ongoing immunogenicity trial testing alternative doses: a study of half doses of

mRNA-1273 (Moderna) with 200 participants in Belgium (ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT04852861),

and one real-world evaluation of the impact of alternative dosing on disease burden, recently an-

nounced in Brazil (Governo ES, 2021), which will evaluate immunogenicity and effectiveness of

half a dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca). For much of this section we discuss

practical options for evaluating alternative dosing policies (which also apply to other dose stretch-

ing policies), most of which could be implemented in a few weeks.


                                                 35
    Given recent work in establishing correlates of protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection, fur-

ther immunogenicity trials could provide very valuable information safely and at low cost. While

clinical trial data on a few candidates already exists, much of this is with small sample sizes, and

many more doses could be tested. New immunogenicity trials can be conducted in a matter of

weeks and require only a few hundred participants. Since the outcome measured is not infection,

there is no need to conduct trials in places where the risk of COVID-19 is high--in fact, they can be

conducted in places where the virus is not circulating and which have strong health care systems,

to minimize risk to participants. Clinical pharmacology modeling, routinely used during vaccine

development, should also be used at this stage, allowing us to combine data from multiple trials

and to extrapolate a dose-response function to new doses and across age groups.

    Beyond immunogenicity trials, non-randomized approaches can also be used to establish ef-

fectiveness of different dosing strategies against infection or mortality as a vaccination campaign

is rolled out. Observational designs, such as test-negative case-control studies, are recommended

by the WHO to study vaccine effectiveness, and the same methods can be used to quickly de-

termine the effect of alternative dosing in real-world settings. However, unlike immunogenicity

studies, they need to be conducted where infections are occurring.29 Model-based synthesis of

immunogenicity data, pre-existing clinical trial data (on full doses), and new data on alternative

doses can also be used to extrapolate outcomes between doses, to safely generate estimates for

immunogenicity in high risk individuals, and also to increase statistical power.30
  29 Both    practical and modeling assessments (in influenza) suggest that the risk of bias of these study designs is
acceptable (Shi et al. 2017). The number of COVID-19 cases required to detect (with a precision of 10%) 70%
efficacy with a test-negative design is 1,345, assuming that vaccine coverage in the underlying population is 50%.
This is according to the WHO's sample size calculator, included in its official guidance document. The number would
likely be lower under a non-inferiority design needed for testing alternative doses. Matching techniques can also be
used to correct for bias in effectiveness studies (Dagan et al. 2021).
   30 It is important to note that ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca) was approved for emergency use in all

adults in the UK and Europe despite (at the time) lack of clear evidence on efficacy in the elderly. Extrapolating



                                                         36
    Testing, however, can take time. Even a rapid study of immune response requires, in the

case of 2-dose vaccines, time for administration of two doses (for alternative doses, a minimum

of 3 to 4 weeks apart, depending on the vaccine; for FDF, several months), and at least several

days for immune responses to develop following a second dose. During a period of epidemic

growth, the delay associated with running experiments could be costly in terms of infections and

deaths, and more lives could be saved in expectation by implementing whichever policy has higher

expected value and simultaneously evaluating outcomes. Thus, many countries decided to delay

second doses for some vaccines early on, without waiting for more complete data. In the case

of the UK, the decision was made only weeks into the vaccination campaign. Similarly, data

on alternative dose efficacy was not yet available when the WHO's Strategic Advisory Group of

Experts on Immunization (SAGE) approved the use of alternative doses of yellow fever vaccine

during epidemics (World Health Organization 2016).

    In some cases, randomized trials that explicitly test the impact of dose stretching on infection

and disease risk can also be part of roll-out plans (Kominers and Tabarrok 2020; Bach 2020). Roll-

out of modified plans need not wait until trial results are known. Instead, plans can be adjusted as

new information emerges. The vaccinated can be comprehensively monitored, allowing decision-

makers to modify policy based on infection rates and immune response data.

    An important feature of the dose stretching policies we have analyzed is that they are, to a large

degree, reversible. In the case of FDF, if it is found to be ineffective, the dosing interval can be

shortened. In the case of alternative dosing, reversibility can be understood as the ability to increase

dosing or provide later booster shots of the same or a different vaccine. The costs of reversing
response across ages for a smaller dose of an already widely used vaccine with comprehensive real-world data is much
less risky than for a new vaccine.




                                                        37
alternative dosing may be higher than those of reversing FDF, since it may require additional

vaccine supply and use of healthcare staff to deliver vaccines. Additionally, if not effective, either

policy will lead to a higher number of infections and deaths in the period until it is reversed.

   Even if policymakers are pessimistic about the odds that alternative dosing will be effective,

testing the policy is likely to save lives in expectation as long as there is even a relatively small

chance of success. Suppose there is a 75% chance that half-dose efficacy is 30% and a 25% chance

that it is 90%. If the policy is reversible, trying alternative dosing with a limited population to learn

whether efficacy was truly 30% or 90% would save lives in expectation. If the trial was done in a

healthy volunteer population in a region with access to good care, health risks would be minimal,

and tiny relative to the potentially enormous gains from rapidly increasing vaccination rates with

alternative dosing, as long as efficacy could be learned quickly enough.

   Ultimately, regulators and public health officials in each jurisdiction have to decide whether to

wait for additional immunogenicity studies before testing efficacy of alternative doses, and, if they

do test alternative dosing, whether to do so as part of vaccine roll-outs or through formal trials.



8. Conclusion

The COVID-19 vaccination rate in most countries is limited by scarce vaccine supplies. We an-

alyze policies that stretch scarce supplies, speeding protection to more people. In particular, we

explore the impacts of three dose stretching policies: alternative dosing; delaying second doses;

and using available vaccines early rather than waiting for more efficacious vaccines. Delayed sec-

ond doses has been tested as part of vaccination roll-outs in some countries, with indications of

substantial benefits for at least some vaccine-variant combinations. However, alternative dosing



                                                   38
has not been tested yet, despite high immunogenicity from smaller doses of vaccines observed in

early stage clinical trials. For alternative doses, we use the high correlation (across vaccines) be-

tween neutralizing antibody response and efficacy against disease to provide suggestive evidence

that half or even quarter doses of some vaccines generate immune responses associated with high

efficacy. Next, we used an SEIR model to explore the impact of the three dose stretching ap-

proaches on disease burden, and show that all three substantially reduce infections and mortality

over a wide range of plausible efficacy levels. These results derive from the value of speed in

vaccinations -- both starting vaccinations early and vaccinating at high daily rates. The value is

so high that under supply constraints, the gains from enhanced speed enabled by dose stretching

outstrip the costs of potential efficacy loss for a wide range of efficacies for stretched doses.

   Our simulations used averted burden of infection and death as outcome variables, abstracting

from other important economic and social costs. Faster vaccination could substantially reduce the

time until relaxation of lockdowns and other costly non-pharmaceutical interventions. alternative

dosing, in particular, can also bring long-term benefits, even if supply constraints are eventually

alleviated, such as a decrease in production costs for vaccine manufacturers and lower prices for

consumers. Additionally, the trials and testing required to evaluate and potentially implement

alternative dosing could also be helpful in the continued development of newer vaccine platforms,

such as viral vector and mRNA vaccines, since little is currently known about optimal dosing

for such vaccines. Our simulations thus likely underestimate the wider benefits of accelerating

vaccination with dose-stretching policies.

   To accommodate uncertainty about the efficacy of untested alternative dosing policies, our

analytical approach was to simulate a range of potential values for the efficacy loss entailed by

the policy. In practice, policymakers may not know which of these efficacy values applies to their

                                                  39
situation. However, it is possible to learn more safely, quickly, and inexpensively: the reversibility

of the dose-stretching policies strengthens the case for trying them. If efficacy falls too much,

the standard dose policy can be reinstated; if not, the dose-stretching policy can be retained and

expanded.

   Dose stretching may be particularly beneficial for low-income countries (LICs), not necessarily

through their use in LICs themselves but dose-stretching in other countries could free up supplies

to start widespread vaccination in LICs earlier. LICs have signed fewer bilateral deals with vaccine

manufacturers and have received small allocations from COVAX and other international arrange-

ments. If the present capacity is used without stretching measures, it may take years before LICs

reach 70% coverage of COVID-19 vaccines (Castillo et al. 2021). Estimating the benefit to LICs of

having other countries undertake stretching measures is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, we

discuss dose stretching in LICs in Appendix C, which repeats the main simulations, parametrized

for LICs.

   Dose stretching may also be particularly beneficial for non-elderly populations, who often

have stronger immune responses to vaccines. Decision-makers might consider rolling out dose

stretching policies only for younger adults, the majority of whom remain unvaccinated by the end

of May 2021, including in many high income countries. For COVID-19 vaccines, this may also

reduce side effects (including mild to moderate ones that can still be a barrier to uptake), which

have generally been higher in non-elderly populations.

   Our SEIR model is based on a vaccine with 95% efficacy and does not allow for partial pro-

tection (e.g., from mortality but not infection). It uses an age structure similar to those in many

high income countries and a disease burden appropriate for SARS-CoV2 variants most prevalent

in 2020. In further research, we will modify some of the modeling assumptions. In particular, we

                                                 40
will examine the case of a vaccine with efficacy in the 70% range (such as for ChAdOx1 nCoV-19

(Oxford/AstraZeneca), or mRNA vaccines against recently emerged variants), explore the case of

low-income countries in more detail, allow for differences in effectiveness against different types

of disease burden, and check fo r robustness of our conclusions to the emergence of viral vari-

ants. Further work should also investigate the effect that simultaneously implementing alternative

dosing and increased delays between two doses would have on health benefits. Additionally, in

future work we plan to consider longer time horizons, accommodating boosters, loss of immu-

nity, and endogenous behavioral response to risk, such that R = 1 for an extended period of time

(Gans 2020). We will also explicitly model a global production constraint, not only the problems

of individual countries, and will analyze scenarios where it is not possible to maintain strict age

prioritization. Last, we will extend the analysis to allow for the vaccination of children.

   To conclude, we argue that alternative COVID-19 vaccine dosing regimens could potentially

dramatically accelerate global vaccination and reduce mortality, and that these potential benefits

dwarf the costs of testing these regimens. While our paper focuses on the COVID-19 context, its

conclusions are broadly applicable to vaccine shortages during an epidemic.




                                                 41
Appendix A: Survey of Evidence on Dose Stretching
This appendix surveys existing evidence from medical literature on the effects on individual vac-
cine efficacy (VE) of dose stretching policies. Table 1 lists clinical trials for several impor-
tant vaccines. Note that in some cases, while early trials tested multiple doses, later trials used
only a single dose size (such as for BNT162b2), while in others (e.g., ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Ox-
ford/AstraZeneca)), multiple dose sizes were tested at all stages.


Alternative Dosing
In early stage clinical trials, lower dosages of COVID-19 vaccines were often found to stimulate
a strong NAb response, at least in non-elderly patients. Evidence on the immunogenicity of a
range of dose sizes of each vaccine is summarized in Table 2. Note that in some later trials, such
as those for JNJ-78436735 (Johnson & Johnson) and NVX-CoV2373 (Novavax), Phase 3 clinical
trials proceeded with the smaller of two dose options tested in early trials after those trials found
no statistically significant difference in immune response between the doses.




                                                 42
                                                                                                             43
 Vaccine    Phase    Date posted   1st       Doses      Dose    Treatment arms       Age        N    Clinical
                                   dose              interval                        group           trials.gov
                                   re-                 (days)                                        number
                                   sults*

               1/2     3/27/2020   Yes       2        28, 56    ·   1× 5e10 v.p.     18-55    1090   NCT04324
                                                                ·   2× 5e10                          606
 ChAdOx1                                                        ·   5e10, 2.2e10
 nCoV-19                                                        ·   5e10, 3.5-6.5e10

               1/2     6/23/2020   No        2            28    2× 5-7.5e10 v.p.     18-65    2130   NCT04444
                                                                                                     674
               2/3     5/26/2020   Yes       2         28-42    ·   1× 5e10 v.p.     18-70+   12390 NCT04400
                                                                ·   2× 3.5-6.5e10                   838
                                                                ·   5e10, 2.2e10
                                                                ·   5e10, 3.5-6.5e10

                3       9/2/2020   Yes       2         28-84    · 1× 5e10 v.p.       18+      10300 NCT04536
                                                                · 5-10, 3.5-6.5e10                  051

                1      6/18/2020   Yes       1            n/a   · 1× 5e10 v.p.       18-55     25    NCT04436
 JNJ-                                                           · 1× 1e11                            276
 78436735
             1/2a      6/18/2020   Yes       2            56    ·   1× 5e10 v.p.     18-55,   1085   NCT04436
                                                                ·   2× 5e10          65+             276
                                                                ·   1× 1e11
                                                                ·   2× 1e11
                3      8/10/2020   Yes       1            n/a   1× 5e10 v.p.         18+      44325 NCT04505
                                                                                                    722

 mRNA-          1      2/25/2020   No        2            28    ·   2× 25µg          18+      120    NCT04283
 1273                                                           ·   2× 50                            461
                                                                ·   2× 100
                                                                ·   2× 250
               2a      5/28/2020   No        2            28    · 2× 50µg            18+      660    NCT04405
                                                                · 2× 100                             076
 NVX-      1/2         4/30/2020   Yes       2            21    · 2× 5µg             18-59/   131/   NCT04368
 CoV2373**                                                      · 2× 25              18-84    1500   988
                                                                · 5, 25
                1      4/20/2020   No        2            21    ·   2× 10µg          18-55,   195    NCT04368
 BNT162b2                                                       ·   2× 20            65-85           728
                                                                ·   2× 30
                                                                ·   2× 100
               2/3     4/20/2020   No        2            21    30µg                 12-15,   43548 NCT04368
                                                                                     16-55,         728
                                                                                     55+

Table 1: *Trial reports immunogenicity at least three weeks after dose administration, before a second dose (if
planned) has been administered, and has a comparable outcome (in terms of age group, dose, and day measured)
for second doses. **Treatment arms also included groups in which each vaccine dose arm was administered with and
without 50µg of Matrix-M adjuvant.
Vaccine     nAb       Day    Age        N       Mea-      Stan-       Dose         Dose     NAb Standard                NAb     Difference
            assay       of   group           sured on     dard        tested       frac-     re- dose NAb           response    is
                      2nd                         day     dose*                     tion   sponse response        as fraction   significant
                      dose                                                                                                 of   (at 5%
                                                                                                                   standard     level)?
                                                                                                                        dose

                             18-55      41          42                             0.44      161           193           0.83   no
ChAdOx1                                                   5e10        2.2e10
            MN80        14   56-69      28          42                             0.44      143           144           0.99   no
nCoV-19                                                   v.p.        v.p.
                             70+        34          42                             0.44      150           161           0.93   no
BBV152      PRNT50      28   12-65    190           56    6µg         3µg            0.5     100           197           0.51   yes

JNJ-                         18-55      24          56    5e10        1e11            2      310           288           1.08   no
            PRNT IC50 n/a
78436735                     65+        50          28    v.p.        v.p.            2      212           277           0.77   no
            PRNT80           18-55      15          42                25µg         0.25      340           654           0.52   no
mRNA-1273               28   18-55      78          42    100µg       50µg           0.5    1733         1909            0.91   no
            MN50
                             55+        63          42                50µg           0.5    1827         1686            1.08   no
NVX-        MN          21   18-59      50          35    5µg         25µg            5     3305         3906            0.85   no
CoV2373**   IC>99
                             18-55      12          28                10µg         0.33      157           361           0.43   n/a
                             65-85      12          35                10µg         0.33      111           206           0.54   n/a
BNT162b2*** PRNT50      21                                30µg
                             18-55      12          28                20µg         0.67      363           361           1.01   n/a
                             65-85      12          28                20µg         0.67       84           206           0.41   n/a

                Table 2: Neutralizing antibody (nAb) responses listed are the peak levels recorded in published trial data. Sources:
                Ramasamy et al. 2020 (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19, Oxford/AstraZeneca), Ella et al. 2021 (BBV152, Covaxin), Sadoff et
                al. 2021a (JNJ-78436735, Johnson & Johnson), Jackson et al. 2021 (mRNA-1273, Moderna - 25µg), Chu et al.
                2021 (mRNA-1273, Moderna - 50µg), Keech et al. 2020 (NVX-CoV2373, Novavax), Walsh et al. 2020 (BNT162b2,
                Pfizer). *"Standard dose" is what is being used in vaccine roll-outs thus far (v.p.=viral particles). **Both doses were
                administered together with 50µg of adjuvant. ***Sample size was too small to determine significance.
                                                                                                                                              44
First Doses First
There is already some evidence both from clinical trials and real-world data on the efficacy of first
doses. Efficacy varies by vaccine, by dose size, and by the virus variant. In some cases, first doses
have been found to be highly effective.

    · Efficacy of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 after two doses was 62-90 percent (Voysey et al. 2021).
      Efficacy at preventing symptomatic infection was 73 percent starting 22 days after the first
      dose (UK Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation 2020a). A recent clinical trial
      demonstrated that delaying the second dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca)
      to 12 weeks or later improved long-term vaccine efficacy (Voysey, et al. 2021). Hence the
      authors concluded, "ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination programs aimed at vaccinating a large
      proportion of the population with a single dose, with a second dose given after a 3 month
      period is an effective strategy for reducing disease, and may be the optimal for rollout of a
      pandemic vaccine when supplies are limited in the short term."

    · In Phase 3 clinical trials, VE of BNT162b2 (Pfizer) between 15 and 28 days after the first
      dose (before immune response from the second dose, delivered at 14 days, would have kicked
      in) was 91% (JCVI 2020a).31

    · In a trial that administered first and second doses of mRNA-1273 (Moderna) four weeks
      apart, VE two weeks after the first dose was 95.2% (Baden et al. 2020).

    While we have limited information on how long these immune responses last, we do know
that the second doses of mRNA-1273 (Moderna) were given as late as 42 days after the first shot
(Infectious Disease Society of America 2021), that the UK's Joint Committee on Vaccination and
Immunisation's analysis suggests that protection from ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca)
lasts up to 3 months (JCVI 2020a), and that immunity from natural infection seems to last at least
6 months.
    Most vaccine schedules offer some flexibility on when booster shots may be taken, and typi-
cally require a minimum interval of over four weeks between shots.
    Real world data on ongoing vaccinations has produced results similar to those found in clinical
trials.

    · In Israel, BNT162b2 (Pfizer) was estimated to be 78% effective against hospitalizations and
      80% effective against severe disease 21-27 days following the first dose (Dagan et al. 2021).

    · A study of data covering the entire population of Scotland found that BNT162b2 and ChA-
      dOx1 nCoV-19 (Oxford/AstraZeneca) reduced hospitalization after four weeks by 85 and 94
      percent, respectively, in real-time vaccination campaigns (University of Edinburgh 2021).

    · A study of older adults in the UK found that a single dose of BNT162b2 or ChAdOx1 nCoV-
      19 was 80% effective at preventing hospitalization (Lopez Bernal et al. 2021a).
   31 One trial found that first dose efficacy was only 52.4%, but most infections in the treatment group occurred in the

first two weeks, before the immune response is likely to have kicked in.




                                                          45
    · In the UK, a study of healthcare workers who received the first dose of BNT162b2 found
      that it was 75% effective at preventing positive cases and reduced asymptomatic infections
      by half (Hall et al. 2021).

    However, first doses might not be as effective for all vaccines. For example, the first dose of
CoronaVac was found to be only 3% effective in a study of Chile's vaccine rollout (although trials
have also found CoronaVac to be less effective than other vaccines even after two doses) (Dyer
2021). It is possible that the coronavirus outbreak in Chile in April was amplified by CoronaVac's
low first-dose efficacy, which made up 93% of administered doses (over a third of adults had
received at least the first dose of the vaccine at the beginning of the month) (Taylor 2021).
    First doses have also been less effective against new variants of the COVID-19 virus.32 .

    · First doses of BNT162b2 (Pfizer) were only 17% effective against the South African variant,
      B.1.351 (Burn-Murdoch et al. 2021).33

    · Data from the UK suggest that first doses of BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (Ox-
      ford/AstraZeneca) are only 51% effective against the B.1.17 variant (Lopez Bernal et al.
      2021b).34

    · New data from India, aggregated across BNT162b2 and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19, suggests first
      dose efficacy against the B.1.617.2 variant is just 33% (Lopez Bernal et al. 2021b).35




Immune escape risk
One serious concern about modified vaccination approaches is that they might lead to weak im-
mune responses and immune escape through mutation (Wadman 2021). In considering such risks
it is important to also consider the risks of the status quo. Without a modified vaccination approach
there is a higher probability of more infections. A non-vaccinated person who becomes infected
goes through a period of "partial immunity" and thus also increases the risk of immune escape.
Indeed, variants of the SARS-CoV-2 virus are already circulating that are more transmissible and
might be less vulnerable to vaccines but these arose before widespread vaccination (Kupferschmidt
2021). Thus, it isn't clear whether the balance of probabilities on immune escape favors or dis-
favors the modified approach. The risk of immune escape should also be evaluated in the larger
context of vaccine approval. In June 2020, the FDA was willing to accept a vaccine with an ef-
ficacy rate as low as 50%36 even given the risks of immune escape. A vaccine efficacy rate of
  32 JNJ-78436735    (Johnson & Johnson), which is administered as a single dose, was somewhat less effective against
the South African variant, but still exceeded WHO standard levels, with 52% and 64% efficacy 14 days and 28 days
after the shot, respectively (Sadoff et al. 2021b)
   33 Second doses were 75% effective.
   34 Second dose VE is also lower, although not as much: 66% and 93% for ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and BNT162b2,

respectively.
   35 Second dose VE was 60% and 88% for ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and BNT162b2, respectively.
   36 "To ensure that a widely deployed COVID-19 vaccine is effective, the primary efficacy endpoint point estimate

for a placebo-controlled efficacy trial should be at least 50%" (U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2020a).



                                                         46
70%37 is very good. If the efficacy rate of a dosage regime, such as offering a second dose of an
mRNA vaccine at 12 weeks never falls below 70%, then the dosing regime should be considered
no more risky than the approvable vaccine. The calculus should also take into account the fact that
we have some indication that vaccines may be protective against asymptomatic infection even with
one dose (e.g. (Voysey et al. 2021)) and that milder and less symptomatic infections lead to less
transmission (Kampen et al. 2020).
    The New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (NERVTAG), a scientific
advisory group to the British government, recently considered the risk of immune escape and
concluded that although the risk of immune escape from delaying a second dose is real it is likely
small, especially in comparison to other sources of immune escape such as therapeutics and natural
infection. Moreover, the risk is outweighed by the measurable benefits of getting more does out
quickly.

             It is not currently possible to quantify the probability of emergence of vaccine
         resistance as a result of the delayed second dose, but it is likely to be small.The UK
         currently has more than 1,000 COVID-19 related deaths each day and has limited
         supplies of vaccine. In the current UK circumstances the unquantifiable but likely
         small probability of the delayed second dose generating a vaccine escape mutant must
         be weighed against the measurable benefits of doubling the speed with which the most
         vulnerable can be given vaccine-induced protection.
             ...a single dose of vaccine does not generate a new/novel risk. Given what we
         have observed recently with the variants B.1.1.7 and B1.351, it is a realistic possibility
         that over time immune escape variants will emerge, most likely driven by increasing
         population immunity following natural infection.




  37 A recent study (Bartsch et al. 2020) suggested that a vaccine of efficacy 70 percent could prevent a COVID-19
epidemic from taking off, and one of 80 percent could extinguish an epidemic without any other measures such as
social distancing.


                                                       47
Appendix B: Extensions of Epidemiological Model
Simulating several policies required extending the basic epidemiological model in (1)­(7). This
appendix presents the systems of differential equations behind those extensions.

B1: Model with Two Doses of a Single Vaccine
The analysis of a first-doses-first (FDF) policy in Section 6.2 requires extending the basic model to
allow one or two doses to have differing efficacy and to connect the delay between doses to the rate
of vaccination. The model maintain the assumption that a single vaccine candidate is available. In
this subsection, let subscripts 1 and 2, respectively indicate variables associated with the first and
second doses. The following differential equations govern the extended model:
                      i (t ) = -i (t )Si (t ) - vi (t )1i S
                      S                                      ~i (t )                                (B1)
                     Ei (t ) = i (t )[Si (t ) + N1i (t ) + N2i (t )] -  Ei (t )                     (B2)
                      Ii (t ) =  Ei (t ) -  Ii (t )                                                 (B3)
                     D i (t ) = pi  Ii (t )                                                         (B4)
                     R i (t ) = (1 - pi ) Ii (t ) - vi (t )1i R    ~ i (t )                         (B5)
                     1i (t ) = vi (t )1i e1 S
                     P                        ~i (t ) + Ri (t ) - vi (t )2i P1i (t )                (B6)
                     2i (t ) = vi (t )2i e2 [P1i (t ) + N1i (t )]
                     P                                                                              (B7)
                     1i (t ) = vi (t )1i (1 - e1 )S
                    N                              ~i (t ) - vi (t )2i N1i (t ) - i (t )N1i (t )    (B8)
                     2i (t ) = vi (t )2i (1 - e2 )[P1i (t ) + N1i (t )] - i (t )N2i (t ).
                    N                                                                               (B9)

B2: Model with Two Vaccines
The basic model must be extended if the planner is allowed to switch to the more effective vaccine
when it becomes available because the first vaccine continues to provide protection to the success-
fully immunized when the new vaccine is introduced, governed by different parameters. In this
subsection, we reinterpret subscript 1 as indicating variables associated with the less effective vac-
cine available earlier and 2 as indicating prime variables associated with the more effective vaccine
available later. Compartment flows follow these differential equations:

                         Si (t ) = -i (t )Si (t ) - [v1i (t )1i + v2i (t )2i ]S~i (t )             (B10)
                         Ei (t ) = i (t )[Si (t ) + N1i (t ) + N2i (t )] -  Ei (t )                (B11)
                          i (t ) =  Ei (t ) -  Ii (t )
                          I                                                                        (B12)
                          i (t ) = pi  Ii (t )
                         D                                                                         (B13)
                          i (t ) = (1 - pi ) Ii (t ) - [v1i (t )1i + v2i (t )2i ]R
                         R                                                           ~ i (t )      (B14)
                        P1i (t ) = v1i (t )1i e1 S~i (t ) + R  ~ i (t )                            (B15)
                        P2i (t ) = v2i (t )2i e2 S~i (t ) + R  ~ i (t )                            (B16)
                         1i (t ) = v1i (t )1i (1 - e1 )S
                        N                                 ~i (t ) - i (t )N2i (t )                 (B17)
                                                       ~i (t ) - i (t )N1i (t ).
                         2i (t ) = v2i (t )2i (1 - e2 )S
                        N                                                                          (B18)


                                                        48
Appendix C: Low-Income Countries

The simulations so far have been calibrated based on data from a subset of countries with the most
extensive data, typically high-income country (HIC) parameters. These differ in several respects
from parameters for low-income countries. LICs generally have much younger populations. Ad-
ditionally, mortality risk rises less steeply with age in LICs than HICs, close to a two-fold increase
per decade (Demombynes 2020) compared to the three-fold increase per decade in HICs. Other
factors also differ, including the virus variants that are most frequently found in both areas and
the behavioral aspect of the population (for example, for a significant portion of the population in
LICs, self-isolation might be infeasible). Patterns may also be changing over time, as exemplified
by India's terrible recent (April 2021) wave of infections. Our current analysis abstracts from this
and should be considered preliminary.


                          Supply constraint          HIC      LIC   Epidemic scenario      Slow-decrease          Slow-growth   Fast-growth



                          Infections                                                    Deaths
                    100                                                           100




                     75                                                           75
 % burden averted




                     50                                                           50




                     25                                                           25




                      0                                                            0
                              10
                              25

                                         50

                                                75

                                                        00




                                                                             00




                                                                                           10
                                                                                           25

                                                                                                   50

                                                                                                             75

                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                         00
                            0.
                            0.

                                       0.

                                              0.

                                                      1.




                                                                           2.




                                                                                         0.
                                                                                         0.

                                                                                                 0.

                                                                                                           0.

                                                                                                                  1.




                                                                                                                                       2.


                                                             Percentage of population vaccinated daily

Figure 12: Comparing Averted Burden from Faster Vaccination in LICs to HICs. Vertical axis shows percentage
reduction in burdens relative to no vaccination, in infections (left panel) and deaths (right panel), at various vaccination
speeds (horizontal axis) and epidemic scenarios (colors). The plot is analogous to Figure 4 but with low-income
country added (dashed lines) to high-income country case (solid lines).

    Figure 12 reprises the results for burden averted by faster vaccination for LICs that were pro-
vided for HICs in Figure 4. The broad pattern of results is similar for LICs and HICs. For both
sets of countries, faster vaccination has a large and nonlinear effect on the proportion of disease
burden without a vaccine averted. At high vaccination rates (1­2% per day), then burden reduc-
tions in LICs are very similar to HICs. At very low vaccination rates, the percentage of burden
averted is substantially larger in LICs than HICs. For example, at a vaccination rate of 0.1% of

                                                                             49
the population per day under the slow-growth scenario, 19% of cases are averted in HICs but 54%
in LICs. The difference is likely due to population structure. Only 5% of the LIC population is
above age 60 compared to 25% of the population in HICs. An increase in a very low vaccination
rate allows LICs to quickly move beyond their senior populations to younger cohorts with higher
transmission rates. The quantitative results depend on our assumption, in the absence of good data
on the contact matrix for LICs, that social mixing is the same in LICs as HICs.
    We reprized all of the previous HIC results for LICs but for brevity present just the results on
the relative benefits of alternative dosing, in Figure 17 in Appendix D. The relative benefit of a
given alternative-dosing policy shown for LICs is slightly lower than that for HICs in Figure 6, but
the magnitudes are similar.


Appendix D: Supplementary Exhibits




                                                50
                                                                                                                     51




                         Table 3: Parameters Specified in Epidemiological Model


Parameter   Interpretation             Value                       Comments


T           Length of each simu-       365
            lation (in days)


ni          Age distribution over      [0,10): 0.11, 0.29          World Population Prospects 2019 distribution for
            different age groups:      [10,20): 0.11, 0.23         high and low income country categories, based on
            high income and low        [20,30): 0.13, 0.17         R package wpp2019.
            income countries           [30,40): 0.14, 0.12
                                       [40,50): 0.14, 0.08
                                       [50,60): 0.13, 0.05
                                       [60,70): 0.11, 0.03
                                       [70,80): 0.08, 0.02
                                       [80, ): 0.05, 0.004


c(i, j)     Contacts from age co-      9x9 matrix based on         Mossong et al. (2008).
            hort i to age cohort j     large scale survey of       Dominant eigenvalue is y = 14.17.
                                       age-structured contacts


q           Probability of trans-      0.0203 for R=0.99,          Adjusted to match desired R0 .
            mission on contact         0.02264 for R=1.1
                                       0.0411 for R=2


            Reciprocal of average      1/5 = 0.2                   Incubation period was initially estimated to be
            length of incubation                                   about five days (Verity et al. 2020; Cevik et al.
            period                                                 2021). Some have suggested a longer period, but
                                                                   we opted for five days to account for shorter serial
                                                                   interval for COVID-19 (five to six days), as we do
                                                                   not model pre-sympotmatic transmission.


            Reciprocal of average      1/5 = 0.2                   While duration of viral shedding is longer, infec-
            length of infectious                                   tiousness decreases quickly after onset of symp-
            period                                                 toms (Cevik et al. 2021).


pi          Age-specific infection     [0,10): 2e-05               Based on a recent meta-analysis of IFRs (Man-
            fatality rate (IFR)        [10,20): 6e-05              heim et al. 2020).
                                       [20,30): 3e-04
                                       [30,40): 8e-04
                                       [40,50): 0.0015
                                       [50,60): 0.006
                                       [60,70): 0.022
                                       [70,80): 0.051
                                       [80, ): 0.093
                                                                                                                                  52




                                                                                                                    Age cohort
                         Vaccinated                      Currently infected               Susceptible
                   80                                                               80                                  80+
                                                  0.3                                                                   [70,80)
 % of age cohort




                   60                                                                                                   [60,70)
                                                                                    60
                                                  0.2                                                                   [50,60)
                   40
                                                                                    40                                  [40,50)
                                                  0.1                                                                   [30,40)
                   20

                                                                                    20                                  [20,30)
                    0                              0                                                                    [10,20)
                        Jan   Apr     Jul   Oct         Jan   Apr     Jul     Oct        Jan   Apr      Jul   Oct
                                                                                                                        [0,10)
                                                                    time

Figure 13: Age-specific Evolution of Vaccinated, Infected, and Susceptible Compartments. Colors indicate com-
partment percentages for various age cohorts. Assumes slow-growth epidemic scenario and baseline values of param-
eters (95% efficacy, vaccination rate of 0.25% of population per day, target 80% vaccination rate in cohorts age 20 and
over). The assumed policy of prioritizing older cohorts is reflected in vaccination panel. Because they are vaccinated
earlier, older cohorts experience an earlier downturn from their peak infection rate.
                                                                                                                                                                                53




                                             Slow-decrease epidemic                       Slow-growth epidemic                        Fast-growth epidemic

                               0.95   1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00    1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00    1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00


                                0.9   1.05    1.05   1.05   1.05   1.05    1.10    1.05   1.05   1.05   1.05   1.05    1.10    1.05   1.05   1.05   1.05   1.10   1.35




                                                                                                                                                                         Infections
                                0.8   1.15    1.10   1.10   1.15   1.15    1.25    1.10   1.10   1.10   1.15   1.15    1.25    1.20   1.15   1.15   1.15   1.25   Inf
 Efficacy of fractional dose




                                0.7   1.20    1.20   1.20   1.25   1.30    1.50    1.20   1.20   1.20   1.25   1.30    1.60    1.30   1.25   1.25   1.30   1.95   Inf


                                0.6   1.30    1.30   1.35   1.40   1.50    2.05    1.30   1.30   1.35   1.45   1.55    2.40    1.50   1.40   1.35   1.70   Inf    Inf


                                0.5   1.45    1.40   1.50   1.65   1.85    4.00    1.40   1.40   1.55   1.75   2.05    7.50    1.70   1.60   1.60   Inf    Inf    Inf



                               0.95   1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00    1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00    1.00    1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00


                                0.9   1.10    1.10   1.10   1.15   1.15    1.20    1.10   1.10   1.10   1.15   1.15    1.20    1.10   1.15   1.15   1.15   1.20   1.85




                                                                                                                                                                         Deaths
                                0.8   1.25    1.30   1.35   1.40   1.45    1.75    1.25   1.30   1.35   1.40   1.45    1.80    1.25   1.45   1.45   1.50   2.05   Inf


                                0.7   1.45    1.55   1.65   1.80   2.00    3.50    1.45   1.55   1.65   1.85   2.05    3.50    1.50   1.90   1.90   4.00   Inf    Inf


                                0.6   1.75    1.90   2.15   2.55   3.50    10.00   1.75   1.85   2.15   2.65   3.50    18.00   1.85   2.55   4.50   Inf    Inf    Inf


                                0.5   2.10    2.40   3.50   4.50   7.50     Inf    2.10   2.30   3.50   5.00   11.00    Inf    2.50   4.00   Inf    Inf    Inf    Inf
                                       10


                                               25


                                                      50


                                                             75


                                                                    00


                                                                            00




                                                                                    10


                                                                                           25


                                                                                                  50


                                                                                                         75


                                                                                                                00


                                                                                                                        00




                                                                                                                                10


                                                                                                                                       25


                                                                                                                                              50


                                                                                                                                                     75


                                                                                                                                                            00


                                                                                                                                                                   00
                                      0.


                                              0.


                                                     0.


                                                            0.


                                                                   1.


                                                                           2.




                                                                                   0.


                                                                                          0.


                                                                                                 0.


                                                                                                        0.


                                                                                                               1.


                                                                                                                       2.




                                                                                                                               0.


                                                                                                                                      0.


                                                                                                                                             0.


                                                                                                                                                    0.


                                                                                                                                                           1.


                                                                                                                                                                  2.
                                                                          Baseline percentage of pop. vaccinated daily

Figure 14: Threshold Speed-up at which Alternative Dominates Full Dosing. Entries present threshold speed-up
in the vaccination rate when moving from alternative to full dosing such that alternative dosing averts greater disease
burden. Shading intensity increases with the needed threshold. Entries marked "Inf," denoting infinity, are cases in
which full dosing dominates for all speed-ups simulated, even as high as 32. Reciprocal of entry can be interpreted as
the size of alternative dose, holding constant efficacy on vertical axis, below which alternative dominates full dosing.
Each tile represents a different combination of epidemic growth, level of efficacy of alternative dose, and vaccination
rate assumed for the full dose. Maintains baseline assumption that full dose is 95% effective.
                                                                                                                                                                                            54




                                                               Slow-decrease epidemic                     Slow-growth epidemic                      Fast-growth epidemic

                                                 0.95   0.89   0.83   0.79   0.77   0.75   0.74   0.82   0.70   0.63   0.58   0.55   0.53   0.91   0.85   0.83   0.83   0.82   0.82

                                                  0.9   0.90   0.84   0.80   0.77   0.76   0.75   0.82   0.71   0.64   0.59   0.56   0.54   0.91   0.86   0.84   0.83   0.83   0.83
 Efficacy for the less effective vaccine (e 2)




                                                                                                                                                                                      Infections
                                                  0.8   0.90   0.84   0.81   0.79   0.77   0.76   0.83   0.72   0.65   0.61   0.58   0.56   0.92   0.87   0.85   0.85   0.85   0.85

                                                  0.7   0.91   0.85   0.82   0.80   0.79   0.78   0.83   0.73   0.67   0.63   0.60   0.58   0.92   0.88   0.87   0.87   0.87   0.87

                                                  0.6   0.91   0.86   0.83   0.82   0.81   0.80   0.84   0.74   0.69   0.65   0.63   0.61   0.93   0.90   0.89   0.88   0.88   0.88

                                                  0.5   0.91   0.87   0.85   0.83   0.82   0.82   0.84   0.76   0.71   0.68   0.66   0.64   0.94   0.91   0.90   0.90   0.90   0.90


                                                 0.95   0.80   0.70   0.64   0.60   0.57   0.56   0.73   0.57   0.47   0.40   0.36   0.34   0.65   0.45   0.38   0.37   0.36   0.36

                                                  0.9   0.82   0.71   0.65   0.61   0.59   0.57   0.74   0.59   0.49   0.42   0.38   0.35   0.68   0.48   0.41   0.39   0.39   0.39

                                                  0.8   0.84   0.75   0.68   0.65   0.62   0.60   0.78   0.64   0.54   0.47   0.42   0.39   0.74   0.54   0.47   0.45   0.45   0.45




                                                                                                                                                                                      Deaths
                                                  0.7   0.87   0.78   0.72   0.68   0.65   0.64   0.82   0.69   0.59   0.52   0.47   0.43   0.80   0.61   0.53   0.51   0.51   0.51

                                                  0.6   0.89   0.81   0.76   0.72   0.69   0.68   0.86   0.74   0.64   0.57   0.52   0.48   0.86   0.68   0.59   0.57   0.57   0.57

                                                  0.5   0.92   0.85   0.80   0.76   0.73   0.72   0.90   0.79   0.70   0.63   0.58   0.54   0.92   0.75   0.66   0.64   0.64   0.64

                                                         1      2      3      4      5      6      1      2      3      4      5      6      1      2      3      4      5      6
                                                                                            Months until 95% effective vaccine available


                                                                                                           Less effective better by >5%



Figure 15: Burden Averted Using Delayed Vaccine Relative to Switching Policy. Entries are ratios of burden
averted using vaccine 2, a 95% effective vaccine available after delay t2 indicated on horizontal axis, to that from
starting with vaccine 1, with efficacy e1 indicated on the vertical axis, immediately and switching to vaccine 2 at t2 .
Entries greater than 1 favor vaccine 2 and less than 1 favor the switching policy. The policies are no different when
there is no delay, both equivalent to using the more-effective vaccine only.
                                                                                                                                                 55
                                             Second-dose delay policy:          SDF         HDF-60    FDF


                              Efficacy following first dose e 1=80%
                                  Slow-decrease epidemic             Slow-growth epidemic            Fast-growth epidemic
                        100


                         75




                                                                                                                                    Infections
                         50
       % harm averted




                         25


                          0
                        100


                         75




                                                                                                                                    Deaths
                         50


                         25


                          0
                              0. 0
                                 20
                                 50
                                 80
                                 00




                                                              00


                                                                   0. 0
                                                                      20
                                                                      50
                                                                      80
                                                                      00




                                                                                               00


                                                                                                    0. 0
                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                       80
                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                               00
                                 1




                                                                      1




                                                                                                       1
                              0.


                              0.
                              0.
                              1.




                                                           2.

                                                                   0.


                                                                   0.
                                                                   0.
                                                                   1.




                                                                                            2.

                                                                                                    0.


                                                                                                    0.
                                                                                                    0.
                                                                                                    1.




                                                                                                                            2.
                                                             Percentage of pop. vaccinated daily

                              Efficacy following first dose e 1=50%
                                  Slow-decrease epidemic             Slow-growth epidemic            Fast-growth epidemic
                        100


                         75




                                                                                                                                    Infections
                         50
       % harm averted




                         25


                          0
                        100


                         75
                                                                                                                                    Deaths




                         50


                         25


                          0
                              0. 0
                                 20
                                 50
                                 80
                                 00




                                                            00


                                                                   0. 0
                                                                      20
                                                                      50
                                                                      80
                                                                      00




                                                                                             00


                                                                                                    0. 0
                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                       80
                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                             00
                                 1




                                                                      1




                                                                                                       1
                              0.


                              0.
                              0.
                              1.




                                                           2.

                                                                   0.


                                                                   0.
                                                                   0.
                                                                   1.




                                                                                            2.

                                                                                                    0.


                                                                                                    0.
                                                                                                    0.
                                                                                                    1.




                                                                                                                            2.




                                                             Percentage of pop. vaccinated daily

Figure 16: Burden Averted Relative to No Vaccination under Various Delays in Second Dose. Results related
to the same policies studied in Figure 9, but here burden that each policy averts is compared to no vaccination, while
Figure 9 compares SDF to the optimal alternative. SDF refers to second doses first, the status-quo policy of delaying
four weeks until the second dose; FDF refers to first doses first, delaying 12 weeks until the second dose; and HDF-60
refers to a hybrid policy of delaying four weeks for age 60 and over and 12 weeks for under 60.
                                                                                                                                                                             56




                                             Slow-decrease epidemic                     Slow-growth epidemic                       Fast-growth epidemic

                               0.95   1.00    0.90   0.78   0.68   0.61   0.51   1.00   0.85   0.68   0.56   0.49   0.39   1.00    0.77   0.49   0.34   0.29   0.24

                                0.9   1.01    0.92   0.79   0.69   0.63   0.52   1.02   0.87   0.70   0.58   0.51   0.40   1.03    0.81   0.52   0.37   0.32   0.27




                                                                                                                                                                      Infections
                                0.8   1.05    0.95   0.82   0.72   0.65   0.55   1.08   0.92   0.74   0.61   0.54   0.43   1.11    0.89   0.62   0.46   0.41   0.36
 Efficacy of fractional dose




                                0.7   1.08    0.98   0.86   0.75   0.69   0.58   1.15   0.98   0.79   0.66   0.58   0.47   1.18    0.99   0.73   0.58   0.53   0.49

                                0.6   1.13    1.03   0.90   0.79   0.73   0.63   1.23   1.06   0.86   0.72   0.64   0.53   1.26    1.09   0.86   0.73   0.69   0.66

                                0.5   1.18    1.08   0.96   0.85   0.79   0.69   1.35   1.16   0.96   0.81   0.73   0.61   1.34    1.20   1.01   0.90   0.87   0.84


                               0.95   1.00    0.91   0.79   0.70   0.64   0.55   1.00   0.86   0.70   0.59   0.53   0.43   1.00    0.71   0.40   0.25   0.20   0.15

                                0.9   1.02    0.93   0.81   0.72   0.66   0.57   1.03   0.89   0.72   0.61   0.55   0.45   1.08    0.78   0.45   0.29   0.24   0.19




                                                                                                                                                                      Deaths
                                0.8   1.07    0.97   0.85   0.75   0.70   0.60   1.11   0.95   0.78   0.66   0.59   0.49   1.25    0.95   0.60   0.42   0.36   0.30

                                0.7   1.13    1.02   0.90   0.80   0.75   0.65   1.21   1.04   0.85   0.72   0.65   0.54   1.44    1.15   0.80   0.61   0.55   0.49

                                0.6   1.19    1.09   0.96   0.86   0.80   0.70   1.34   1.15   0.95   0.80   0.73   0.61   1.65    1.39   1.05   0.87   0.82   0.77

                                0.5   1.27    1.17   1.04   0.94   0.88   0.78   1.50   1.30   1.08   0.92   0.84   0.72   1.89    1.66   1.36   1.20   1.16   1.12
                                      1

                                              4

                                                     2

                                                            3

                                                                   4

                                                                          8


                                                                                 1

                                                                                        4

                                                                                                2

                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                                                               8
                                             3/

                                                     1/

                                                            1/

                                                                   1/

                                                                          1/




                                                                                        3/

                                                                                               1/

                                                                                                      1/

                                                                                                             1/

                                                                                                                    1/




                                                                                                                                  3/

                                                                                                                                          1/

                                                                                                                                                 1/

                                                                                                                                                        1/

                                                                                                                                                               1/
                                                                                             Dose fraction

                                                      Fractional dose better by >5%            Comparable (within 5%)             Full dose better by >5%



Figure 17: Comparing Full to Alternative Dosing in LICs. Repeats simulation results from Figure 6 on the the
relative burden of infections (top panel) and deaths (bottom panel) under alternative dosing vs full dose but uses LIC
rather than HIC parameters for the size (ni ) and mortality rate ( pi ) in age cohorts. Values lower than 1 favour alternative
dose. Contact matrix and other parameters are the same as in the HIC case. See Figure 6 for additional notes.
References
Ahuja, Amrita, et al. (2021a) "Optimal Dose Stretching Under Constrained Vaccine Supply in a
    Pandemic I: Economic Theory," working paper.

Ahuja, Amrita, et al. (2021b) "Preparing for a Pandemic: Accelerating Vaccine Availability,"
    American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 111: 331-35.

Akbarpour, Mohammad, Eric Budish, Piotr Dworczak, and Scott Duke Kominers. (2021). "An
    Economic Framework for Vaccine Prioritization." working paper, Available at http://web.st
    anford.edu/~mohamwad/Vaccines.pdf.

Anderson, Roy M. and Robert M. May. (1992) Infections Diseases of Humans: Dynamics and
    Control. Oxford University Press.

Ang, Katerina, Jennifer Hassan, Kim Bellware, and Hannah Knowles. (2021). "WHO Chief Urges
    Wealthy Countries to Share Doses Before Vaccinating Kids." The Washington Post, 14 May.

AstraZeneca. (2020) "AZD1222 Oxford Phase III Trials Interim Analysis Results Published in
     The Lancet," Press Release, December 8 [Online only]. Available at https://www.astrazenec
     a.com/media-centre/press-releases/2020/azd1222-oxford-phase-iii-trials-interim-analysis-
     results-published-in-the-lancet.html.

AstraZeneca. (2021) "Pushing boundaries to deliver COVID-19 vaccine across the Globe," Febru-
     ary 2021. Available at https://www.astrazeneca.com/what-science-can-do/topics/technolog
     ies/pushing-boundaries-to-deliver-covid-19-vaccine-accross-the-globe.html.

Antony, Jesmin, Patricia Rios, Chantal Williams, Naveeta Ramkissoon, Sharon E.
    Straus, and Andrea C. Tricco (2020). "Safety and effectiveness of dose-sparing
    strategies for seasonal influenza vaccine". medRxiv 2020.07.31.20163717. doi:
    https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.31.20163717

Bach, Peter B. (2020) "We Can't Tackle the Pandemic Without Figuring out which COVID-19
    Vaccines Work Best," STAT, September 24 [Online only]. Available at https://www.statnews
    .com/2020/09/24/big-trial-needed-determine-which-COVID-19-vaccines-work-best/.

Baden, Lindsey R., et al. (2020) "Efficacy and Safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine,"
    New England Journal of Medicine 384: 403­416.

Bansal, Shweta, Bryan T. Grenfell, and Lauren Ancel Meyers. (2007) "When Individual Behav-
    ior Matters: Homogeneous and Network Models in Epidemiology," Journal of The Royal
    Society Interface 16: 879­971.

Bartsch, Sarah M., et al. (2020) "Vaccine Efficacy Needed for a COVID-19 Coronavirus Vaccine
     to Prevent or Stop an Epidemic as the Sole Intervention," American Journal of Preventive
     Medicine 59: 493­503.

Bloomberg. (2021) "Covid-19 Vaccine Tracker." Accessed June 3, 2021 [Online only]. Available
    at https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/covid-vaccine-tracker-global-distribution/.

                                             57
Branswell, Helen and Adam Feuerstein. (2020) "AstraZeneca Covid­19 Vaccine Is 70% Effective
    on Average, Early Data Show," STAT, November 23 [Online only]. Available at https://ww
    w.statnews.com/2020/11/23/astrazeneca-COVID-19-vaccine-is-70-effective-on-average-e
    arly-data-show.

Bubar, Kate M., et al. (2021) "Model-informed COVID­19 Vaccine Prioritization Strategies by
    Age and Serostatus," Science 371: 916­921.

Burger, Ludwig (2021). "BioNTech-Pfizer raise 2021 vaccine output goal to 2.5 billion doses."
    Reuters, 30 March. Available at https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-bion
    tech-target-idUSKBN2BM1BW.

Burn-Murdoch, John, Anna Gross and Sarah Neville. (2021). "Two vaccine doses needed for
    strong protection against variant found in India, data show." Financial Times, 22 May.

Castillo, Juan C., et al. (2021) "Market Design to Accelerate COVID­19 Vaccine Supply," Sci-
     ence 371: 1107­1109.

Chu, Laurence, et al. (2021) "A Preliminary Report of a Randomized Controlled Phase 2 Trial of
    the Safety and Immunogenicity of mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine," Vaccine 39: 2791­
    2799.

Cobey, Sarah, Daniel B. Larremore, Yonatan H. Grad, and Marc Lipsitch. (2021) "Concerns about
    SARS-CoV-2 Evolution Should not Hold Back Efforts to Expand Vaccination," Nature Re-
    views Immunology 21: 330­335.

Dagan, Noa, et al. (2021) "BNT162b2 mRNA Covid­19 Vaccine in a Nationwide Mass Vaccina-
    tion Setting." New England Journal of Medicine 384: 1412­1423.

Davies, Nicholas G., et al. (2020) "Age-dependent Effects in the Transmission and Control of
    COVID-19 Epidemics." Nature Medicine 26: 1205­1211.

Demombynes, Gabriel. (2020) "COVID-19 Age-Mortality Curves are Flatter in Developing
   Countries." World Bank working paper no. 9313 [Online only]. Available at http://hdl.ha
   ndle.net/10986/34028.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Robert S. Pindyck. (1994) Investment under Uncertainty (first edition).
     Princeton University Press.

Duke Global Health Innovation Center. (2021) "Launch and Scale Speedometer: COVID-19,"
    Duke University [Online only]. Available at https://launchandscalefaster.org/COVID-19.

Dyer, Owen. "COVID-19: Chinese Vaccines May Need Changes to Improve Efficacy, Admits
    Official." BMJ 373 (April 13, 2021): n969. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n969.

Earle, Kristen A., et al. (2021). "Evidence for Antibody as a Protective Correlate for COVID-19
     Vaccines". MedRxiv, 20 March 2021, 2021.03.17.20200246.



                                             58
Ebinger, Joseph E. et al. "Antibody Responses to the BNT162b2 MRNA Vaccine in Individuals
    Previously Infected with SARS-CoV-2." Nature Medicine, 1 April 2021, 1­4. https://doi.or
    g/10.1038/s41591-021-01325-6.

Ella, Raches, et al. (2021) "Safety and Immunogenicity of an Inactivated SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine,
     BBV152: Interim Results from a Double-Blind, Randomised, Multicentre, Phase 2 Trial,
     and 3-Month Follow-up of a Double-Blind, Randomised Phase 1 Trial." Lancet: Infectious
     Diseases [Online only]. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00070-0.

Gans, Joshua S. (2020). "The economic consequences of R = 1: Towards a workable behavioural
    epidemiological model of pandemics," Covid Economics: 41.

Gallagher, Molly E., et al. (2020) "Considering Indirect Benefits is Critical When Evaluating
     SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine Candidates." Nature Medicine 27: 4­5.

Goldberg, Yair et al. (2021) "Protection of previous SARS-CoV-2 infection is similar to that of
    BNT162b2 vaccine protection: A three-month nationwide experience from Israel," medRxiv
    Preprint [Online only]. Available at https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2021/04/24/202
    1.04.20.21255670.

Goldstein, Edward, Marc Lipsitch, and Muge Cevik. (2020) "On the Effect of Age on the Trans-
    mission of SARS-CoV-2 in Households, Schools, and the Community," Journal of Infectious
    Diseases 223: 362­369.

Governo do Estado do Espirito Santo (Governo ES). (2021) "Viana receberá estudo para efetivi-
    dade de vacina contra a Covid-19 em população de 18 a 49 anos," Press Release, June 4
    [Online only]. Available at https://www.es.gov.br/Noticia/viana-recebera-estudo-para-efeti
    vidade-de-vacina-contra-a-covid-19-em-populacao-de-18-a-49-anos.

Hall, V. S., et al. (2021) "Do Antibody Positive Healthcare Workers Have Lower SARS-CoV-2 In-
     fection Rates Than Antibody Negative Healthcare Workers? Large Mulit-centre Prospective
     Cohort Study (the SIREN Study), England: June to November 2020," medRxiv Preprint [On-
     line only]. Available at https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.01.13.21249642v1.

Haute Autorité de Santé (2021). "Une Seule Dose de Vaccine pour les Personnes Ayant déjà
    été Infectées par le SARS-CoV-2." Press release, February 12 [Online only]. Available at
    https://www.has-sante.fr/jcms/p_3237456/en/une-seule-dose-de-vaccin-pour-les-personne
    s-ayant-deja-ete-infectees-par-le-sars-cov-2.

Hogan, Alexandra B., et al. (2020) "Modelling the Allocation and Impact of a COVID-19 Vac-
    cine," Imperial College London [Online only]. doi: 10.25561/82822.

Infectious Disease Society of America. (2021) "Moderan COVID-19 Vaccine," April 26 [Online
     only]. Available at https://www.idsociety.org/COVID-19-real-time-learning-network/vacc
     ines/moderna-COVID-19-vaccine/.

Institut National de Santé Publique du Québec. (2021) "Données Préliminaires sur l'efficacité
      Vaccinale et avis Complémentaire sur la Stratégie de Vaccination Contre la COVID­19 au


                                             59
    Québec en Contexte de Pénurie," Government report, February 12 [Online only]. Available
    at https://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/3111-donnees-preliminaires-efficacite-vaccinale-st
    rategie-covid19.

Irwin, Aisling. (2021). "What it Will Take to Vaccinate the World Against COVID-19." Nature
     News Explainer, 25 March [Online only]. Available at https://www.nature.com/articles/d4
     1586-021-00727-3.

Jackson, Lisa A., et al. (2020) "An mRNA Vaccine Against SARS-CoV-2: Preliminary Report,"
    New England Journal of Medicine 383: 1920­1931.

Juan-Giner, Aitana et al. (2021) "Immunogenicity and Safety of Fractional Doses of Yellow Fever
    Vaccines: A Randomised, Double-Blind, Non-Inferiority Trial." The Lancet 397, no. 10269
    (January 2021): 119­27. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32520-4.

Kampen, Jeroen J.A. van, et al. (2020) "Shedding of Infectious Virus in Hospitalized Patients
   with Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19): Duration and Key Determinants," medRxiv
   Preprint [Online only]. Available at https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.08.2
   0125310v1.

Keech, Cheryl, et al. (2020) "Phase 1-2 Trial of a SARS-CoV-2 Recombinant Spike Protein
    Nanoparticle Vaccine." New England Journal of Medicine 383: 2320-2332.

Kermack, W. O. and A. G. McKendrick. (1991) "Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of
    Epidemics," Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 53: 33­55.

Kominers, Scott Duke, and Alex Tabarrok. (2020) "The Case for a Covid Vaccine Lottery."
   Bloomberg, November 9. Available at https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2
   020-11-09/COVID-19-vaccine-lottery-is-a-winning-strategy.

Krammer, Florian. "Correlates of Protection from SARS-CoV-2 Infection". The Lancet 397, no.
    10283 (17 April 2021): 1421­23.

Khoury, David S., et al. (2021). "Neutralizing Antibody Levels are Highly Predictive of Immune
   Protection from Symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infection." Nature Medicine [Online only]. doi:
   10.1038/s41591-021-01377-8.

Kremer, Michael, Jonathan Levin, and Christopher M. Snyder. (2020) "Advance Market Com-
    mitments: Insights from Theory and Experience," American Economic Review: Papers and
    Proceeding 110: 269­273.

Kupferschmidt, Kai. (2021) "New Coronavirus Variants Could Cause More Reinfections, Require
    Updated Vaccines." Science News, January 15 [Online only]. doi: 10.1126/science.abg6028.

Lopez Bernal, Jamie, et al. (2021a) "COVID-19 Vaccine Coverage in Health-Care Work-
    ers in England and Effectiveness of BNT162b2 mRNA Vaccine Against Infection
    (SIREN): A Prospective, Multicentre, Cohort Study." Lancet, April 23 [Online only]. doi:
    10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00790-X.


                                             60
Lopez Bernal, Jamie, et al. (2021b) "Effectiveness of COVID-19 Vaccines Against the B.1.617.2
    Variant." Public Health England Preprint [Online only]. Available at https://khub.net/docum
    ents/135939561/430986542/Effectiveness+of+COVID-19+vaccines+against+the+B.1.617
    .2+variant.pdf/204c11a4-e02e-11f2-db19-b3664107ac42.

Manheim, David, et al. (2021) "Exploring Risks of Human Challenge Trials For COVID-19."
   Risk Analysis [Online only]. Available at https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.13726.

Mannix, Liam and Aisha Dow. (2021) "Scientists Call for Pause on AstraZeneca Vaccine Roll-
   out," Sydney Morning Herald, 12 January.

Mathieu, Edouard, et al. (2021) "A Global Database of COVID-19 Vaccinations." Nature Human
    Behavior [Online only]. Available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01122-8.

Matrajt, Laura, Julia Eaton, Tiffany Leung, and Elizabeth R. Brown. (2021) "Vaccine Optimiza-
    tion for COVID-19: Who to Vaccinate First?" Science Advances 7: eabf1374.

Mazzucato, Mariana, Jayati Ghosh, and Els Torreele. (2021) "Mariana Mazzucato, Jayati Ghosh
   and Els Torreele on Waiving COVID Patents." The Economist, 20 April.

ModernaTX, Inc. (2020) "Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee Meet-
   ing Presentation: Sponsor Briefing Document Addendum," Company report, December 17
   [Online only]. Available at https://www.fda.gov/media/144453/download.

Moderna, Inc. (2021) "Moderna Announces Additional Investments to Increase Global Supply
   for COVID-19 Vaccine to up to 3 Billion Doses in 2022," Press release, April 29 [Online
   only]. Available at https://investors.modernatx.com/news-releases/news-release-details/m
   oderna-announces-additional-investments-increase-global-supply/.

Monod, Mélodie, et al. (2021) "Age Groups that Sustain Resurging COVID-19 Epidemics in the
   United States," Science 371: eabe8372. doi: 10.1126/science.abe8372.

Mossong, Joél, et al. (2008) "Social Contacts and Mixing Patterns Relevant to the Spread
   of Infectious Diseases," Public Library of Science Medicine 5: e74. doi: 10.1371/jour-
   nal.pmed.0050074.

Muena, Nicolas A., et al. "Long-Lasting Neutralizing Antibody Responses in SARS-CoV-2
   Seropositive Individuals Are Robustly Boosted by Immunization with the CoronaVac and
   BNT162b2 Vaccines." MedRxiv, May 18, 2021, 2021.05.17.21257197.

Mulligan, Mark J., et al. (2020) "Phase I/II Study of COVID-19 RNA Vaccine BNT162b1 in
    Adults," Nature 586: 589­593.

New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group. (2021) "SARS-CoV-2 Immunity-
   escape Variants," working paper, January [Online only]. Available at https://assets.publishin
   g.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/954990/s1015-s
   ars-cov-2-immunity-escape-variants.pdf.



                                              61
Pan-American Health Organization. (2018) "Brazil Launches World's Largest Campaign with
    Fractional-dose Yellow Fever Vaccine," PAHO report, January 25 [Online only]. Available
    at https://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=14065:
    brazil-launches-worlds-largest-campaign-with-fractional-dose-yellow-fever-vaccine&Ite
    mid=135&lang=en.

Pan-American Health Organization. (2009) "Final Recommendations on Pandemic Influenza,"
    PAHO technical report, December 9 [Online only]. Available at https://www.paho.org/en/do
    cuments/technical-advisory-group-final-recommendations-pandemic-influenza-august-20
    09.

Parry, Helen Marie et al. "Single Vaccination with BNT162b2 or ChAdOx1 in Older People
     Induces Equivalent Antibody Generation but Enhanced Cellular Responses after ChAdOx1."
     SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, April 13, 2021.

Paltiel, A. David, Jason L. Schwartz, Amy Zheng, and Rochelle P. Walensky. (2020) "Clinical
     Outcomes Of A COVID-19 Vaccine: Implementation Over Efficacy." Health Affairs 40 (1):
     42­52. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02054.

Pearson, Samantha. (2021) "Brazil's Experiment to Vaccinate Town With Chinese Coron-
    aVac Reduced Covid-19 Deaths by 95%," The Wall Street Journal, May 31. Avail-
    able at https://www.wsj.com/articles/brazils-experiment-to-vaccinate-town-with-chinese-
    coronavac-reduced-covid-19-deaths-by-95-11622479864?redirect=amp

Polack, FP et al.. "Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine." N Engl J
    Med. 2020 Dec 31;383(27):2603-2615. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2034577. Epub 2020 Dec 10.
    PMID: 33301246; PMCID: PMC7745181.

Ramasamy, Maheshi N., et al. (2020) "Safety and Immunogenicity of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Vac-
   cine Administered in a Prime-Boost Regimen in Young and Old Adults (COV002): A Single-
   Blind, Randomised, Controlled Phase 2/3 Trial." Lancet 396(10267): 1979-1993.

Sabino, Ester C., et al. (2021) "Resurgence of COVID-19 in Manaus, Brazil, Despite High Sero-
    prevalence," Lancet 397: 452­455.

Sadoff, Jerald, et al. (2021a) "Interim Results of a Phase 1-2a Trial of Ad26.COV2.S Covid-19
    Vaccine." New England Journal of Medicine 384: 1824-1835.

Sadoff, Jerald, et al. (2021b) "Safety and Efficacy of Single-Dose Ad26.COV2.S Vaccine against
    Covid-19." New England Journal of Medicine [Online only]. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2101544.

Shi, Meng et al. (2021) "A Comparison of the Test-Negative and the Traditional Case-Control
     Study Designs for Estimation of Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness under Nonrandom Vacci-
     nation". BMC Infectious Diseases 17, no. 1 (8 December 2017): 757.

Smyth, Jamie. (2014) "Benefits from Immunization During the Vaccines for Children Program
   Era--United States, 1994­2013," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 63: 352­355.



                                             62
Smyth, Jamie. (2021) "Australian Scientists Cast Doubt on Oxford/AstraZeneca Vaccine," Finan-
   cial Times, January 12. Available at https://www.ft.com/content/8def3a81-9b80-46a1-9742
   -f64b80bfc74f.

Stamatatos, Leonidas, et al. (2021) "Antibodies Elicited by SARS-CoV-2 Infection and Boosted
    by Vaccination Neutralize an Emerging Variant and SARS-CoV-1," medRxiv Preprint, April
    16 [Online only]. doi: 10.1101/2021.02.05.21251182.

Taylor, Luke. (2021) "Covid-19: Spike in Cases in Chile Is Blamed on People Mixing after First
    Vaccine Shot". BMJ 373 (20 April 2021): n1023. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n1023.

Thompson, Mark G., et al. (2021) "Interim Estimates of Vaccine Effectiveness of BNT162b2
   and mRNA-1273 COVID-19 Vaccines in Preventing SARS-CoV-2 Infection among Health
   Care Personnel, First Responders, and Other Essential and Frontline Workers--Eight U.S.
   Locations, December 2020­March 2021," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70: 495­
   500.

Times of India. (2021) "Centre increases gap between two doses of Covishield to 12-16 weeks."
    13 May [Online only]. Available at https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/centre-increa
    ses-gap-between-two-doses-of-covishield-to-12-16-weeks/articleshow/82604870.cms.

U.K. Department of Health. (2020) "Statement from the UK Chief Medical Officers on the Pri-
    oritisation of First Doses of COVID­19 Vaccines," government report, December 30 [Online
    only]. Available at https://www.health-ni.gov.uk/news/statement-uk-chief-medical-officers-
    prioritisation-first-doses-COVID-19-vaccines.

U.K. Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. (2020a) "Optimising the COVID-19
    Vaccination Programme for Maximum Short-term Impact: A Short Statement from the Joint
    Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI)," December 31 [Online only]. Avail-
    able at https://www.cas.mhra.gov.uk/ViewandAcknowledgment/ViewAttachment.aspx?Att
    achment_id=103741.

U.K. Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. (2020b) "Statement from JCVI on Im-
    munisation Prioritisation," U.K. Department of Health, April 16 [Online only]. Available at
    https://app.box.com/s/rejtu4r0q2hj4w8g4dhjsipx1erozhmm.

Unicef. (2021) "COVID-19 Vaccine Market Dashboard," [Online only]. Accessed June 1 at https:
    //www.unicef.org/supply/covid-19-vaccine-market-dashboard.

University of Edinburgh. (2021) "Scottish Vaccine Roll-out Working, Data Suggests," University
    of Edinburgh News, 22 February [Online only]. Available at https://www.ed.ac.uk/news/20
    21/scottish-vaccine-roll-out-working-data-suggests.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2020a) "Development and Licensure of Vaccines to Prevent
     COVID-19 Guidance for Industry." June [Online only]. Available at https://www.fda.gov/
     media/139638/download.




                                             63
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2020b) "Emergency Use Authorization for an Unapproved
     Product Review Memorandum," November 20 [Online only]. Available at https://www.fda.
     gov/media/144416/download.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2020c) "FDA Briefing Document: Moderna COVID-19
    Vaccine," Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee Meeting, Decem-
    ber 17 [Online only]. Available at https://www.fda.gov/media/144434/download.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2020d) "Moderna COVID­19 Vaccine EUA Letter of Au-
     thorization," Letter to ModernaTX, Inc., 25 February [Online only]. Available at https:
     //www.fda.gov/media/144636/download.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2021) "Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: FDA Issues Poli-
     cies to Guide Medical Product Developers Addressing Virus Variants." FDA. February 23,
     2021.

Voysey, Merryn, et al. (2021) "Safety and Efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Vaccine AZD1222
    Against SARS-CoV-2: An Interim Analysis of Four Randomised Controlled Trials in Brazil,
    South Africa, and the UK," Lancet 397: 99­111.

Wadman, Meredith. (2021) "Could Too Much Time Between Doses Drive the Coronavirus to
   Outwit Vaccines?" Science News, January 13 [Online only]. doi: 10.1126/science.abg5655.

Walsh, Edward E. et al. (2020) "Safety and Immunogenicity of Two RNA-Based Covid-19 Vac-
    cine Candidates." New England Journal of Medicine 383: 2439-2450.

Wearing, Helen J., Rohani Pejman, and Matt J. Keeling. (2005) "Two Current Biases in Infec-
    tious Disease Models May Substantially Affect Their Usefulness in Predicting Disease Out-
    breaks," Pulbic Library of Science Medicine 2: e174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020174.

Weintraub, Karen. (2021). "Vaccines 2.0: Next-Generation COVID-19 Shots Will Be Cheaper,
    Easier to Deliver and Protect against More Viruses, Industry Leaders Say." USA TODAY,
    Accessed June 2, 2021 [Online only]. Available at https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/he
    alth/2021/05/31/next-generation-covid-vaccines-cheaper-easier-more-protective/51745320
    01/.

World Health Organization. (2016) "Fractional Dose Yellow Fever Vaccine as a Dose-Sparing
    Option for Outbreak Response." WHO Secretariat information paper, 20 July [Online only].
    Available at https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/246236/WHO-YF-SAGE-16
    .1-eng.pdf;jsessionid=2488808AE277C696A248A99B69146591?sequence=1.

World Health Organization. (2021a) "Interim Recommendations for Use of the Pfizer-BioNTech
    COVID-19 Vaccine, BNT162b2, Under Emergency Use Listing," World Health Organization
    Interim Guidance, January 8 [Online only]. Available at https://www.who.int/publications-d
    etail-redirect/WHO-2019-nCoV-vaccines-SAGE_recommendation-BNT162b2-2021.1.

World Health Organization. (2021b) "The COVAX Facility: Interim Distribution Forecast," World
    Health Organization Report, February 3 [Online only]. Available at https://www.who.int/do


                                             64
    cs/default-source/coronaviruse/act-accelerator/covax/covax-interim-distribution-forecast.p
    df?sfvrsn=7889475d_5.

World Health Organization. (2021c) "WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard," Ac-
    cessed February 20, 2021 [Online only]. Available at https://covid19.who.int/?gclid=Cj0KC
    QiApY6BBhCsARIsAOI_Gjb3ub4-w-VJ_SNIXuDR3K1WsuhjG2Gdrh16CTV_SXKOJ
    v6ZywBQcd0aAvkhEALw_wcB.

Wise, Jacqui. "COVID-19: People Who Have Had Infection Might Only Need One Dose of
    MRNA Vaccine." BMJ 372 (February 2, 2021): n308. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n308.

Willyard, Cassandra. (2021) "Had Covid? You May Need Only One Dose of Vaccine, Study
    Suggests," New York Times, February 1.




                                            65
