                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PRICING WITHOUT MISPRICING

                                         Jianan Liu
                                     Tobias J. Moskowitz
                                     Robert F. Stambaugh

                                     Working Paper 29016
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29016


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




Liu is at the HKU Business School, University of Hong Kong, and Shanghai Mingshi Investment
Co, Ltd.; Moskowitz is at the Yale School of Management, Yale University, AQR Capital
Management, and NBER; Stambaugh is at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
and NBER. AQR Capital is a global investment firm that may or may not use the insights in this
paper. The views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily those of AQR
Capital. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jianan Liu, Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Robert F. Stambaugh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pricing Without Mispricing
Jianan Liu, Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Robert F. Stambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 29016
July 2021
JEL No. G12,G14,G40

                                          ABSTRACT

We offer a novel test of whether an asset pricing model describes expected returns in the absence
of mispricing. Our test assumes such a model assigns zero alpha to investment strategies using
decade-old information. The CAPM satisfies this condition, but prominent multifactor models do
not. While multifactor betas help capture current expected returns on mispriced stocks,
persistence in those betas distorts the stocks' implied expected returns after prices correct. These
results are most evident in large-cap stocks, whose multifactor betas are the most persistent.
Hence, prominent multifactor models distort expected returns, absent mispricing, for even the
largest, most liquid stocks.

Jianan Liu                                       Robert F. Stambaugh
928, KK Leung Building                           Finance Department
The University of Hong Kong                      The Wharton School
Hong Kong, China                                 University of Pennsylvania
jiananl@hku.hk                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
                                                 and NBER
Tobias J. Moskowitz                              stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
tobias.moskowitz@yale.edu
1. Introduction

The joint-hypothesis problem posed by Fama (1970) is central to empirical investigations of
market efficiency. Fama (1991) expresses the inherent challenge as follows:

       We can only test whether information is properly reflected in prices in the context
       of a pricing model that defines the meaning of "properly."

In this study, we ask which pricing model best defines "properly." Such a model offers the
best benchmark for assessing market efficiency and gauging mispricing. Models that capture
expected returns empirically could be identifying mispricing in an inefficient market or com-
pensated risks in an efficient market.1 Which pricing model, among prominent candidates,
would best describe expected stock returns if there were no mispricing? That is the question
addressed in this paper.

    Tests of market efficiency seek to control for the equilibrium model of expected returns or
identify situations where the underlying model differences out (such as examining deviations
from the law of one price, e.g., Lamont and Thaler, 2003, Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan, 2018,
Hu, Pan, and Wang, 2013). Conversely, we seek to avoid having market inefficiency confound
tests of asset pricing models. To implement this idea empirically, we attempt to plausibly
identify when mispricing is absent. Our key assumption is that any current mispricing of a
stock gets corrected in less than ten years. Suppose a long-short spread based on decade-
old information produces a significant alpha with respect to a given pricing model. That
alpha does not reflect mispricing under our assumption, so we infer that the model does not
describe expected stock returns in the absence of mispricing.

    In many ways, finding settings where mispricing is absent or where information must
surely be reflected in prices is an easier task than identifying the right pricing model (or
finding deviations from the law of one price). While our plausible assumption avoids mis-
pricing, a drawback is low power. Tests where we can confidently rule out mispricing may
also be tests that have low power to discriminate among pricing models. For instance, while
information in decade-old characteristics should be reflected correctly in today's prices, many
   1
     Prominent empirical models in asset pricing have received numerous interpretations from both sides of
the market efficiency debate. An inexhaustive list of rational and behavioral theories includes Fama and
French (1993, 1995, 2015), Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) , Zhang (2005), Li, Livdan, and Zhang (2009),
Belo (2010), Li and Zhang (2010), Liu and Zhang (2008), Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), Johnson (2002), Sagi
and Seasholes (2007),Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009), and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015) on the rational, no
mispricing side and Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), Daniel and Titman (1997), Daniel, Hirshleifer,
and Subrahmanyam (1998), Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Hong and Stein (1999), and Stambaugh
and Yuan (2017) on the behavioral, mispricing side.


                                                    1
of those characteristics may have low correlation with the current values of multifactor betas
that pricing models either omit or include. The betas of long-short spreads based on those
lagged characteristics could then be essentially zero, offering little power to discriminate
among models. Nevertheless, some characteristics provide adequate power to distinguish
models based on our test.

   We find that the traditional CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) clears the above
hurdle required of a no-mispricing benchmark model. The long-short spreads we examine are
formed using the Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) mispricing measures that combine multiple
stock characteristics. Consistent with that study's results, we find large CAPM alphas for
spreads based on a mispricing measure's most recent value. As the measure is lagged more,
becoming increasingly stale, the CAPM alphas of the corresponding spreads steadily decay
to insignificant values. In contrast, as the lag increases up to ten years, the same spreads
steadily produce significant alphas with respect to the three-factor model of Fama and French
(1993), the four-factor model of Hou et al. (2015), and the five-factor model of Fama and
French (2015). In essence, we offer a novel and different way to compare asset pricing models
based on stale information that provides a better assessment for the "proper" benchmark
for tests of market efficiency. Using this new criterion, the CAPM is a preferred benchmark
to other prominent multifactor models.

   Our results admit a simple explanation. Observable characteristics can help identify mis-
pricing of some stocks, and multifactor betas can help capture those stocks' expected returns.
Some of those multifactor betas, however, can persist longer than the stocks' mispricing. If
a multifactor beta gets included in a pricing model to help explain expected returns that in
part reflect mispricing, then persistence in that beta injects unhelpful distortions into stocks'
implied expected returns after the mispricing corrects. When a security's mispricing is more
transitory than its multifactor betas, including factors that capture mispricing will distort
the security's expected return absent mispricing. By excluding those multifactor betas, the
CAPM avoids such effects.

   The above explanation is well illustrated using one of the Stambaugh and Yuan (2017)
composite mispricing measures, PERF, which combines measures of profitability, distress,
and momentum. A long-short strategy based on current PERF scores produces large positive
alphas with respect to all of the pricing models examined. If we instead use increasingly
stale PERF scores to construct the spreads, the resulting CAPM alphas decay to insignificant
values, whereas the alphas with respect to the other models remain large and significant.
Persistent multifactor betas on those spreads contribute to the latter models' assigning them


                                               2
low expected returns, translating to positive observed alphas.

    We show that much of the persistence in the PERF spreads' multifactor betas can be
explained by persistence in characteristics that constitute PERF. Our test's power when
based on PERF owes mainly to stocks' PERF characteristics persisting longer than the
associated mispricing. A firm with a currently high PERF score (signaling overpricing) tends
to remain unprofitable and distressed long thereafter. Previous studies link the predictive
abilities of those characteristics to investor underreaction.2 Suppose, for example, investors
underreact to profitability information, paying too high a price for an unprofitable firm.
We expect that the longer a firm has been unprofitable, the less likely are investors to
underreact to currently low profitability. Consistent with that hypothesis, we find that the
longer a stock has had its current PERF score, the less useful that score is in constructing
a profitable long-short strategy today.

   We find our test has little ability to discriminate among models when using spreads
based on decade-old scores for MGMT, the other mispricing measure of Stambaugh and
Yuan (2017). There is less persistence in those spreads' multifactor betas, as there is less
persistence in MGMT's underlying stock characteristics. Consequently, our test then lacks
sufficient power. One property of MGMT scores, though, further supports the above under-
reaction scenario: In contrast to PERF scores, the MGMT scores that have persisted longest
are no less useful in predicting returns than are the scores least like their previous values.
Consistent with this result, unlike the PERF characteristics, the characteristics constituting
MGMT, such as firms' issuance and asset growth, are not linked to underreaction by the
literature.

    Models failing our hurdle for a no-mispricing benchmark can perform well by the usual
empirical metrics that assess a pricing model's ability to describe expected returns condi-
tional on any available information. Those models potentially capture mispricing well, and
some of them are even cast explicitly in the those terms (e.g., Stambaugh and Yuan (2017)).
Such models can be quite useful in capturing and designing trading strategies, but they
are less useful for providing the benchmark model of expected returns to which "properly"
applies in the sense of Fama (1991).

   We conduct our tests separately within different segments of firm size, for a number of
reasons. Consider the largest firms, for example. Our assumption that mispricing disappears
   2
     Although the literature provides empirical evidence linking these characteristics to underreaction, that
evidence plays no role in how Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) group prominent anomalies into PERF versus
their other mispricing score, MGMT.


                                                     3
within 10 years seems especially plausible for the largest stocks, which are liquid and well-
monitored. They should be the stocks least likely to have persistent market frictions impeding
price correction over periods as long as a decade. Correctly pricing large stocks thus seems
the purest test for any proper benchmark model to clear. Moreover, our test relies on decade-
old information being related to current multifactor betas, and betas seem likely to be more
stable over time for the largest firms. We empirically confirm that greater beta stability,
finding larger stocks have more persistent multifactor betas. Consider instead the smallest
stocks. They are probably subject to the greatest mispricing, thereby presenting salient
targets for multifactor models aiming to fit average short-run returns. In this respect, small
stocks could offer our test an especially informative sample for distinguishing such models
from the proper no-mispricing benchmark. Offsetting this potential advantage, however, is
that multifactor betas are least stable for small stocks, making the link between decade-
old information and current betas substantially weaker. Because determinants of our test's
informativeness likely differ across firm size, we allow each segment to speak separately in
the data.

   We find that results differ meaningfully across firm size. Our test delivers its strongest
message when based on the largest stocks in the economy. For stocks larger than the NYSE
70th percentile, and for even the largest 200 names, a long-short PERF strategy produces
significant alpha that lasts for less than a year under the CAPM but persists up to 10 years
under prominent multifactor models. The latter result is striking, given the implausibility
of decade-long mispricing afflicting the largest stocks in the economy. A more plausible
explanation is that the multifactor models significantly distort what these stocks' expected
returns would be in the absence of mispricing. In contrast, although we find greater apparent
mispricing (larger initial alphas) among the smallest firms, the characteristics and betas of
small firms change too rapidly to distinguish among competing models at longer lags of the
mispricing measures--the low power problem. The fact that our results are driven by the
largest firms provides compelling support for the notion that multifactor models pick up
temporary mispricing that then distorts expected returns that should only reflect underlying
risk premia. In other words, the largest firms would seem to present the strongest test of
what model should be the proper benchmark for addressing questions about market efficiency
(Fama, 1991). Our evidence indicates that the CAPM is a better model for this task than
popular multifactor models.

   Our main test lags the Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) measures by 10 years as the way to
purge mispricing effects. As an alternative way to remove mispricing from tests of pricing
models, we create a "no mispricing" sample that eliminates from the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ

                                              4
universe all stocks whose current (unlagged) values of those measures fall in the top or bot-
tom 20%. Within that sample, we then form size-sorted portfolios. We find a strong and
significant size premium once we purge the sample of mispricing, consistent with similar re-
sults in Asness, Frazzini, Israel, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2018) and Stambaugh and Yuan
(2017). We also find that the multifactor models failing our earlier test using 10-year old
information also fail to explain the size premium in the no mispricing sample. Even though
all of those models include a size factor, that factor can be contaminated by mispricing when
formed within the overall stock universe, as explained by Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). The
failure of these models under both of our approaches to removing mispricing effects provides
a robust set of results supporting our conclusion that prominent multifactor pricing models
distort what expected returns would be in the absence of mispricing.

   Finally, given the relative success of the CAPM in our tests versus the multifactor mod-
els, we examine augmented versions of the CAPM that add a beta factor or a no-mispricing
size factor. The multifactor models mentioned earlier relate expected return to betas on
factors constructed using stock characteristics other than market beta. The model of Black
(1972), for example, relates expected return to just market beta but with a lower slope than
in the CAPM. Motivated by that model, we augment the market factor with the betting-
against-beta factor of Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) that allows a non-CAPM role for market
beta. Even that model, relating expected return to just market beta, fails to clear our hurdle
required of a benchmark model. Specifically, this two-factor model produces significant al-
phas for the same 10-year-lagged PERF spread that challenges the other multifactor models.
That is not the case if we construct a beta factor within just the no-mispricing sample of
stocks described earlier. Overall, when combining results under both of our approaches for
removing mispricing effects, we find that the CAPM, augmented with a no-mispricing size
factor, emerges as the best benchmark model for gauging whether information is properly
reflected in prices.

   Our approach and evidence are novel, but they relate to results reported in recent studies
by Cho and Polk (2020), Keloharju, Linnainmaa, and Nyberg (2020), and Yara, Boons, and
Tamoni (2020). We discuss and interpret their results in the context of our tests. Our
framework can reconcile and add perspective to those results, providing a unified explanation.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 motivates our test, discusses
its power, describes our empirical setting, and presents the test results for various pricing
models using spreads formed with decade-old variables. Section 3 provides insights into the
test results by examining the resulting alphas and factor betas for the sequence of lags up


                                              5
to ten years. Section 4 examines the implications of persistent firm characteristics for factor
betas as well as the underreaction scenario. Section 5 discusses our findings in the context of
the related studies mentioned above. Section 6 evaluates models using size-sorted portfolios
of stocks least likely to be mispriced. Section 7 examines augmented versions of the CAPM,
and Section 8 concludes.



2. A simple test of pricing without mispricing

In this section we introduce and apply our test of whether an asset pricing model is the
proper benchmark that delivers expected returns in the absence of mispricing. We begin
by motivating our test and discussing its inherent challenge in achieving power. We explain
why large stocks are likely to provide our test with the greatest power, given their more
persistent multifactor betas, which we document. We then apply the test to a variety of
asset pricing models prominent in the literature.

   In addition to the traditional CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), we test the
three-factor model of Fama and French (1993), the five-factor model of Fama and French
(2015), and the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015). In a later section, we also
apply our test to the CAPM augmented with a size factor that excludes stocks most likely
to be mispriced, following Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). Also later, we test variations on
the CAPM that allow a flatter relation between expected return and market beta, such as
in Black (1972) and as implemented using the betting-against-beta (BAB) factor of Frazzini
and Pedersen (2014).


2.1. Motivation and power

In the absence of mispricing, the proper benchmark asset pricing model should deliver zero
alpha for any investment strategy. This implication motivates the canonical test of market
efficiency, but it is plagued by the joint hypothesis problem identified by Fama (1970): any
test of efficiency is a joint test of the pricing model. The proper model for testing efficiency
is one that characterizes prices in an equilibrium wherein (public) information is correctly
reflected in prices. Such an equilibrium may be just hypothetical in a market with noise
traders or other frictions that hinder information from being incorporated immediately into
prices. Nevertheless, the "proper" model is the one relevant to the joint hypothesis problem
posed by Fama (1970). Under this view, non-zero alphas imply mispricing or an incorrect

                                               6
model, while zero alphas imply no mispricing or, again, an incorrect model. In the latter case,
the incorrect model captures mispricing but not expected returns in the absence thereof. In
other words, the model is not a useful empirical benchmark for gauging the extent of market
inefficiencies.

   Rather than investigate potential market inefficiencies, we explore the other side of the
joint hypothesis. That is, we ask which asset pricing models best capture expected return
in the absence of mispricing. To do so, we assume that decade-old information is correctly
reflected in prices today, however inefficient the market may be in reflecting current in-
formation. Specifically, we test the abilities of various models to produce zero alpha for
strategies based on decade-old stock characteristics. Such a test, we argue, is unlikely to be
contaminated by information inefficiency.

   The test's inherent challenge is achieving power. We seek to discriminate among pricing
models that include or omit various factors. For many assets, however, current betas on
those factors may have little or no relation to decade-old characteristics. Our test relies on
finding assets and characteristics for which the relation between the assets' current betas
and lagged characteristics is strong enough to provide power. We expect the greatest power
to be offered by assets most likely to have stable betas.

   To understand better the nature of our test and its potential power, let ft denote the
vector of returns in month t on the factor portfolios associated with a given asset pricing
model. Consider the time-series regression,

                                        rt =  +  ft + t ,                                        (1)

where rt is the excess return in month t on an investment strategy whose portfolio weights
in month t are determined by sorting a given universe of assets, A, on the values in a vector
x of a characteristic observed (publicly) in month t -  . The value of  depends on the
identity of the characteristic, x, its lag length,  , the set of factors, f , and the asset universe,
A. We represent this dependence via the functional notation,

                                          = (x, , f, A).                                         (2)

Let f  denote the factors in the proper pricing model that captures expected return in the
absence of mispricing. Our test assumes

                                       (x, 120, f  , A) = 0                                      (3)

for any characteristic x. If the market is efficient, then (x, 1, f  , A) = 0 for any x. In an
inefficient market, various choices of x can make (x, 1, f  , A) = 0.

                                                 7
    A model can fail as the no-mispricing benchmark by omitting a relevant factor or by
including an irrelevant one. Omitting a relevant factor from a pricing model is a possibility
long recognized in the literature. In an inefficient market, however, there is a distinct possi-
bility that models are developed with factors that are irrelevant in the absence of mispricing.
The factors in prominent pricing models are generally returns on portfolios formed using
recent information, unavailable before month t - 1. In an inefficient market, a set of such
         ~, can be useful in making
factors, f

                                              ~, A)  0
                                       (x, 1, f                                              (4)

for various choices of a characteristic, x. To reject such a model as being the correct no-
mispricing benchmark, our test relies on detecting

                                      (^       ~, A
                                       x, 120, f  ^) = 0,                                    (5)

                                ^, and a given characteristic, x = x
for a given asset universe, A = A                                  ^.

    Suppose that the model is not the no-mispricing benchmark because f    ~ incorrectly includes
or excludes a given factor, fj . Let j (^      ~, A
                                          x, , f  ^) denote the factor's corresponding element
of  in equation (1) if f ~ includes fj . Otherwise, let j (^     ~, A
                                                            x, , f  ^) denote the factor's slope
coefficient in that regression when f ~ is augmented by fj . A necessary condition for (5) to
obtain, and thus for our test to have power, is that that

                                      j (^       ~, A
                                         x, 120, f  ^) = 0.                                  (6)

That nonzero beta in (6), when multiplied by the non-zero mean (factor premium) of fj ,
then represents the component of expected return that is incorrectly included or excluded,
resulting in the nonzero alpha in (5). The challenge faced by our test, noted earlier, is that
for many asset universes and characteristics, there may be essentially no relation between
individual assets' decade-old values in x
                                        ^ and their current betas on fj . In that scenario, a
long-short strategy based on those values in x
                                             ^ is likely to produce j (^       ~, A
                                                                       x, 120, f  ^) = 0, the
same as one would expect if the assets in the long and short legs were just randomly selected.
Settings more likely to avoid this no-power scenario are those in which j (^      ~, A
                                                                            x, 1, f  ^) = 0 and
the individual assets' betas on fj are stable over time. The latter condition, in turn, seems
more likely when the selected universe, A  ^, comprises assets tending to have more stable
factor betas generally.




                                               8
2.2. Large stocks have the most stable betas

We expect larger stocks to have more stable betas. By virtue of their size, large firms are
likely to have greater inertia, taking longer to change course in ways that would significantly
impact their characteristics relevant to factor exposures. (Aircraft carriers turn more slowly
than destroyers.)

    Table 1 reports evidence consistent with this argument for betas with respect to the five
factors in the model of Fama and French (2015). For each factor, we compute the rank
correlation between stocks' estimated betas in months t and t - 120 for all stocks that exist
in both months. The beta estimate in a given month uses monthly returns in the prior 60
months. The table reports the average rank correlation across all months in our sample,
which covers the period from January 1968 through December 2018. We compute these
rank correlations within each of three size segments. Using NYSE market-cap percentiles as
break points, and using market values at the end of month t - 120, we form three subsamples
consisting of all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks (i) above the 70th percentile, (ii)
between the 70th and 20th percentiles, and (iii) below the 20th percentile. For labeling ease,
we denote these segments as "large," "medium," and "small," while recognizing that other
terms can be applied. For example, we sometimes use "microcaps" as an alternative label
for the stocks below the 20th percentile, following Fama and French (2008).3

    The results in Table 1 reveal that some factors generally have more stable betas than
others. For example, M KT and SM B betas have rank correlations between 0.14 and 0.33,
whereas the correlations for CM A betas are 0.03 or less in magnitude. For all factors,
however, the rank correlation among large stocks exceeds that among the other two size
segments. Moreover, aside from the tiny correlations for CM A betas, the rank correlation
among medium-sized stocks exceeds that among small stocks for each of the other four
factors. We see that beta stability increases in firm size, suggesting large stocks are likely
to provide our test with the most power. Large stocks are also less volatile and more liquid,
which reduces estimation error in their betas, which can also improve power.
    3
      Stocks between the 70th and 20th NYSE percentiles essentially combine categories that are often denoted
as "mid-cap" and "small-cap." In that respect, readers should not misinterpret our "small" labeling.




                                                     9
2.3. Mispricing measures and test power

2.3.1. PERF and MGMT scores


Rather than entertain many separate stock characteristics, we rely on two measures that
combine multiple characteristics. Specifically, we focus on PERF and MGMT, the two "mis-
pricing" measures constructed by Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) using 11 stock characteristics
corresponding to a set of prominent return anomalies analyzed previously by Stambaugh, Yu,
and Yuan (2012, 2014, and 2015).4 We follow this research design for two reasons: parsimony
and transparency. First, Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) show that factors based on PERF and
MGMT, when combined with market and size factors, produce jointly insignificant alphas
for spreads formed using a large number of other stock characteristics beyond the set of 11.
Second, with each of the two measures comprising a manageable number of characteristics,
related behavioral hypotheses can be more easily identified, and we exploit that ability in
analyzing our results.

   Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) construct PERF and MGMT by separating the 11 charac-
teristics into two clusters, with a cluster containing the characteristics most similar to each
other. Similarity can be measured by either time-series correlations of anomaly returns or
average cross-sectional correlations of characteristic rankings. As shown by Stambaugh and
Yuan (2017), both methods produce the same two clusters of characteristics.

   The characteristics in PERF are distress, O-score, momentum, gross profitability, and
return on assets, while those in MGMT are net stock issues, composite equity issues, ac-
cruals, net operating assets, asset growth, and the ratio of investment to assets. Following
Stambaugh and Yuan (2017), we compute a stock's PERF and MGMT scores in a given
month by averaging the stock's rankings with respect to its available characteristics within
each of the two clusters. Higher rankings for a characteristic correspond to lower abnormal
returns, as identified by previous studies documenting the return anomalies. If a stock has
fewer than three non-missing rankings within either cluster, its corresponding mispricing
score (PERF or MGMT) for the month is missing.
   4
     The appendix included in Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) provides detailed descriptions of these 11 char-
acteristics.




                                                  10
2.3.2. Test power for PERF versus MGMT


At a given point in time, the stock characteristics underlying either PERF or MGMT can
correlate cross-sectionally with the stocks' sensitivities to one or more of the factors in a
multifactor pricing model. For such factors, the more stable are stocks' related characteris-
tics, the more likely it is that a spread based on lagged values of those characteristics has
current betas on those factors that differ between the spread's long and short legs. That is,
the more likely is the spread to meet the condition in equation (6).

   Figure 1 reports the persistence in PERF and MGMT scores for large, medium, and
small cap stocks. Within each universe, we rank stocks on their PERF or MGMT scores and
compute the average difference in scores between stocks in the top 30% versus the bottom
30%. We compute that average difference for scores lagged from 1 month ("year 0") to 120
months ("year 10"). The k -year persistence measure, displayed in the figure, is the ratio of
the average score difference for the year-k lag to that for the year-0 lag.

   We see in Figure 1 that PERF scores exhibit substantially greater persistence than
MGMT scores, for all three size categories. By the earlier reasoning, the multifactor be-
tas on PERF spreads are thus more likely to be persistent and thereby satisfy the condition
in equation (6), as compared to MGMT spreads. We also see in Figure 1 that the persistence
in PERF scores is especially strong among large stocks. This observation that large firms
have greater persistence in at least some of their characteristics seems consistent with the
results presented earlier, showing multifactor betas are generally most stable for large stocks.
Overall, given these findings, we expect PERF spreads among the large stocks to provide our
test with the most power. In a later section, we investigate carefully the role that persistence
in characteristics and betas plays in our test results, which are presented next.


2.4. Test results

We begin by applying our test to the CAPM, the Fama-French three- and five-factor models
(denoted as FF3 and FF5), and the Hou-Xue-Zhang four-factor model (denoted as Q4).5
For each of these four models, and for various market-cap subsamples, Table 2 reports
the estimated alphas and associated t-statistics for spreads based on decade-old PERF or
MGMT scores. To construct the spreads, in each month t, stocks are divided into the most
underpriced 30% (M 1), the middle 40% (M 2), and the most overpriced 30% (M 3) based on
   5
       We download factors for the latter three models from the respective authors' websites.


                                                      11
their PERF or MGMT scores in month t - 120. The long-short spread is the M 1 minus M 3
return in month t, and the stocks in each leg are value weighted. This sorting and long-short
construction is performed separately within each of the large, medium, and small segments
of size described earlier, formed based on market values in month t - 120. We also repeat
the above within a "mega cap" subsample of the 200 largest stocks, as well as within the
all-stock universe.

   The most striking results in Table 2 occur when sorting on decade-old PERF scores, in
Panel A. Across all size segments, spreads based on PERF produce relatively small CAPM
alphas, between -14 and 21 basis points (bps) per month, with t-statistics of 1.55 or less
in magnitude. In contrast, among large stocks, the same PERF spreads produce substantial
and statistically significant alphas for all three of the multifactor models, between 29 and
46 bps, with t-statistics between 2.35 and 4.16. A PERF spread among just the mega caps
produces even slightly larger alphas for the three multifactor models, all with significant
t-statistics (between 2.16 and 3.32), despite there being only 200 stocks in that category.

   Consistent with our prior that large stocks offer our test the most power, the large-stock
segment is where we see differing test outcomes across models. For the small-stock segment,
decade-old PERF scores produce nothing close to a rejection for any of the models, with t-
statistics between -0.87 and -1.10. That is, microcaps do not allow our test to say anything
about whether one model serves better than another as the proper no-mispricing benchmark.
This result is unsurprising. Firms that were microcaps a decade ago, if still around today, are
likely to have experienced significant changes in their fundamental characteristics, leaving
their decade-old PERF scores having little relation with their current betas on any of the
various models' factors. A sort on those PERF scores then produces essentially the same
estimated alphas one would expect from a random sort--zero.

   The corresponding results for medium-sized stocks lie between the two contrasting cases
for large and small stocks, just as one would expect with a positive relation between firm size
and test power. For medium stocks, the CAPM is again not rejected, producing an alpha of
-9 bps with a t-statistic of -0.54, the smallest values in absolute magnitude among the four
models. For the multifactor models, the results are mixed: FF5 produces an alpha of 26 bps
with a t-statistic of 2.10, thus being rejected; Q4 produces nearly the same alpha, 25 bps, but
with a marginal t-statistic of 1.64; FF3 is clearly not rejected, with an alpha of 10 bps and a
t-statistic of 0.73. Thus, as compared to small stocks, stronger evidence against at least one
of the multifactor models emerges among medium stocks, but the strongest evidence clearly
resides with large stocks.


                                              12
   Microcaps account for roughly half of the total number of stocks in a given month, so
given the above results for microcaps, including them when sorting on decade-old PERF
scores is likely to shrink the multifactor alphas considerably. Indeed, when sorting within
the all-stock universe, the resulting alphas with respect to FF5 and Q4 are just 17 and 18
basis points, with t-statistics of 1.62 and 1.54, which are smaller than what those models
produce within the large and medium categories. For FF3, however, the all-stock alpha is
31 basis points with a t-statistic of 2.86. For that model, the especially high alpha within
large stocks exerts a strong enough influence to produce a significant all-stock result.

   The results in Panel B of Table 2 reveal that our test cannot discriminate across models
when based on MGMT scores. The alphas for all of the models, across all size categories,
are no greater than 17 bps in magnitude, and the t-statistics are no greater than 1.54 in
magnitude. MGMT scores, in contrast to PERF scores, exhibit less long-term persistence,
and decade-old MGMT scores bear little relation to current estimated betas on the various
model's factors. PERF scores exhibit considerable persistence, as shown earlier, and we later
relate that property to persistence in the PERF spread's multifactor betas. Nevertheless, for
those wishing to set aside this distinction between PERF and MGMT and view the earlier
PERF results as simply "one out of two," we next conduct multiple-comparison versions of
our test to assess whether rejection of the multifactor models based on our test is simply
due to chance.

   The first four columns of results in Table 3 report p-values for a joint test of whether
the PERF and MGMT alphas are jointly zero. This Wald test essentially corresponds to
that of Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989), modified to incorporate a heteroskedasticity-
and autocorrelation-consistent covariance matrix, with p-values thus computed using the
asymptotic chi-square distribution rather than the F -distribution. For large stocks, the
CAPM produces a p-value of 7.5%, whereas the three multifactor models produce p-values
less than 2%. Thus, even when ignoring the distinction between PERF and MGMT that is
relevant to our test's power, a meaningful distinction emerges between the CAPM and the
multifactor models. At a conventional 5% significance level, the joint test does not reject the
CAPM as the appropriate no-mispricing benchmark model, but all three of the multifactor
models are rejected. The same is true within the mega-cap stocks, where the p-values for
the three multifactor models are just slightly higher but still well below 5%, whereas the
CAPM's p-value is 36%. For the medium and small categories, the joint test rejects none of
the four models at conventional significance levels, which is not surprising given the results
for these categories in Table 2.



                                              13
    The last two columns of Table 3 report p-values for tests that set aside the power-relevant
distinctions between not only PERF and MGMT, but also between large and small firms.
The test reported in the next-to-last column is the same as reported in the previous four
columns but performed on the all-stock universe. The last column reports a test of whether
both the PERF and MGMT alphas, in each of the three separate size categories (large,
medium, and small), are all jointly equal to zero. In other words, this last test considers
a six-element vector of alphas. Most of the p-values in both columns exceed conventional
significance levels except those for FF3, which are 1.25% in the next-to-last column and
0.12% in the last column. For that popular, long-standing model, evidently the decade-
old PERF scores of large stocks identify violations strong enough to survive dilution by
including smaller stocks via either of the two underlying channels. Even for the other two
multifactor models, though, their p-values in the last two columns, between 5.7% and 13.1%,
are substantially smaller than those of the CAPM, which are 30% and 18.9%. These all-in
multiple-comparison tests, which ignore power distinctions, echo the same message as earlier
but with weaker statistical significance.

   The results of our test among large stocks reveal what seems an economically significant
shortcoming of popular multifactor models. These models fail significantly in capturing
expected returns on strategies based on decade-old information. Our assumption that such
information should be fully reflected in prices seems especially reasonable for the market's
largest and most liquid stocks. The CAPM, in contrast, fares well in this regard, emerging
as a better candidate for the no-mispricing benchmark model in the sense of Fama (1970).



3. Alphas and betas across lags

To gain additional perspective on the above results, we compute the alphas and factor betas
of portfolios formed by sorting on PERF and MGMT across various lag lengths, up to the
ten years used in the test. We first examine the lag patterns of alphas within each of the
size segments. We then decompose the large-stock alphas across lags, revealing which of
PERF's factor betas exhibit the persistence underlying each multifactor model's rejection
by our test.




                                              14
3.1. Alphas and lag length

Figure 2 plots the alphas of long-short spreads sorted on PERF lagged 1, 12, 24, . . . , 120
months, moving from left to right on the horizontal axis (labeled in years and denoting the
1-month lag as year 0). The top three panels plot the alphas under each model for each
of the three size groups, and the bottom three panels plot their corresponding t-statistics
(displaying reference lines at ±1.65 and ±1.96).

   First consider results for the large stocks, shown in the leftmost plots in Figure 2. When
sorting on PERF scores in the most recent month, the M 1 - M 3 spread produces monthly
alphas between 26 and 62 bps across the four models, all statistically significant (marginally
for Q4). These results echo those in Stambaugh and Yuan (2017), who sort stocks on the
most recent mispricing score (combining PERF and MGMT) and find significant long-short
alphas with respect to various prominent models. When PERF scores are instead lagged
one year, however, we see that the resulting spread's CAPM alpha drops to just 6 bps, with
an insignificant t-statistic of 0.42. In contrast, the spread's monthly alphas with respect to
the other three models are between 30 and 44 bps, with t-statistics between 2.3 and 4.8. At
longer lags, the CAPM alphas remain well smaller than those of the other models and never
rise to statistical significance. In contrast, all three multifactor models produce positive and
significant alphas that generally persist across the multi-year lags.

   The results for medium-sized stocks, in the middle panels of Figure 2, are similar to
those for large stocks in that the CAPM alphas lie consistently well below the multifactor
alphas at longer lags. The statistical significance of the latter alphas is weaker, consistent
with the lower power discussed earlier. For microcaps, in the rightmost plots, alphas for
all models drop sharply as the lag in PERF scores lengthens. That pattern dominates any
cross-model differences, which essentially converge to zero at the longest lags, consistent with
microcaps having little long-run stability in multifactor betas and hence providing no power
to discriminate across models.

   Figure 3 plots alphas across lags for spreads based on MGMT scores. Recall from our
test results that all models, in all size segments, deliver statistically insignificant alphas when
MGMT scores are lagged ten years. Figure 3 reveals a general pattern of substantial declines
in the alphas as the lag length increases from one month to a few years. The basic reason,
noted earlier, is that factor betas for MGMT spreads are less persistent than those for PERF
spreads. Therefore, the MGMT spread's long- and short-leg betas with respect to a given
factor tend to converge more quickly to the same value as the lag lengthens. As a result, the


                                                15
MGMT spreads essentially provide no power for our test when sorting on decade-old scores.

   Figure 4 shows results for the 200 largest stocks (mega caps) that correspond to the
plots for large, medium, and small stocks displayed in Figures 2 and 3. As noted earlier,
even when the PERF and MGMT spreads are formed just within the mega caps, our test
produces results quite similar to those obtained for the broader large-cap segment. The plots
in Figure 4 reveal that this strong similarity of results extends across all lags.

   Even though the MGMT spreads provide our test with insufficient power to distinguish
the various models' suitability as the no-mispricing benchmark, the MGMT spreads do help
provide insight, along with PERF, into potential empirical motivations for multifactor pricing
models. Specifically, consider the alphas for spreads formed based on the most recent scores
(i.e., at the end of the previous month), corresponding to year 0 in the plots. In Figure 3, for
example, note that the alphas based on the most recent MGMT scores are greatest for the
CAPM across all size segments; the multifactor models, especially FF5 and Q4, reduce those
alphas considerably. For PERF, the latter two multifactor models also reduce the year-0
CAPM alphas among the medium and small stocks, which are the segments in which year-0
CAPM alphas are the greatest.

   Combined with our test results, the above year-0 observations suggest a narrative in
which many apparent violations of the CAPM produced by year-0 sorting characteristics,
such as PERF and MGMT, reflect short-term mispricing rather than omitted components
of expected returns under the no-mispricing benchmark model. Multifactor models reduce
apparent year-0 violations by partially capturing mispricing, but the models then distort
expected returns relative to the no-mispricing benchmark. We next investigate sources of
these distortions.


3.2. Decomposing alphas

When applied to large stocks, our test rejects each of the multifactor models as being the
no-mispricing model. To understand better the source of rejections for those three models,
Tables 4 through 6 decompose the large-stock alphas for the PERF and MGMT spreads
plotted in Figures 2 and 3. Specifically, the alpha at each lag is decomposed into the average
return spread minus the product of the spread's estimated beta times the sample-average
factor premium for each factor in the model. Panel A reports results for PERF, and Panel
B reports results for MGMT. For example, the first row of Panel A of Table 4 decomposes



                                               16
the FF3 alpha based on PERF scores from the most recent month (year 0) as follows:

 raw excess return + (-M KT M KT ) + (-SM B SM B ) + (-HM L HM L) = 
       0.21              0.14           0.01            0.26        0.62
Note that the bulk of the alpha is coming from a negative exposure to HM L that delivers
an additional 26 bps above the 21 bps excess return. The alpha of 62 bps, with a t-statistic
of 6.05, confirms the predictive ability of the PERF mispricing measure of Stambaugh and
Yuan (2017).

   When PERF is lagged 12 months or more, in the remaining rows of Panel A in Table 4,
the average return spreads are generally quite small, all less than those at the one-month lag.
As the lag increases, the spread's market-exposure component shrinks slightly but remains
fairly stable, declining from 0.14 at one month to 0.10 at ten years. The SMB component
is consistently tiny. At all lags, the largest component of alpha comes from HML exposure,
whose contribution is 26 bps at year 0 and declines only modestly to 20 bps at year 10. In
other words, the PERF spread's negative beta on HML is very persistent. The persistent
HML beta injects an unhelpful component of implied expected returns for the PERF spread
well after any earlier mispricing associated with the stale PERF scores is likely to have
disappeared. Any persistence in mispricing, especially among large and liquid stocks, is
likely to be far less than the observed persistence in PERF's HML exposure. We see that
the latter persistence accounts for the rejection of FF3 as the no-mispricing benchmark model
in the sense of Fama (1970), based on our test using decade-old PERF scores.

   Panel B of Table 4 reports the corresponding FF3 results for spreads based on lagged
MGMT scores. The average return spread equals 37 bps at a one-month lag (year 0), declines
to 14 bps at a three-year lag, and takes even smaller values at longer lags. The year-0 alpha
of the spread is 27 bps (t-statistic: 3.63), and the year-1 alpha remains nearly that high
at 25 bps (t-statistic: 3.09). At longer lags, however, the alpha is small and insignificant.
The contributions to alpha from market and SMB exposures are consistently small. Most
importantly, in contrast to the PERF results, the contribution from HML exposure shrinks
substantially toward zero as the lag increases. Thus, as the lag in MGMT scores increases,
the average spread return shrinks, but so does the contribution from HML exposure, so no
significant alpha results. The shrinking exposure to HML indicates that the HML betas of
the MGMT spread's long and short legs become fairly similar within a few years. This lack
of persistence in those betas leaves our test based on decade-old MGMT scores with little
power.

   For the FF5 model, Table 5 presents the same alpha decomposition. The results based

                                              17
on PERF spreads, in Panel A, are very similar. The component of alpha arising from HML
exposure is even somewhat larger than in FF3 (Table 4). Again, that exposure persists at
long lags, injecting an unhelpful component of implied expected return well after any previ-
ous mispricing associated with the lagged PERF scores is likely to have been corrected. The
negative alpha components reflecting exposures to the two additional factors, investment
(CMA) and profitability (RMW), help produce lower alphas than does FF3. That result is
consistent with those factors helping to capture mispricing. As the lag increases, however,
PERF's exposures to CMA and RMW shrink and only modestly offset the positive contri-
bution from the persistent HML exposure. The latter contribution, as with FF3, accounts
for our test's rejecting FF5 as the no-mispricing benchmark model. For the spread based on
decade-old PERF scores, the alpha is 29 bps per month with a t-statistic of 2.62.

   Panel B of Table 5 reports results for MGMT spreads. As noted earlier, our test fails to
reject FF5 when using MGMT, as the year-10 alpha is -12 bps with a t-statistic of -1.29.
The results for the other lags in Panel B, however, offer a nuanced interpretation. Recall
from Table 4 that the spread based on MGMT scores from the most recent month (year 0)
produces an FF3 alpha of 27 bps, with a t-statistic of 3.63. That spread's alpha under FF5
drops to just 5 bps with a t-statistic of 0.76. At longer lags, though, the FF5 alphas turn
negative and produce some relatively large t-statistics. For example, if we had designated
seven years rather than ten in our test's no-mispricing assumption, the corresponding test
would have produced a rejection for FF5 using MGMT (t-statistic: -2.47). The reason
for the negative alphas at longer lags is that the MGMT spread's HML, CMA, and RMW
exposures all make relatively persistent negative contributions to alpha that are not offset
by MGMT's positive but progressively smaller average return spreads at longer lags. By
year 10, the most important of the alpha contributions, reflecting exposure to the CMA
investment factor, declines to less than 40% of its year-0 value. Therefore, insufficient beta
stability, as discussed earlier, ultimately dooms our test based on decade-old MGMT scores.
At the same time, somewhat more CMA beta stability would evidently have led to rejection
otherwise. Also worth noting is that MGMT's year-0 alpha under FF3 (and under the
CAPM) is the largest in absolute magnitude across all lags, whereas that same spread's tiny
alpha under FF5 is the second smallest in absolute magnitude across all lags (and just 1 bp
higher than the year-1 value). Viewed collectively, these results for MGMT at least suggest
a scenario, as outlined earlier, in which adding investment and profitability factors helps
capture mispricing and satisfy the condition in equation (4). Persistent exposures to those
factors distort implied expected returns after the mispricing is corrected.

   Table 6 reports the same alpha decomposition for the Q4 model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang

                                             18
(2015). This model does not contain the value factor, HML, which is the main factor causing
distortions to expected returns in the FF3 and FF5 models. Instead of including HML, the
Q4 model adds investment and profitability factors, IA and ROE, to the market and size
factors. Panel A reports the results for the PERF spreads. As with FF3 and FF5, we again
see a factor injecting an unhelpful positive component of alpha at longer lags. Unlike with
those models, where the unhelpful factor is HML, here we see IA is the most troublesome
factor for the Q4 model. The IA column in Panel A of Table 6 contains values very similar
to those in the HML column in Panel A of Table 4 (in fact the year-0 and year-10 values
are identical). As with FF5, PERF's exposure to the profitability factor makes a relatively
persistent negative contribution to alpha that only partially offsets the unhelpful positive
contribution from the most troublesome factor, IA. Thus, we arrive at the same explanation
as to why our test rejects Q4 using PERF; the explanation here simply replaces HML with
IA. We return a bit later to this swapping of roles between IA and HML as the troublesome
factor causing distortions in expected returns.

   Panel B of Table 6 suggests the same interpretation discussed previously as that of
Panel B of Table 5, for the FF5 model. The year-0 MGMT spread's alpha under Q4 is 5
bps, the same as the spread's FF5 alpha. At longer lags, alphas are again negative, larger
in magnitude, and often with substantial t-statistics. As with FF5, the most important
contributor to the negative alphas at longer lags is the investment factor, IA, and the pattern
across years is similar: MGMT's IA exposure exhibits nontrivial persistence across lags, but
not enough to produce a significant alpha at year 10. The IA contribution at year 10 is only
35% of its year-0 contribution.

   Spreads based on lagged PERF scores exhibit persistent exposures to the value factor,
HML, that largely account for the rejections of FF3 and FF5 as the no-mispricing bench-
mark model. Recall that the rejection of the Q4 model, however, owes largely to persistent
exposures to Q4's investment factor, IA. The results in Table 7 reveal that this swapping of
roles as the troublesome factor is due to the fact that Q4 does not include a value factor.
To draw that conclusion, we augment the factors in Q4 with HML and decompose alphas
with respect to that multifactor model. First, our test based on decade-old PERF scores
among large stocks also rejects this model as the no-mispricing benchmark. Specifically, the
year-10 alpha reported in Panel A of Table 7 is 36 bps with a t-statistic of 3.16. The largest
contribution to that alpha is HML exposure, which is strongly persistent across all lags. The
alpha contribution from IA exposure is consistently small. This dominance of HML exposure
for the PERF spread therefore closely resembles that for FF5 in Panel A of Table 5. In other
words, when comparing these results to those in Panel A of Table 6, we see that the IA

                                              19
exposure of the PERF spread simply serves as a stand-in for the spread's HML exposure
when HML is absent, as in Q4.

   Panel B of Table 7 decomposes the MGMT-spread alphas with respect to the model
that augments Q4 with the HML factor. These results are very similar to those for Q4
in Table 6. The alpha is very small for year-0 but is larger and negative at longer lags,
often producing significant t-statistics. The year-10 value is again insignificant because the
investment factor's large negative alpha contribution is not persistent enough as the lag
increases.



4. Persistence in characteristics

A spread based on decade-old PERF scores exhibits a very persistent HML beta, especially
among large stocks. What accounts for that persistence? Is price correction why the spread's
average return is less persistent? We next explore these two questions, focusing on the role
of persistence in characteristics that constitute the PERF score.


4.1. HML beta and persistent characteristics

As noted earlier, a stock's PERF score is the average of its cross-sectional rankings (per-
centiles) on five characteristics: gross profitability, return on assets, distress, O-score, and
momentum. To streamline our analysis, we average the first two characteristics to form a
profitability score, and we average the second two to form a "financial health" score (the neg-
ative of the two distress measures). Figure 5 plots the average, across all sample months, of
the current difference in average profitability scores (Panel A), financial health scores (Panel
B), and momentum scores (Panel C) between the long and short legs of spreads formed on
lagged PERF scores. The lags range from 1 month (0 years) to 10 years, and the shaded
areas indicate plus/minus 1.96 standard errors.

   As Figure 5 indicates, the spread in profitability scores between the PERF spread's long
and short legs (M 1 versus M 3) declines slowly as the lag increases but remains significant
even at the ten-year lag. In other words, the profitability difference between today's high-
and low-PERF stocks tends to persist well into future years. This persistence in profitability
is consistent with the low turnover of profitability-sorted portfolios found by Novy-Marx
(2013) and Frazzini, Israel, and Moskowitz (2018). The second plot in Figure 5 shows that


                                              20
financial health is similarly persistent over a 10-year horizon. The third plot, however, shows
that there is little persistence in momentum differences, which is consistent with the high
turnover of momentum strategies (Frazzini, Israel, and Moskowitz (2018)).

   The persistence in some of PERF's underlying characteristics can explain much of the
persistence in PERF's HML beta. To show this, we first regress individual large stocks'
current HML betas on the stocks' current profitability, financial health, and momentum
scores. The HML betas are estimated in the FF5 model, using the most recent 60 months
of return data. Table 8 reports the coefficients and t-statistics from this Fama-MacBeth
regression. The HML beta exhibits a strongly significant negative relation to profitability (t-
statistic: -8.87) and a marginally significant negative relation to financial health (t-statistic:
-1.81). As observed above, the PERF spread's long-short differences in these characteristics
are quite persistent.

   We can assess the role of that persistence in capturing the persistence in PERF's HML
beta. Specifically, for each characteristic, we multiply the coefficient in Table 8 by the
PERF spread's corresponding long-short difference in the characteristic plotted in Figure
5. We then sum those products across characteristics to obtain the fitted HML beta of the
PERF spread for each lag. Figure 6 plots those fitted betas along with the actual estimated
betas. The fitted betas are uniformly smaller in absolute magnitude than actual betas,
because the regression does not explain all cross-sectional variation in HML betas. Thus,
the regression predicts less of a difference between the betas on the long and short legs than
exists in the actual estimates. However, the fitted betas exhibit strong persistence, not as
much as in the actual beta estimates, but a substantial amount nonetheless. In other words,
persistence in PERF's characteristics accounts for much of the persistence in the HML beta
of the PERF spread. Recall that the latter persistence lies at the heart of our test's rejection
of the multifactor models that include the HML factor.


4.2. Underreaction and persistent characteristics

Our test rejects prominent multifactor models as being the no-mispricing benchmark. As
discussed above, these rejections are consistent with the PERF characteristics, and thus the
PERF spreads' multifactor betas, persisting longer than mispricing. In order for PERF to
persist longer than whatever mispricing it identifies, PERF must be an imperfect indicator of
mispricing. We next explore whether PERF's limitation as a mispricing measure is consistent
with the likely source of mispricing it identifies.


                                               21
   PERF's underlying characteristics are profitability, financial health, and momentum.
Previous studies provide evidence that the abilities of all three characteristics to predict
stock returns reflect the market's underreaction to relevant information.             For example,
Bouchard, Kr¨
            uger, Landier, and Thesmar (2019) link the profitability anomaly to under-
reaction; Dichev (1998) links the financial-health (distress) anomaly to underreaction; Da,
Gurun, and Warachka (2014) link the momentum anomaly to underreaction. Moreover,
Chen, He, Tao, and Yu (2020) directly link the PERF measure's predictive ability to under-
reaction.

   If the mispricing identified by PERF reflects underreaction, then the degree of that
mispricing should depend on how long a stock has had its current PERF score. As observed
earlier, PERF scores are generally quite persistent, especially for large firms, but we expect
any associated mispricing to be less persistent. For a stock whose PERF score has not
changed in years, it seems unlikely that the market would still be underreacting to whatever
information that PERF score initially represented. For a stock whose PERF score recently
changed, underreaction to the underlying information reflected in that score is more plausible.

   To examine this hypothesis, we distinguish PERF scores that have persisted at their
current levels from PERF scores that have more recently changed. We first divide all large
stocks into quintiles based on their PERF scores in the most recent month. Let Qi,t denote the
stock's PERF quintile, with quintile 1 containing the most underpriced stocks and quintile 5
the most overpriced. Within PERF quintiles 1 and 5, we further divide stocks into quintiles,
P1 through P5, based on the persistence of their current score over the past ten years.
Specifically, for each stock i in month t, we compute
                                                                120
            P ersistencei,t = [I (Qi,t = 5) - I (Qi,t = 1)] ×           [Mi,t- - 0.5] ,        (7)
                                                                 =13

where I (Qi,t = n) equals 1 if Qi,t = n and 0 otherwise,  = [10 - int(( - 1)/12)] /9,
and Mi,t- is the percentile rank of stock i based on its PERF score in month t -  , with
a high (low) rank corresponding to overpricing (underpricing). To provide some sense of
the differences in the persistence of scores, P1 firms have on average been in their PERF-
score quintile for around a year (12 months), while P5 firms on average have been in their
respective PERF-score quintiles for about 8 years out of the last 10 years.

   For each persistence quintile, the first row of Table 9 reports the monthly CAPM alphas
of long-short spreads based on PERF quintiles 5 minus 1. The underreaction hypothesis
predicts that long-short spreads based on PERF scores should be the most profitable when
formed with stocks whose PERF scores are the least persistent. Consistent with this hypoth-

                                               22
esis, the PERF-spread alphas are nearly monotonic across persistence quintiles. The spread
based on the least persistent PERF scores has the highest alpha, equal to 89 bps per month
with a t-statistic of 3.57. The spread based on the most persistent scores has an alpha of only
24 basis points with a t-statistic of 1.02. In other words, PERF scores that have remained
relatively constant for a long time exhibit no significant ability to predict returns. The differ-
ence of 66 bps between the least and most persistent PERF quintiles has a t-statistic of 2.29.
The last column shows that a PERF spread using the least persistent scores outperforms
the PERF spread within the entire large-stock segment (regardless of score persistence) by
50 bps per month (t-statistic of 2.69). The results for the PERF spreads in Table 9 strongly
support the underreaction hypothesis and demonstrate why mispricing is likely to be less
persistent than PERF scores and their underlying stock characteristics.

   The difference in persistence between mispricing and PERF scores among large stocks
is essentially what enables our test to distinguish the CAPM from prominent multifactor
models as the better candidate for the no-mispricing benchmark model. On the flip side,
for the objective of finding profitable trading strategies, our results indicate that the stock
characteristics underlying PERF, such as profitability and financial health, are primarily
useful when dissimilar to their past values. When a firm's values of these characteristics
have been similar for a long time, the characteristics lose their predictive ability for returns,
consistent with our premise that mispricing does not last very long in competitive markets.

   The second row of Table 9 repeats the above analysis using MGMT scores to identify
mispricing. The literature generally does not advance underreaction as an explanation for
the predictive abilities of the stock characteristics that constitute MGMT (net stock issues,
composite equity issues, accruals, net operating assets, asset growth, and investment to as-
sets). Consistent with that observation, we see no pattern in the MGMT-spread alphas
across the persistence quintiles. The P1 minus P5 difference in alphas is -11 bps with a sta-
tistically insignificant t-statistic of -0.49. MGMT scores strongly predict returns, however,
delivering a CAPM alpha for the MGMT spread within all large stocks of 64 bps per month
(t-statistic of 5.75).



5. Reinterpreting related studies

When compared to prominent multifactor models, the CAPM emerges as the best choice
for the benchmark model of proper pricing in the sense of Fama (1970). Our test reveals
that the CAPM prices decade-old information better than prominent multifactor models.

                                               23
This finding resembles some other recent results from the literature, but we provide a rather
different motivation and interpretation. Our framework can reconcile and provide some
additional clarity to the other results, offering a unified explanation.

   For example, Cho and Polk (2020) find that the CAPM describes the cross-section of
prices better than it describes expected short-horizon returns. Their finding can be inter-
preted through the lens of our test. Price levels of stocks, viewed as discounted present
values of long-term assets, are likely to depend more on discount rates applied in the long
run than on short-run discount rates. If mispricing gets corrected in the short run, as we
assume, then it affects expected returns (discount rates) only at short horizons. When ab-
stracting from mispricing (conditioning only on decade-old information), we find that the
CAPM best captures expected returns. Likewise, by looking at prices, Cho and Polk (2020)
effectively mitigate the impact of mispricing distortions, present in short-horizon expected
returns, thereby allowing the expected returns that are unaffected by mispricing, i.e., those
prevailing in later periods, to have the dominant voice. The CAPM then fares well, con-
sistent with our results. Cho and Polk (2020) do not interpret their result in this manner
and instead leave it as a challenge for future work. Nor do they conduct tests to distinguish
among various asset pricing models. We offer a novel test that distinguishes among models
and provides a plausible interpretation of their results.

   Keloharju, Linnainmaa, and Nyberg (2020) find that persistent differences in firm char-
acteristics do not predict stock returns, a result that they argue is consistent with long-term
expected returns not varying across stocks. While the authors admit a mispricing expla-
nation, they largely interpret their findings as reflecting changes in firms' risks over time,
with risks reverting toward common levels. We offer a different (and somewhat opposite)
interpretation. That is, the reason persistent characteristics fail to have long-term return
consequences is because they imperfectly identify mispricing, which dissipates faster than
the characteristics change. The characteristics do not matter for expected returns absent
mispricing (e.g., expected returns in more distant periods), consistent with our finding that
the CAPM serves better than do multifactor models as the proper no-mispricing benchmark.
Of course, separate from that point, CAPM betas could also revert to a common level (one),
making long-run return forecasts equal across stocks, but our interpretation does not in-
volve risks converging. In fact, as explained earlier, our test's power to discriminate among
prominent asset pricing models hinges on stability in multifactor betas.

   Yara, Boons, and Tamoni (2020) examine the returns to 56 characteristic-sorted port-
folios up to five years after portfolio formation and compare the return differences between


                                              24
long-short portfolios sorted on the most recent information about a characteristic and lagged
(up to five years) information about a characteristic. For about half of the cross-sectional
characteristics they study, they find significant pricing errors between the recent and old
characteristics that are not captured by existing asset pricing models, where 2/3 of those
characteristics contain more return predictability from newer information and 1/3 contain
more predictability from old information. Yara, Boons, and Tamoni (2020) argue that over-
fitting of short-term return predictability by multifactor models (e.g., Harvey and Liu, 2019)
may explain these findings. However, the authors do not link their findings to asset pricing
theory or explain why some characteristics benefit more from older versus newer information.
They simply show that existing asset pricing models fail to capture characteristic-sorted port-
folio returns at different horizons, where the CAPM does better at pricing older sorts, but
worse at newer sorts, while popular mulitfactor models like the Fama and French five-factor
model do better at pricing newer sorts than older sorts, all consistent with our results. Our
study provides insights into why some characteristics produce alphas for longer periods than
others, depending on which pricing model is used to compute alpha.

   In the next section, we depart from the above studies along yet another dimension, as well
as from our previous analysis. Instead of using lag length to eliminate mispricing effects,
we use current information to form a universe of stocks least likely to be mispriced. We
then assess various pricing models under this alternative way of purging mispricing from the
sample.



6. Size portfolios and mispricing

To evaluate a pricing model as the proper no-mispricing benchmark, our main test uses
spreads based on decade-old information to remove mispricing effects. As an alternative to
using lagged information, in this section we remove mispricing effects using current infor-
mation. However, in order to conduct these tests among stocks that exhibit no mispricing,
we need to sort stocks on an ex ante variable that is plausibly related to expected returns
and/or betas in prominent multifactor models.

   A stock's current market capitalization, or "size," is a good candidate variable to form
portfolios to test these models. Size has long played a prominent role in asset pricing. Since at
least Banz (1981), the literature often finds average returns decrease with size, but to a degree
ranging from negligible to quite substantial, depending on the empirical framework. Recent
studies by Alquist, Israel, and Moskowitz (2018) and Asness, Frazzini, Israel, Moskowitz, and

                                               25
Pedersen (2018) address various issues that bear on the estimated magnitude of the size effect.
The latter study finds that the size premium becomes substantially larger when controlling
for characteristics distinguishing "quality" stocks, those of financially healthy firms with
strong and growing profits. Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen (2019) conclude that quality
stocks are underpriced relative to the opposite "junk" stocks. In a related vein, Stambaugh
and Yuan (2017) argue that mispricing is likely to depress the size premium as typically
computed. In support of that prediction, they find a much larger size premium within a
universe of stocks excluding those most likely to be mispriced. Size also has been linked
to beta differences on prominent factors (Fama and French (1992), Asness, Frazzini, Israel,
Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2018)). These two features of size-sorted portfolios potentially
provide power for our test to distinguish among pricing models.


6.1. Size portfolios without mispriced stocks

We follow essentially the same procedure as Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) for forming size-
sorted portfolios that exclude mispriced stocks. First, we sort stocks by their PERF and
MGMT mispricing scores, and then we exclude from the sample the firms that are the most
over- and underpriced according to those measures. Specifically, we remove any firm that
appears in the top or bottom 20% based on PERF scores or in the top or bottom 20% based
on MGMT scores. The remaining sample is a set of firms that are not particularly over- or
underpriced according to these measures, which we term the "no-mispricing" sample. We
then sort firms within this no-mispricing sample into three size groups (using the NYSE
bottom 30th, middle 40th, and top 30th market capitalization percentiles) and examine the
small-minus-big return spread.

  We compute the alpha of this no-mispricing size spread with respect to each of the pricing
models tested previously: CAPM, FF3, FF5, and Q4. We also compute alphas with respect
to three additional pricing models: (i) equal expected returns, labeled ExRet, for which the
spread's alpha is simply its average return, (ii) the CAPM augmented with the FF3 size
factor, labeled CAPM + SM B F F , and (iii) the CAPM augmented with the no-mispricing
size factor of Stambaugh and Yuan (2017), labeled CAPM + SM B N M . The sample period
is from January 1975 to December 2018.6

   The first row of Table 10 reports the size spread's monthly alpha and corresponding t-
   6
    We begin the sample in 1975 due to a jump in the number of small stocks with the launch of NASDAQ
and the accompanying significant drop in average market capitalization within the small-stock portfolio.



                                                  26
statistic with respect to each model. The spread's average return is 53 bps with a t-statistic
of 3.60. Adjusting for market beta reduces that value only modestly, as the CAPM alpha is
42 bps with a t-statistic of 2.85. More interestingly, the no-mispricing size spread produces
significant alphas with respect to FF3, FF5, Q4, and CAPM + SM B F F , all of which include
a size factor, but one constructed using all stocks (including mispriced stocks). Those models
produce monthly alphas for the no-mispricing size spread between 17 and 31 bps, with t-
statistics between 2.86 and 4.87. Not surprisingly, the spread has a tiny alpha (3 bps) with
respect to CAPM + SM B N M , given that the Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) no-mispricing
size factor is constructed similarly to our no-mispricing size spread.7

   The alternative approach used here for removing mispricing effects relies on excluding
mispriced stocks. Whether we have successfully achieved that rests on an assumption that
mispriced stocks are limited to those whose current PERF or MGMT scores lie in either
of those measures' top or bottom quintiles. That assumption could be less palatable than
assuming the market fails to correctly price decade-old information, as assumed in our main
test. At the same time, it seems hard to argue that the stocks included in our no-mispricing
sample are more mispriced than those that are excluded. Conditional on having successfully
excluded mispriced stocks, we find that the proper no-mispricing benchmark model is neither
the equal-exected-returns model, nor the CAPM, nor any of the multifactor models that
include a size factor formed using all stocks. None of those models is able, in any case,
to price a size spread formed within a subset of stocks having non-extreme values of the
characteristics that PERF and MGMT comprise.


6.2. Size portfolios that include mispriced stocks

The second row of Table 10 reports alphas of a size spread formed within the universe of
all stocks, regardless of their PERF and MGMT scores. The spread again takes the bottom
minus top 30% of size. Each alpha in the second row is lower than the corresponding value
in the first row. Unlike the first row, which has significant positive alphas in all but the last
column, there are no significant positive alphas in the second row, even for the CAPM and
ExRet that do not include a size factor. The average spread return is positive, equal to 14
bps per month, but with a t-statistic of only 0.99; the CAPM alpha is even smaller, at just
5 bps. In our post-1975 sample period, there is no significant difference in average returns
   7
     The Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) size factor takes large (small) firms as all those above (below) the
median market capitalization among all NYSE stocks, whereas the spread here uses the 30th and 70th
percentiles of NYSE stocks in the no-mispricing sample.



                                                  27
between small and large stocks, with or without adjusting for market exposure.

   In fact, the only significant alphas in the second row of Table 10 are negative, for FF3
(-10 bps with a t-statistic of = -2.33) and especially for CAPM + SM B N M (-23 bps with
a t-statistic of -4.17). Coupled with the results in the first row, those in the second row
suggest mispricing is masking a very significant size effect. These results are consistent with
those in Asness, Frazzini, Israel, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2018) and Stambaugh and Yuan
(2017), who find a much stronger size effect when controlling for a quality/junk measure or
the mispricing measures used here, with the former and latter measures sharing a number
of stock characteristics.

   All of the models price the all-in size spread better than the no-mispricing size spread
(comparing absolute values of alphas), except of course for the model that includes SM B N M .
This result echoes the scenario discussed earlier in Section 2, in which prominent models can
do better at capturing expected returns that include mispricing than in capturing expected
returns that do not.

   The third row of Table 10 reports alphas of a size spread formed within the stocks that are
excluded when forming the no-mispricing sample. That is, these are the stocks identified as
the most mispriced, based on their PERF and MGMT scores. Consistent with the difference
between the first two rows, each alpha in the third row is lower still than the corresponding
value in the second row. The average return spread is tiny, at 4 bps, and all of the other
row entries are negative, significantly so for FF3, FF5, and CAPM + SM B N M . Stambaugh
and Yuan (2017) argue that overpricing among small stocks is especially unlikely to be
corrected by arbitrage forces in the market. Therefore, including mispriced stocks lowers the
observed size effect. The results in the final row of Table 10 appear to be consistent with
that argument, where alphas are reported on a size spread formed within only the stocks
identified as being overpriced by PERF and MGMT screens. Within those overpriced stocks,
the size spread's average return is -29 bps, and the spread's alpha with respect to CAPM
+ SM B N M is a very substantial -60 bps per month with a t-statistic of -3.58.



7. Augmented CAPM

The results of the previous section, based on size sorts in a no-mispricing sample, point to
deficiencies in not only the multifactor models but also in the CAPM as being the proper
no-mispricing benchmark model. The CAPM does, however, emerge as a better candidate


                                              28
for the proper benchmark model when we exploit a ten-year lag to eliminate mispricing.
Given the CAPM's relatively favorable showing, we explore various augmented versions
of the CAPM by revisiting the spreads based on lagged PERF and MGMT scores. First,
motivated by the results in Table 10, we examine the CAPM augmented with the Stambaugh
and Yuan (2017) size factor. We then explore versions of the Black (1972) CAPM, adding a
beta factor, with and without the size factor.


7.1. CAPM with a no-mispricing size factor

Figure 7 plots the alpha spreads and corresponding t-statistics for the spreads based on PERF
(left panels) and MGMT (second panels) under the CAPM augmented with the SM B N M
factor. Results are displayed for the large, medium, and small size segments. When lagged
one month (year 0), both PERF and MGMT produce large and significant alphas for all
three segments, especially for small stocks. The alphas decline with lag length, all reaching
insignificant levels at the ten-year lag. Therefore, based on our test that assumes decade-old
information is not mispriced, these results do not reject the CAPM augmented with SM B N M
as being the proper benchmark model of expected returns in the absence of mispricing.


7.2. CAPM with a beta factor

In the model of Black (1972), stocks with low (high) betas earn positive (negative) CAPM
alphas. To capture this effect, the market factor can be augmented with a beta factor that
goes long low-beta stocks and short high-beta stocks. We entertain two versions of such a
model. The first, labeled as "Black," adds a beta factor constructed following the method in
Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972), but applied to the no-mispricing sample of stocks defined
in the previous section. The second version of a beta-factor model, labeled "FP BAB,"
augments the market with the betting-against-beta factor of Frazzini and Pedersen (2014).

   For spreads based on lagged PERF scores, Figure 8 displays alphas and t-statistics com-
puted with respect to six different models: CAPM, Black, and FP BAB, as well as each of
those models augmented with the no-mispricing size factor, SM B N M . Separate panels show
results for each of the three size segments. For small stocks, consistent with earlier results,
all models produce alphas that are quite large at the one-month lag (year 0) but decay to
statistically insignificant levels by year 10. For both the large and medium segments, four
of the six models produce very similar alphas that decay to insignificant levels by year 10.


                                              29
The two exceptions are the FP BAB models, with and without the SM B N M size factor. For
those two models, alphas remain substantially higher and statistically significant at the long
lags.

   An important distinction between the Black and FP BAB models is the stock universe
used to form the beta factors. The former uses the no-mispricing sample, whereas Frazzini
and Pedersen (2014) use the whole stock universe to construct their BAB factor. Thus, mis-
pricing emerges as a potential wedge between the results. Consistent with that possibility,
Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan (2018) argue that mispricing plays a key role in the observed
return spread between low- and high-beta stocks. If at least part of the BAB factor reflects
temporary mispricing that should not be part of the model that would describe expected
returns in an efficient market, then a scenario similar to that discussed earlier for the mul-
tifactor models arises. That is, the mispricing associated with PERF corrects faster than
PERF's sensitivity to the BAB factor decays.

   The above scenario is consistent with the results in Panel A of Table 11, which decomposes
the PERF-spread alphas with respect to the FP BAB model. The PERF spread is formed
within the union of the large and medium segments, given that both cause problems for the
FP BAB models in Figure 8. We see that persistent negative exposure to the BAB factor
results in a persistent positive alpha contribution across lags. At the ten-year lag, that
contribution is the largest component of the alpha, which has a t-statistic of 2.71. Given
the latter, our test rejects FP BAB as the no-mispricing benchmark model. As with the
multifactor models examined earlier, after mispricing dissipates, the persistent exposures to
the BAB factor continue to inject unhelpful components into implied expected returns.

   Panel B of Table 11 reports corresponding results for MGMT-spread alphas. In this case,
exposures to the BAB factor make a persistent contribution to alpha, but the contribution
is negative and offsets positive contributions from average return and market exposure. As
a result, the alpha at the ten-year lag is insignificant, with a t-statistic of -1.08. Therefore,
as with earlier results for all other models, spreads based on MGMT do not allow our test
to distinguish among models as being the no-mispricing benchmark.



8. Conclusion

In an efficient market, public information is properly reflected in prices, but assessing effi-
ciency rests on having a pricing model that defines "properly" (Fama, 1970, 1991). We in-


                                               30
vestigate whether prominent asset pricing models appear suitable for that role. We assume
prices properly reflect at least the information the market has had ten years to evaluate,
whether or not the market is efficient. With this assumption, a model suitable as the no-
mispricing benchmark should clear the seemingly modest hurdle of assigning zero alphas to
long-short spreads based on decade-old information.

   We find a number of prominent models fail that test, assigning significant alphas to
spreads formed using ten-year lags of the Stambaugh and Yuan (2017) PERF mispricing
score. The above models include the three- and five-factor models of Fama and French (1993,
2015), the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), and the CAPM augmented with
the betting-against-beta factor of Frazzini and Pedersen (2014). In contrast, the same long-
short spreads do not produce significant alphas with respect to the traditional CAPM of
Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965). Therefore, the CAPM emerges from this evaluation as
the best candidate for the no-mispricing benchmark.

   It seems reasonable that spreads based on decade-old information should receive zero
alpha with respect to the no-mispricing benchmark. A model can fail to be the no-mispricing
benchmark, assigning nonzero alphas to those spreads, by improperly including or excluding
betas with respect to one or more factors. The main challenge faced by our test, however,
is achieving power. For many stocks, current values of those betas may be unrelated to
decade-old information. The above spreads then have essentially zero betas with respect to
the improperly included or excluded factors, offering our test no power.

   We show that large stocks have the most stable multifactor betas, thus offering our test
the most power. Consistent with that evidence, the large-stock segment is where a ten-
year-lag PERF spread provides the clearest rejections of the various multifactor models as
being the no-mispricing benchmark. Our evidence is consistent with a scenario in which
mispricing, due to underreaction that PERF imperfectly identifies, corrects faster than the
PERF spread's multifactor betas decay toward zero. Those betas then persist in making
unhelpful distortions to implied expected returns. The underreaction scenario is supported
by previous evidence linking price underreaction to the characteristics that constitute PERF
(i.e., firm profitability, financial health, and momentum). We find additional support for
underreaction, focusing on large stocks, where the longer a PERF score remains unchanged,
the less useful it is in predicting returns, consistent with the market not underreacting to
information it has known for some time.

   That large stocks play the strongest role in our test underscores the economic importance
of the results. For these stocks that are the backbone of the US economy, prominent mul-

                                            31
tifactor models evidently distort expected returns purged of mispricing. Mispricing of large
stocks is likely short-lived, given their high visibility and liquidity, so long-run decisions using
expected returns not purged of mispricing could create substantial economic consequences
and capital misallocations.

   The traditional CAPM fares well in our main test using decade-old information to avoid
mispricing, indicating the CAPM provides a better model of expected return purged of
mispricing. The CAPM also appears deficient as the no-mispricing benchmark, however,
when we attempt to eliminate mispriced stocks using current information. When applying
both approaches to eliminating mispricing, we find that augmenting the CAPM with a size
factor, constructed within the no-mispricing sample, appears to provide a better candidate
for the no-mispricing benchmark model.

   Our study is an initial attempt to compare pricing models in the absence of mispric-
ing. Seeking to do so with refinements that potentially offer more power seems a worthy
research objective for asset pricing. Of course, another worthy objective is continuing to
build models that better describe expected returns, whether or not the actual equilibrium
determining those expected returns includes mispricing. Although such models may be less
useful for gauging the extent of market inefficiencies or understanding risk premia, they can
be otherwise useful, such as in designing investment strategies.




                                                32
Figure 1. Persistence in PERF and MGMT scores. The figure displays the persistence
in PERF and MGMT scores for large, medium, and small cap stocks. Within each universe,
we rank stocks on their PERF or MGMT scores and compute the average difference in scores
between stocks in the top 30% versus the bottom 30%. We compute that average difference
for scores lagged from 1 month ("year 0") to 120 months ("year 10"). The k -year persistence
measure, displayed in the figure, is the ratio of the average score difference for the year-k lag
to that for the year-0 lag.




                                               33
Figure 2. Spreads formed with PERF scores. The figure plots estimated alphas (top
panels) and their t-statistics (bottom panels) for long-short spreads formed using lagged
PERF scores. The long (short) leg is the value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the bottom
(top) 30% of PERF scores, which are lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year
10). The PERF percentiles and spreads are constructed separately within three segments
based on (lagged) market capitalization: large (left panels), medium(middle panels), and
small (right panels), with the NYSE's 70th and 20th percentiles used as breakpoints. Alphas
are computed with respect to four pricing models: CAPM, FF3, FF5, and Q4. The lower
subpanels include reference lines at t-statistics of ±1.65 and ±1.96. The sample period is
from 1/1968 to 12/2018.




                                            34
Figure 3. Spreads formed with MGMT scores. The figure plots estimated alphas (top
panels) and their t-statistics (bottom panels) for long-short spreads formed using lagged
MGMT scores. The long (short) leg is the value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the bottom
(top) 30% of PERF scores, which are lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year
10). The MGMT percentiles and spreads are constructed separately within three segments
based on (lagged) market capitalization: large (left panels), medium (middle panels), and
small (right panels), with the NYSE's 70th and 20th percentiles used as breakpoints. Alphas
are computed with respect to four pricing models: CAPM, FF3, FF5, and Q4. The lower
subpanels include reference lines at t-statistics of ±1.65 and ±1.96. The sample period is
from 1/1968 to 12/2018.




                                            35
Figure 4 . Spreads formed with PERF and MGMT scores among mega-caps. The
figure plots estimated alphas (top panels) and their t-statistics (bottom panels) for long-short
spreads formed using lagged PERF scores (left panels) and MGMT scores (right panels). The
long (short) leg is the value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of scores,
which are lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year 10). The percentiles and
spreads are constructed within the sample of mega-cap stocks, consisting of the largest 200
stocks ranked by their most recent market capitalization. Alphas are computed with respect
to four pricing models: CAPM, FF3, FF5, and Q4. The lower subpanels include reference
lines at t-statistics of ±1.65 and ±1.96. The sample period is from 1/1968 to 12/2018.




                                              36
Figure 5 . Spreads in PERF characteristics. Each panel plots the average difference in
a characteristic's current score between the long and short legs of a spreads based on PERF
scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year 10). The spreads contain large-
cap stocks (exceeding the NYSE's 70th percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg contains
stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of that sample's PERF scores lagged from 1 month (year
0) up to 120 months (year 10). The characteristics, which constitute the PERF measure,
are profitability (left panel), financial health (middle panel), and momentum (right panel).
A stock's profitability score is calculated as the simple average of the percentile rankings
of two profitability measures, ROE and gross profitability, with high scores indicating high
ROE and high gross profitability. A stock's financial health score is calculated as the simple
average of the percentile rankings of two distress measures, failure probability and O-score,
with high scores indicating low failure probability and low O-scores. A stock's momentum
score is the percentile ranking of its previous 12-month return, omitting the most recent
month. The shaded areas indicate 95% confidence intervals. The sample period is from
1/1968 to 12/2018.




                                             37
Figure 6 . Fitted and actual HML betas of PERF spreads. The figure plots the
realized (solid line) and fitted (dashed line) HML beta of long-short spreads formed using
lagged PERF scores. The spreads contain large-cap stocks (exceeding the NYSE's 70th
percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg contains stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of
that sample's PERF scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year 10). The
realized beta is the coefficient in a time-series regression using the most recent 60 months.
The fitted beta combines the characteristic spreads in Figure 5 with the regression coefficients
in Table 8. The sample period is from 1/1968 to 12/2018.




                                              38
Figure 7 . Alphas under the CAPM augmented by the no-mispricing SMB. The
figure plots estimated alphas (top panels) and their t-statistics (bottom panels) for long-short
spreads formed using lagged PERF scores (left panels) and MGMT scores (right panels).
The long (short) leg is the value-weighted portfolio of stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of
scores, which are lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year 10). The percentiles
and spreads are constructed separately within three segments based on (lagged) market
capitalization--large, medium, and small--with the NYSE's 70th and 20th percentiles used
as breakpoints. Alphas are computed with respect to the CAPM augmented by the no-
mispricing size factor, SM B N M , constructed as in Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). The lower
subpanels include reference lines at t-statistics of ±1.65 and ±1.96. The sample period is
from 1/1968 to 12/2018.




                                              39
Figure 8 . Alphas under the CAPM augmented by beta factors. The figure plots
estimated alphas (top panels) and their t-statistics (bottom panels) for long-short spreads
formed using lagged PERF scores. The spreads contain large-cap stocks (exceeding the
NYSE's 70th percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg contains stocks in the bottom
(top) 30% of that sample's PERF scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year
10). Alphas are computed with respect to the following models: CAPM; "Black," denoting
the CAPM augmented with a beta factor constructed from the no-mispricing stock sample;
"FP BAB," denoting the CAPM augmented with the betting-against-beta factor of Frazzini
and Pedersen (2014); plus each of the previous three models augmented by SM B N M , the no-
mispricing size factor constructed as in Stambaugh and Yuan (2017). The lower subpanels
include reference lines at t-statistics of ±1.65 and ±1.96. The sample period is from 1/1968
to 12/2018.




                                            40
                                    Table 1
            Correlations between current and decade-old factor betas
The table reports rank correlations of stocks' factor betas in the current month with those ten
years ago. The factors are those in the model of Fama and French (2015), and factor betas
are estimated over the most recent 60 months. The rank correlations are computed separately
within three segments based on (lagged) market capitalization--large, medium, and small--
with the NYSE's 70th and 20th percentiles used as breakpoints. The rank correlations are
averaged across all months from 1/1973 to 12/2018.

                               Factor   Large    Medium      Small
                               M KT      0.27         0.23    0.14
                               SM B      0.33         0.19    0.15
                               HM L      0.17         0.12    0.04
                               CM A      0.03        -0.02   -0.01
                               RM W      0.10         0.06    0.05




                                                41
                                         Table 2
                        Pricing tests using decade-old information

The table reports estimated monthly alphas (in percent) and t-statistics (in parentheses) for
spreads between value-weighted portfolios of stocks in the bottom and top 30% of stocks sorted
by PERF scores (Panel A) and MGMT scores (Panel B), both lagged 10 years. Results are
shown for the total stock universe as well as mega-cap stocks (largest 200) and three market-
cap segments formed using NYSE percentiles as breakpoints: large (above 70th), medium
(70th to 20th), and small (below 20th). The models tested are the CAPM of Sharpe (1964)
and Lintner (1965), the three- and five-factor models of Fama and French (1993, 2015), denoted
FF3 and FF5, and the four-factor model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), denoted Q4. The
sample period is 1/1968 to 12/2018.

                           Mega-cap   Large      Medium       Small     All stocks

                              Panel A: Spreads based on PERF
                  CAPM       0.19      0.21       -0.09        -0.14      0.12
                            (1.16)    (1.55)     (-0.54)      (-0.87)    (0.99)
                  FF3        0.48      0.46           0.10     -0.16      0.31
                            (3.32)    (4.16)         (0.73)   (-0.96)    (2.86)
                  FF5        0.29      0.29           0.26     -0.20      0.17
                            (2.16)    (2.62)         (2.10)   (-1.10)    (1.62)
                  Q4         0.37      0.33           0.25     -0.21      0.18
                            (2.21)    (2.35)         (1.64)   (-0.99)    (1.54)

                              Panel B: Spreads based on MGMT
                  CAPM       0.03      0.09           0.12     0.07       0.08
                            (0.32)    (1.01)         (0.74)   (0.41)     (0.86)
                  FF3        -0.04     0.02       -0.04        -0.01     -0.01
                            (-0.34)   (0.18)     (-0.28)      (-0.09)   (-0.09)
                  FF5        -0.17     -0.12      -0.02        -0.08     -0.14
                            (-1.54)   (-1.29)    (-0.14)      (-0.45)   (-1.43)
                  Q4         -0.14     -0.12      -0.08        -0.11     -0.14
                            (-1.17)   (-1.15)    (-0.49)      (-0.58)   (-1.34)




                                                42
                                        Table 3
                                 Multiple comparison tests

The table entries are p-values. The first five columns test joint equality to zero of the alphas
in Panels A and B of Table 2 for the corresponding size segment. The last column tests joint
equality to zero of the six element vector containing the alphas in Panels A and B of Table
                                                                                                .
2 for each of the large, medium, and small size segments. The test is that of Gibbons, Ross,
and Shanken (1989) but with a heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent covariance
matrix

                Mega-cap     Large    Medium    Small    All stocks   Large/Medium/Small
        CAPM      0.3581     0.0753   0.6050    0.6727    0.2999            0.1892
        FF3       0.0006   < 0.0001   0.7237    0.6363    0.0125            0.0012
        FF5       0.0285     0.0126   0.1434    0.3957    0.1102            0.0570
        Q4        0.0233     0.0197   0.2124    0.3404    0.1309            0.1005




                                               43
                                    Table 4
                     Decomposing Fama-French three-factor alphas

The table decomposes alphas with respect to the three-factor model of Fama and French (1993) for
spreads formed using PERF scores (Panel A) and MGMT scores (Panel B). The spreads contain
large-cap stocks (exceeding the NYSE's 70th percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg contains
stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of that sample's scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months
(year 10). Summing, within a row, the ExRet column (spread's average return) and the subsequent
columns of - ×factor mean (contributions of factor exposures) gives the  column (spread's monthly
percent alpha). The last column reports the alpha's t-statistic. The sample period is from 1/1968
to 12/2018.


          Year   ExRet    -M KT M KT       -SM B SM B      -HM L HM L               t()

                                Panel A: Spreads based on PERF
           0      0.21           0.14            0.01             0.26     0.62     6.05
           1      0.02           0.11            0.01             0.29     0.44     4.81
           2      0.01           0.10            0.01             0.27     0.39     3.89
           3      0.08           0.08            0.01             0.24     0.41     4.28
           4      0.08           0.08            0.01             0.24     0.41     4.24
           5      0.03           0.09            0.00             0.23     0.35     3.65
           6      0.08           0.09            0.00             0.23     0.40     3.99
           7      0.07           0.08            0.01             0.23     0.39     3.54
           8     -0.05           0.08            0.01             0.23     0.27     2.61
           9      0.02           0.09            0.01             0.20     0.33     2.95
           10     0.15           0.10            0.01             0.20     0.46     4.16

                                Panel B: Spreads based on MGMT
           0       0.37          0.05            0.02           -0.17     0.27     3.63
           1       0.32          0.05            0.02           -0.14     0.25     3.09
           2       0.12          0.05            0.03           -0.13     0.06     0.77
           3       0.14          0.06            0.02           -0.11     0.11     1.18
           4       0.02          0.05            0.02           -0.11    -0.02    -0.23
           5       0.09          0.04            0.02           -0.12     0.03     0.38
           6       0.11          0.04            0.01           -0.11     0.05     0.55
           7       0.04          0.03            0.02           -0.10    -0.01    -0.14
           8       0.02          0.01            0.02           -0.10    -0.04    -0.43
           9       0.05          0.02            0.02           -0.06     0.03     0.34
           10      0.03          0.03            0.02           -0.06     0.02     0.18




                                                44
                                          Table 5
                           Decomposing Fama-French five-factor alphas

  The table decomposes alphas with respect to the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015) for
  spreads formed using PERF scores (Panel A) and MGMT scores (Panel B). The spreads contain
  large-cap stocks (exceeding the NYSE's 70th percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg contains
  stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of that sample's scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months
  (year 10). Summing, within a row, the ExRet column (spread's average return) and the subsequent
  columns of - ×factor mean (contributions of factor exposures) gives the  column (spread's monthly
  percent alpha). The last column reports the alpha's t-statistic. The sample period is from 1/1968
  to 12/2018.


Year   ExRet   -M KT M KT      -SM B SM B    -HM L HM L     -CM A CM A     -RM W RM W               t()

                                    Panel A: Spreads based on PERF
  0     0.21        0.11          -0.00            0.31         -0.10            -0.10      0.42    3.39
  1     0.02        0.10           0.01            0.30         -0.01            -0.07      0.34    3.69
  2     0.01        0.09           0.01            0.26          0.01            -0.07      0.31    3.30
  3     0.08        0.07           0.01            0.26         -0.05            -0.05      0.32    3.29
  4     0.08        0.07           0.01            0.27         -0.07            -0.05      0.31    3.05
  5     0.03        0.07           0.00            0.26         -0.06            -0.04      0.26    2.63
  6     0.08        0.07           0.01            0.27         -0.08            -0.02      0.32    3.02
  7     0.07        0.06           0.01            0.27         -0.09            -0.04      0.28    2.49
  8    -0.05        0.06           0.01            0.27         -0.09            -0.05      0.15    1.47
  9     0.02        0.06           0.00            0.25         -0.09            -0.08      0.17    1.49
 10     0.15        0.08          -0.00            0.25         -0.11            -0.08      0.29    2.62

                                   Panel B: Spreads based on MGMT
 0      0.37        0.01           0.02          -0.07          -0.23            -0.05     0.05     0.76
 1      0.32        0.01           0.02          -0.04          -0.21            -0.06     0.04     0.53
 2      0.12        0.02           0.02          -0.07          -0.15            -0.06    -0.11    -1.28
 3      0.14        0.03           0.01          -0.03          -0.17            -0.07    -0.10    -1.06
 4      0.02        0.02           0.01          -0.04          -0.16            -0.09    -0.25    -2.88
 5      0.09        0.01           0.01          -0.05          -0.16            -0.08    -0.19    -2.10
 6      0.11        0.01          -0.00          -0.05          -0.14            -0.07    -0.14    -1.50
 7      0.04       -0.00           0.00          -0.02          -0.17            -0.08    -0.23    -2.47
 8      0.02       -0.01           0.01          -0.06          -0.10            -0.06    -0.19    -1.79
 9      0.05        0.00           0.01          -0.02          -0.10            -0.07    -0.12    -1.29
 10     0.03        0.01           0.01          -0.03          -0.09            -0.06    -0.12    -1.29




                                                  45
                                      Table 6
                         Decomposing Hou-Xue-Zhang Q4 alphas

The table decomposes alphas with respect to the four-factor "Q4" model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang
(2015) for spreads formed using PERF scores (Panel A) and MGMT scores (Panel B). The spreads
contain large-cap stocks (exceeding the NYSE's 70th percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg
contains stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of that sample's scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up
to 120 months (year 10). Summing, within a row, the ExRet column (spread's average return) and
the subsequent columns of - × factor mean (contributions of factor exposures) gives the  column
(spread's monthly percent alpha). The last column reports the alpha's t-statistic. The sample period
is from 1/1968 to 12/2018.


   Year   ExRet    -M KT M KT        -SM B SM B       -ROE ROE     -IA IA              t()

                                 Panel A: Spreads based on PERF
    0      0.21           0.09           -0.01          -0.31         0.26     0.26    1.61
    1      0.02           0.08            0.03          -0.19         0.36     0.30    2.33
    2      0.01           0.08            0.04          -0.10         0.37     0.40    3.26
    3      0.08           0.07            0.03          -0.07         0.29     0.40    3.28
    4      0.08           0.06            0.02          -0.09         0.27     0.35    2.62
    5      0.03           0.07            0.02          -0.07         0.27     0.32    2.48
    6      0.08           0.07            0.02          -0.06         0.26     0.37    2.83
    7      0.07           0.06            0.03          -0.07         0.26     0.34    2.46
    8     -0.05           0.06            0.04          -0.09         0.25     0.20    1.54
    9      0.02           0.07            0.02          -0.11         0.22     0.22    1.60
    10     0.15           0.08            0.02          -0.11         0.20     0.33    2.35

                              Panel B: Spreads based on MGMT
    0       0.37          0.03            0.03           0.00       -0.37     0.05     0.71
    1       0.32          0.02            0.02          -0.06       -0.33    -0.02    -0.31
    2       0.12          0.02            0.03          -0.07       -0.29    -0.18    -2.01
    3       0.14          0.04            0.02          -0.05       -0.25    -0.10    -1.00
    4       0.02          0.03            0.01          -0.11       -0.26    -0.30    -2.98
    5       0.09          0.02            0.01          -0.08       -0.26    -0.21    -1.90
    6       0.11          0.02           -0.00          -0.06       -0.23    -0.16    -1.44
    7       0.04          0.01            0.01          -0.07       -0.24    -0.24    -2.20
    8       0.02          0.00            0.01          -0.08       -0.20    -0.25    -2.05
    9       0.05          0.01            0.02          -0.07       -0.13    -0.12    -1.07
    10      0.03          0.02            0.02          -0.06       -0.13    -0.12    -1.15




                                                 46
                                     Table 7
                   Decomposing alphas with respect to Q4 plus HML

 The table decomposes alphas with respect to the four-factor "Q4" model of Hou, Xue, and Zhang
 (2015), augmented by the HML factor of Fama and French (2015), for spreads formed using PERF
 scores (Panel A) and MGMT scores (Panel B). The spreads contain large-cap stocks (exceeding the
 NYSE's 70th percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg contains stocks in the bottom (top) 30%
 of that sample's scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year 10). Summing, within a
 row, the ExRet column (spread's average return) and the subsequent columns of - × factor mean
 (contributions of factor exposures) gives the  column (spread's monthly percent alpha). The last
 column reports the alpha's t-statistic. The sample period is from 1/1968 to 12/2018.


Year   ExRet   -M KT M KT     -SM B SM B     -ROE ROE      -IA IA    -HM L HM L             t()

                                Panel A: Spreads based on PERF
  0     0.21         0.11         -0.01         -0.24       -0.02          0.24     0.29    2.27
  1     0.02         0.09          0.02         -0.11        0.06          0.25     0.34    3.59
  2     0.01         0.10          0.04         -0.04        0.11          0.21     0.43    4.50
  3     0.08         0.08          0.03         -0.00        0.03          0.22     0.44    4.64
  4     0.08         0.07          0.02         -0.02       -0.01          0.24     0.38    3.72
  5     0.03         0.08          0.02          0.00       -0.00          0.23     0.35    3.60
  6     0.08         0.08          0.02          0.01       -0.01          0.23     0.41    3.87
  7     0.07         0.07          0.03         -0.01       -0.01          0.23     0.38    3.29
  8    -0.05         0.07          0.03         -0.03       -0.01          0.22     0.23    2.10
  9     0.02         0.08          0.02         -0.05       -0.02          0.20     0.25    2.11
 10     0.15         0.09          0.01         -0.05       -0.05          0.21     0.36    3.16

                                Panel B: Spreads based on MGMT
  0     0.37        0.03           0.03         -0.03       -0.26        -0.09     0.04     0.57
  1     0.32        0.02           0.02         -0.07       -0.25        -0.06    -0.03    -0.45
  2     0.12        0.02           0.03         -0.09       -0.19        -0.08    -0.20    -2.35
  3     0.14        0.04           0.02         -0.07       -0.18        -0.06    -0.11    -1.11
  4     0.02        0.02           0.02         -0.13       -0.16        -0.08    -0.31    -3.37
  5     0.09        0.02           0.01         -0.10       -0.16        -0.08    -0.22    -2.14
  6     0.11        0.02           0.00         -0.08       -0.13        -0.08    -0.17    -1.65
  7     0.04        0.01           0.01         -0.08       -0.17        -0.06    -0.25    -2.34
  8     0.02       -0.00           0.01         -0.11       -0.10        -0.09    -0.26    -2.34
  9     0.05        0.01           0.02         -0.09       -0.06        -0.06    -0.13    -1.17
 10     0.03        0.02           0.02         -0.08       -0.05        -0.06    -0.13    -1.29




                                                47
                                   Table 8
         Large stocks' HML betas regressed on their PERF characteristics

The table reports the coefficient estimates from a monthly Fama-Macbeth regression of large
stocks' HML betas on their scores for the characteristics that constitute PERF: profitability,
financial health, and momentum. A stock's profitability score is calculated as the simple
average of its percentile rankings for two profitability measures, ROE and gross profitability
(high scores indicating high ROE and high gross profitability). The financial-health score is
the simple average of the percentile rankings of two distress measures, failure probability and
O-scores (high scores indicating low failure probability and low O-scores). The momentum
score is the percentile ranking of past 12-month returns, omitting the most recent month.
HML betas are estimated based on the five-factor model of Fama and French (2015), using
the prior 60 months of monthly data. The sample period is from 1/1968 to 12/2018.

                                 Characteristic       Coefficient
                                 Profitability         -0.0087
                                                       (-8.87)
                                 Financial health      -0.0019
                                                       (-1.81)
                                 Momentum               0.0008
                                                        (0.70)




                                                 48
                                       Table 9
                  Effects on alpha of persistence in mispricing scores

The table reports the CAPM alphas for spreads based on PERF and MGMT scores, condi-
tional on the degree to which the stocks' current scores have persisted. The universe consists
of large stocks (above the NYSE's 70th percentile) and is first divided into quintiles based
on the most recent PERF scores or MGMT scores. Within the top and bottom quintiles of
those mispricing scores, we rank stocks based on P ersistencei,t , which measures the degree
to which a stock's score in past years has been similar to the current level. Specifically, with
the past window truncated at 10 years,
                                                                 120
             P ersistencei,t = [I (Qi,t = 5) - I (Qi,t = 1)] ×           [Mi,t- - 0.5] ,
                                                                  =13

where Qi,t is stock i's quintile of PERF or MGMT score in month t, I (Qi,t = k ) equals 1 if
Qi,t = k and 0 otherwise,  = [10 - int(( - 1)/12)] /9, and Mi,t- is the rank percentile
of stock i based on its PERF or MGMT score in month t -  . For different quintiles of
P ersistencei,t , the table reports the monthly percent CAPM alpha for PERF and MGMT
spreads (20% most underpriced minus 20% most overpriced), with t-statistics in parentheses.
The sample period is from 1/1968 to 12/2018.

                                                                             Least              Least
                   Among stocks whose current scores have persisted          minus       All    minus
                   Least Next 20% Next 20% Next 20% Most                     most      stocks    all

 PERF spreads      0.89       0.65        0.44         0.19        0.24       0.66      0.40     0.50
                  (3.57)     (2.81)      (2.03)       (0.94)      (1.02)     (2.29)    (2.22)   (2.69)
 MGMT spreads      0.50       0.85        0.86         0.64        0.62       -0.11     0.64     -0.14
                  (3.19)     (4.82)      (4.89)       (3.84)      (3.36)     (-0.49)   (5.75)   (-0.91)




                                               49
                                       Table 10
             Alphas for size spreads that include or exclude mispriced stocks

 The table reports monthly alphas for spreads between small and large stocks in samples that
 include or exclude mispriced stocks. The latter are defined as stocks whose PERF and MGMT
 scores are not in the top or bottom 20% of either measure. The sample of mispriced stocks
 contains those excluded by the previous criterion, and the sample of overpriced stocks contains
 those with PERF or MGMT scores in the top 20%. The size spread goes long stocks whose
 market capitalizations are below the 30th and short those above the 70th percentile of NYSE
 stocks. Alphas are computed with respect to seven models: the CAPM of Sharpe (1964)
 and Lintner (1965); the three- and five-factor models of Fama and French (1993),Fama and
 French (2015), denoted FF3 and FF5; the four-factor model of Hou et al. (2015), denoted
 Q4; the model assuming equal expected returns, denoted ExRet; the CAPM augmented
 by the SMB factor of Fama and French (1993), denoted CAPM+SM B F F ; and the CAPM
 augmented by the no-mispricing size factor constructed as in Stambaugh and Yuan (2017),
 denoted CAPM+SM B N M . Alphas are in percent, and t-statistics are in parentheses. The
 sample period is from 1/1975 to 12/2018.

Sample                CAPM       FF3       FF5        Q4      ExRet     CAPM+SM B F F   CAPM+SM B N M

No mispriced stocks    0.42      0.22      0.19      0.17      0.53          0.31            0.03
                      (2.85)    (3.90)    (3.52)    (2.86)    (3.60)        (4.87)          (0.88)
All stocks             0.05      -0.10     -0.07     -0.03     0.14          0.02           -0.23
                      (0.34)    (-2.33)   (-1.47)   (-0.42)   (0.99)        (0.32)         (-4.17)
Mispriced stocks       -0.04     -0.21     -0.16     -0.08     0.04         -0.07           -0.30
                      (-0.32)   (-3.96)   (-2.55)   (-1.04)   (0.28)       (-1.19)         (-4.18)
Overpriced stocks      -0.32     -0.37     -0.49     -0.40     -0.29        -0.35           -0.60
                      (-1.55)   (-2.31)   (-2.96)   (-2.19)   (-1.41)      (-2.14)         (-3.58)




                                                    50
                                  Table 11
             Decomposing alphas with respect to the CAPM plus BAB

The table decomposes alphas with respect to the CAPM, augmented by the betting-against-beta
(BAB) factor of Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), for spreads formed using PERF scores (Panel A)
and MGMT scores (Panel B). The spreads contain large-cap stocks (exceeding the NYSE's 70th
percentile), and each spread's long (short) leg contains stocks in the bottom (top) 30% of that
sample's scores lagged from 1 month (year 0) up to 120 months (year 10). Summing, within a
row, the ExRet column (spread's average return) and the subsequent columns of - × factor mean
(contributions of factor exposures) gives the  column (spread's monthly percent alpha). The last
column reports the alpha's t-statistic. The sample period is from 1/1968 to 12/2018.


                  Year   ExRet     -M KT M KT        -BAB BAB             t()

                                 Panel A: Spreads based on PERF
                   0      0.21           0.08           0.08      0.38    2.24
                   1      0.02           0.05           0.22      0.29    2.12
                   2      0.01           0.05           0.24      0.29    2.16
                   3      0.08           0.04           0.24      0.36    2.84
                   4      0.08           0.04           0.23      0.35    2.57
                   5      0.03           0.04           0.24      0.31    2.44
                   6      0.08           0.04           0.24      0.36    2.71
                   7      0.07           0.04           0.22      0.33    2.25
                   8     -0.05           0.04           0.18      0.17    1.19
                   9      0.02           0.05           0.14      0.21    1.48
                   10     0.15           0.06           0.16      0.38    2.71

                              Panel B: Spreads based on MGMT
                   0      0.37           0.11          -0.20     0.28     2.61
                   1      0.32           0.09          -0.20     0.21     2.10
                   2      0.12           0.09          -0.24    -0.04    -0.35
                   3      0.14           0.09          -0.22     0.01     0.07
                   4      0.02           0.09          -0.26    -0.15    -1.50
                   5      0.09           0.08          -0.26    -0.09    -0.93
                   6      0.11           0.07          -0.21    -0.03    -0.36
                   7      0.04           0.06          -0.23    -0.14    -1.36
                   8      0.02           0.05          -0.23    -0.16    -1.48
                   9      0.05           0.05          -0.19    -0.09    -0.89
                   10     0.03           0.06          -0.19    -0.11    -1.08




                                                51
References
Alquist, R., Israel, R., Moskowitz, T., 2018. Fact, fiction, and the size effect. Journal of
  Portfolio Management 45, 34­6.

Asness, C., Frazzini, A., Israel, R., Moskowitz, T. J., Pedersen, L. H., 2018. Size matters, if
  you control your junk. Journal of Financial Economics 129, 479­509.

Asness, C., Frazzini, A., Pedersen, L. H., 2019. Quality minus junk. Review of Accounting
  Studies 24, 34­112.

Banz, R. W., 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.
  Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3­18.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment. Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics 49, 307­343.

Belo, F., 2010. Production-based measures of risk for asset pricing. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 57, 146­163.

Berk, J. B., Green, R. C., Naik, V., 1999. Optimal investment, growth options, and security
  returns. Journal of finance 54, 1553­1607.

Black, F., 1972. Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing. Journal of Business
  45, 444­455.

Black, F., Jensen, M. C., Scholes, M. S., 1972. The capital asset pricing model: Some
  empirical tests. In: Jensen, M. C. (ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets , Praeger,
  New York, pp. 79­121.

Bouchard, J.-P., Kr¨
                   uger, P., Landier, A., Thesmar, D., 2019. Sticky expectations and the
  profitability anomaly. Journal of Finance 74, 639­674.

Chen, X., He, W., Tao, L., Yu, J., 2020. Media coverage and underreaction-related anoma-
  lies. Working paper, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, University of
  International Business and Economics, and Tsinghua University .

Cho, T., Polk, C., 2020. Asset pricing with price levels. Working paper, London School of
  Economics .

Da, Z., Gurun, U. G., Warachka, M., 2014. Frog in the pan: Continuous information and
  momentum. Review of Financial Studies 27, 2171­2218.

                                               52
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A., 1998. Investor psychology and security mar-
 ket under-and overreactions. Journal of Finance 53, 1839­1885.

Daniel, K., Titman, S., 1997. Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional variation in
 stock returns. Journal of Finance 52, 1­33.

Dichev, I. D., 1998. Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? Journal of Finance 53,
  1131­1147.

Du, W., Tepper, A., Verdelhan, A., 2018. Deviations from covered interest rate parity.
  Journal of Finance 73, 915­957.

Fama, E. F., 1970. Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. Journal
  of Finance 25, 383­417.

Fama, E. F., 1991. Efficient capital markets: II. Journal of Finance 46, 1575­1617.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of
  Finance 47, 427­465.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
  Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3­56.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1995. Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns.
  Journal of Finance 50, 131­155.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2008. Dissecting anomalies. Journal of Finance 63, 1653­1678.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial
  Economics 116, 1­22.

Frazzini, A., Israel, R., Moskowitz, T. J., 2018. Trading costs. Working paper, AQR Capital
  Management and Yale University .

Frazzini, A., Pedersen, L. H., 2014. Betting against beta. Journal of Financial Economics
  111, 1­25.

Gibbons, M. R., Ross, S. A., Shanken, J., 1989. A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio.
  Econometrica pp. 1121­1152.

Gomes, J., Kogan, L., Zhang, L., 2003. Equilibrium cross section of returns. Journal of
  Political Economy 111, 693­732.


                                             53
Harvey, C. R., Liu, Y., 2019. A census of the factor zoo. Working paper, Duke University
  and Purdue University .

Hong, H., Stein, J. C., 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
  overreaction in asset markets. Journal of Finance 54, 2143­2184.

Hou, K., Xue, C., Zhang, L., 2015. Digesting anomalies: an investment approach. Review of
  Financial Studies 28, 650­705.

Hu, G. X., Pan, J., Wang, J., 2013. Noise as information for illiquidity. Journal of Finance
  68, 2341­2382.

Johnson, T. C., 2002. Rational momentum effects. Journal of Finance 57, 585­608.

Keloharju, M., Linnainmaa, J. T., Nyberg, P., 2020. Long-term discount rates do not vary
  across firms. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. W., 1994. Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and
  risk. Journal of Finance 49, 1541­1578.

Lamont, O. A., Thaler, R. H., 2003. Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech
  stock carve-outs. Journal of Political Economy 111, 227­268.

Li, D., Zhang, L., 2010. Does q-theory with investment frictions explain anomalies in the
  cross section of returns? Journal of Financial Economics 98, 297­314.

Li, E. X., Livdan, D., Zhang, L., 2009. Anomalies. Review of Financial Studies 22, 4301­4334.

Lintner, J., 1965. The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
  portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13­37.

Liu, J., Stambaugh, R. F., Yuan, Y., 2018. Absolving beta of volatility's effects. Journal of
  Financial Economics 128, 1­15.

Liu, L. X., Whited, T. M., Zhang, L., 2009. Investment-based expected stock returns. Journal
  of Political Economy 117, 1105­1139.

Liu, L. X., Zhang, L., 2008. Momentum profits, factor pricing, and macroeconomic risk.
  Review of Financial Studies 21, 2417­2448.

Novy-Marx, R., 2013. The other side of value: The gross profitability premium. Journal of
  Financial Economics 108, 1­28.


                                              54
Sagi, J. S., Seasholes, M. S., 2007. Firm-specific attributes and the cross-section of momen-
  tum. Journal of Financial Economics 84, 389­434.

Sharpe, W. F., 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
  of risk. Journal of Finance 19, 425­442.

Stambaugh, R. F., Yu, J., Yuan, Y., 2012. The short of it: Investor sentiment and anomalies.
  Journal of Financial Economics 104, 288­302.

Stambaugh, R. F., Yu, J., Yuan, Y., 2014. The long of it: Odds that investor sentiment
  spuriously predicts anomaly returns. Journal of Financial Economics 114, 613­619.

Stambaugh, R. F., Yu, J., Yuan, Y., 2015. Arbitrage asymmetry and the idiosyncratic volatil-
  ity puzzle. Journal of Finance 70, 1903­1948.

Stambaugh, R. F., Yuan, Y., 2017. Mispricing factors. Review of Financial Studies 30, 1270­
  1315.

Yara, F. B., Boons, M., Tamoni, A., 2020. New and old sorts: Implications for asset pricing.
  Working paper, Nova SBE, Tilburg University, Rutgers Business School .

Zhang, L., 2005. The value premium. Journal of Finance 60, 67­103.




                                             55
