                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      BODY-WORN CAMERAS AND ADJUDICATION OF CITIZEN COMPLAINTS
                      OF POLICE MISCONDUCT

                                        Suat Çubukçu
                                       Nusret M. Sahin
                                         Erdal Tekin
                                       Volkan Topalli

                                     Working Paper 29019
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29019


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




Kathryn Johnson provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Suat Çubukçu, Nusret M. Sahin, Erdal Tekin, and Volkan Topalli. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Body-Worn Cameras and Adjudication of Citizen Complaints of Police Misconduct
Suat Çubukçu, Nusret M. Sahin, Erdal Tekin, and Volkan Topalli
NBER Working Paper No. 29019
July 2021
JEL No. K4,K42

                                           ABSTRACT

Police body-worn cameras (BWCs) have been the subject of much research on how the
technology's enhanced documentation of police/citizen interactions impact police behavior. Less
attention has been paid to how BWC recordings affect the adjudication of citizen complaints
against the police. We employ citizen complaint data from the Chicago Police Department and
Civilian Office of Police Accountability filed between 2012-2020 to determine the extent to
which BWC footage enhances the efficacy of evidence used to formulate a conclusion of
responsibility, and whether bias against complainants based on race would subsequently be
reduced. Accordingly, we exploit the staggered deployment of BWCs across 22 Chicago police
districts over time to estimate the effect of BWCs on these outcomes. Our findings indicate that
BWCs led to a significant decrease in the dismissal of investigations due to insufficient evidence
("not sustained") as well as a significant increase in disciplinary actions against police officers
("sustained" outcomes") with sufficient evidence to sanction their misconduct. We further find
that disparities in complaints across racial groups for the "unsustained" category fade away with
the implementation of BWCs.

Suat Çubukçu                                     Erdal Tekin
Department of Justice, Law, and Criminology      School of Public Affairs
School of Public Affairs                         American University
Hurst Hall 206H                                  4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
American University                              Washington, DC 20016-8070
4400 Massachusetts Ave., NW                      and IZA
Washington, DC 20016-8070                        and also NBER
suat@american.edu                                tekin@american.edu

Nusret M. Sahin                                  Volkan Topalli
School of Social and Behavioral Sciences         Department of Criminal Justice and Criminology
Criminal Justice Program                         Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Stockton University                              Georgia State University
101 Vera King Farris Dr.                         55 Park Place #514
Galloway, NJ 08205                               Atlanta GA 30303
Nusret.Sahin@stockton.edu                        vtopalli@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

        Recent sociopolitical events in the United States ­ particularly the Black Lives Matter

movement and related calls for law enforcement accountability ­ have brought research on the

interaction between police and citizens to the fore. A good deal of investigations in this area have

shifted from research on police management of citizenry to more contemporary concepts of

police accountability, emerging from the general finding that citizen trust in the police has been

low, particularly among communities of color and particularly during periods of social and

political upheaval (McManus et al., 2019). A key facet of this dissatisfaction stems from the

extent to which police oversight of citizens has come under fire for being too harsh or biased

(Bell, 2017; Smith & Merolla, 2019). 1 In the most extreme cases, citizen deaths or injury at the

hands of police have garnered great attention, resulting in widespread protests and calls for

legislative change. The occurrence of high-profile use of deadly force incidents against African

American citizens, such as the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, the death of Eric Garner

in New York, and the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis has worsened the tension between

the police and African American community: In the wake of the death of George Floyd in 2020,

a Gallup survey (2020) found that the level of confidence in law enforcement had dipped to was

at its lowest level in the US since 1994.

        Against the backdrop of such social and racial justice movements has been a consistently

rising interest in the establishment of accountability processes for law enforcement, predicated

on the belief of citizen activists that the police are insufficiently accountable and biased against




1
  African Americans in particular, are skeptical of routine policing practices and feel racially profiled by them
(Warren, 2011; Horrace & Rohlin, 2016). Several studies also found that African Americans are disproportionately
targeted in stop-and-frisk practices (Meares, 2009; Lotan, 2020; NYCLU, 2012, page 5). For instance, African
Americans are three to five times more likely than Whites to rate the occurrence of police misconduct as "very
often" than Whites (Weitzer & Tuch, 2004).


                                                        3
minorities. Attempts to establish greater accountability have ranged from the social (e.g.,

protests) to the political (e.g., the establishment of citizen boards) to the tactical (e.g., the use of

technology to objectively establish the nature of controversial police citizen interactions).

        Technology, in particular, has been viewed as a potential game-changer, especially in

those instances where the parties differ on what transpired during a given encounter and where

there is a need to reconcile conflicting perceptions of a particular event. Receiving the most

attention has been the use of body-worn cameras (BWCs) by the police. These devices are

viewed by some as a panacea for the proper adjudication of police/citizen conflicts. BWCs are

assumed to provide objective information about encounters between police and citizens which

result in a negative outcome and where accounts of the event differ between the police and

citizens (Ariel et al., 2016, 2018; Braga et al., 2017).

        The implementation of BWCs is interpreted differently by these two constituencies,

however. Citizens generally view the technology as providing an objective bulwark against the

police officers' ability to unfairly implicate individuals in crimes or to dissemble their own

involvement in criminal or unprofessional activities (White et al., 2017; Sousa et al., 2018).

Police institutions (including law enforcement agencies, police unions, and police advocacy

groups) have demonstrated mixed attitudes toward the blanket application of BWCs (see, Huff,

et al., 2018; Nowacki & Willits, 2018). On the one hand, those law enforcement policy-makers

and decision-making constituencies who are proponents of BWC implementation see the

technology as capable of either protecting their officers from unfair accusations by citizens or as

a method to ensure officers conform to administrative directives, protocols, and tactics (Smykla

et al., 2016; Lawshe, et al., 2019). On the other hand, individual officers and police unions

generally have taken a dim view of the technology and expressed that it hinders optimal police




                                                    4
decision-making. Primarily, they claim officers may be reluctant fully carry out their duties in

response to concerns about potential legal action or personal safety (Phillips et al., 2020) 2. This

is not surprising. Historically, police do not always embrace the adoption of technologies

designed to record their activities and may be resistant to the imposition of behavioral

monitoring mechanisms. In the case of BWCs, it could be expected that the cultural acceptance

of this technology as `business as usual' might take some time and effort, as would be reflected

in the informal police code of conduct and police leadership's active promotion of their usage

(Huff et al., 2018; Kyle & White, 2017). At least some resistance to the release of camera

footage for external review appears to be based on a police subculture known to engender insular

attitudes, secrecy, and preservation of the in-group (Reiner, 2017; Quispe-Torreblanca &

Stewart, 2019) 3. It's worth noting that these views are well known to the public, who view them

as a lack of respect for oversight or a desire to operate outside of legal proscriptions regarding

police discretion and use of force (Miethe et al., 2019).

         To these ends, a great deal of research on BWC technology has focused on attitudes and

opinions of law enforcement institutions, police officers, and citizens. Less studied is the

technology's actual impact on the processes that drive these attitudes and beliefs, i.e., the

outcomes of investigations following negative interactions between police officers and citizens.

Do BWCs actually make a difference? Given the involvement of BWC videos in spurring recent


2
  This is in line with explanations for claims of a "Ferguson Effect," where crime rates were assumed to have
increased as a result of police tamping down their enforcement engagement ("de-policing") out of concerns that they
would be held responsible for exercising discretion during encounters with the public, and an overall sense that their
efforts as societal guardians were being disparaged by constituencies that did not understand the day-to-day rigors
and stresses of police work (see, e.g., Nix & Wolfe, 2018) combined with residents refraining from reporting crimes
and cooperating with police due to increased mistrust ("de-legitimizing").
3
  For instance, in their news article covering the New York City Police Department's (NYPD) unwillingness to
share BWC footage with the Civilian Complaint Review Board (CCRB), Umansky and Simon (2020) discussed how
the NYPD withheld video evidence and paper records from the CCRB in at least a couple of incidents despite the
law requiring the NYPD's cooperation with the agency. They also noted that the percentage of sustained cases
doubled when the investigators had access to BWC footage.


                                                          5
protests and political actions, the extent to which they affect such outcomes in a way that

addresses assumed race-based differences in police treatment of citizens has yet to be fully

explored. To that end, the current paper attempts to answer a number of important, interrelated

questions. First, do BWCs provide information that changes the outcome of complaint

investigations? If we assume that an increase in the amount or quality of evidence improves

investigative outcomes, and if we further assume that such improvements accrue to BWC-based

evidence, then we would expect to see such changes reflected in actual investigation outcomes.

Second, if BWC technology does provide objective information regarding police/citizen

interactions, does that improvement in evidence support the claims of different categories of

complainants in a way that illuminates whether there is a race effect? Here, our interest is in

testing whether the racial bias claims of citizen advocates would be reflected in the outcomes of

subsequent investigations. Such putatively biased outcomes could be the result of racial bias

inherent in police-citizen interactions (see Taylor et al., 2009), bias in subsequent investigations

and adjudication processes, or both. Put simply, if investigations of police misconduct unfairly

disadvantage minorities, does BWC technology even the playing field?

       To address this question, we evaluate the impact of BWC technology on the outcomes of

investigations using complaint data from the Chicago Police Department between 2012-2020.

Our research design exploits the staggered deployment of BWCs among 22 Chicago police

districts over time to determine the extent to which evidence from BWC technology altered the

outcomes of investigations in general and more specifically, whether the inclusion of BWC

evidence differentiated the outcomes of police misconduct claims based on the race of

complainants. Our results indicate support for the contention that before the adoption of BWCs,

CPD's citizen complaint investigations process was producing biased outcomes, and that BWC




                                                  6
technology helps investigators to conduct more impartial investigations that reduce racial

disparities in outcomes.

II. The Impacts of Body-Worn Cameras on Police Behavior and Citizen Complaints

         BWCs have their origins in the implementation of police vehicle dash camera systems for

enforcing motor vehicle related crimes (e.g., drunk driving) in the 1990s. The introduction of

BWC technology in the mid-2000s facilitated the recording of police-citizen encounters and

ushered in a new era of police accountability based on enhanced expectations by the public of

"objective" evidence of what "really happens" during police-citizen encounters resulting from

pervasive distribution of BWC footage on media. 4 The reasons for the wide adoption of these

systems in recent years reflect motivations of citizens, 5 police organizations, and policy-makers,

and can be summarized as follows: (1) to promote a more civilized officer and citizen behavior

during encounters, (2) to evidence citizens' wrongdoing in court and to protect officers from

spurious complaints, (3) to strengthen supervision and meet the public's expectations of

transparency, and (4) to reduce the number of use-of-force incidents and to effectively resolve

citizen complaints (Bowling & Iyer, 2019; Coudert et al., 2015; Lum et al., 2019; Maghan et al.,

2002).

         The research examining the impact of BWCs on the nature of police-citizen interactions

and citizen perceptions is mixed. The Rialto Randomized Controlled Trial in 2012 was the first

to evaluate the causal impact of BWCs on excessive use-of-force and citizens' complaints


4
  Many would argue that the historical precursor for the expectation that visual footage could serve as a medium for
exposing police misconduct were the "Rodney King" tapes, depicting the beating of King by members of the LAPD
shot by videographer George Holliday from his balcony in 1991 (see Granot et al., 2018; Stuart, 2011). The tapes
received extensive airplay in media outlets and engendered expectations of convictions for the officers involved.
When they were acquitted, Los Angeles and other cities in the US experienced rioting and protests.
5
  The deadly shooting of Michael Brown in 2014 heightened public expectations of police accountability and both
the public and the federal government urged the police in the United States to widely adopt BWCs (Bowling & Iyer,
2019; Culhane et al., 2016). Subsequent police shootings of unarmed Black men have further intensified such
expectations.


                                                         7
against the police. In a study examining its outcomes, Ariel et al. (2015) found that deployment

of BWCs led to an approximately 50 percent decrease in use-of-force incidents and a roughly 90

percent decrease in citizen complaints against officers. Furthermore, the authors concluded that

the benefits of the equipment justified its costs, at a ratio of 4:1. In their follow-up work,

Sutherland et al. (2017) found that the sharp reduction in the rate of complaints against Rialto

police officers persisted in the three years post-experiment (page 5).

       However, a recent body of work failed to support these findings, fueling skepticism. For

example, in June 2015, the Washington, DC, Metropolitan Police Department partnered with

policing scholars to design and execute a randomized controlled trial on BWCs in that city, with

2,224 MPD officers randomly assigned into "no BWC" or "BWC" groups. In their evaluation,

Yokum et al. (2017) did not find a statistically significant effect of BWCs in reductions of use-

of-force incidents or citizen complaints. They concluded that adopting BWCs does not

necessarily result in a change in police behavior and that law enforcement agencies should not

expect significant reductions in the use-of-force or civilian complaints after their adoption.

Similarly, in their systematic review of seventy BWC studies, Lum and colleagues (2019) found

that more recent research on BWCs did not reveal extensive changes in officer behavior in

response to camera deployment. They surmised this could be because officers are aware that

BWCs provide them with evidence to refute unjustified citizen complaints. Most concerning was

their conclusion that the commonly observed reductions in complaints after BWC adoption fail

to persist over time (Lum et al., 2019; Koslicki et al., in press).

       Meanwhile, the impact of BWC technology on citizen complaints does seem positive. For

example, Jennings et al. (2015) tested the effect of BWCs on officers' response-to-resistance

incidents and citizen generated complaints in a randomized controlled trial in Tampa, Florida.




                                                   8
Officers allocated to the treatment group (i.e., wearing BWCs) had fewer response-to-resistance

incidents and received fewer external complaints compared to those without BWCs. Another

randomized controlled trial conducted by Braga and colleagues (2018) in Las Vegas, Nevada

found that officers wearing BWCs received fewer use-of-force complaints and reports than those

without cameras and that the resolution of citizen complaints was swifter when video evidence

was made available to investigators (see also findings by Katz et al., 2014, and Groff et. al.,

2020). Similarly, Peterson and Lawrence (2020) employed a panel analysis suggesting the

deployment of BWCs led to fewer complaints after the deployment of the cameras, and that this

drop continued over time. The question remains however, whether the decrease in citizen

complaints is because of changes in police behavior (i.e., officers know they are being recorded

and BWCs produce a "civilizing effect"?) 6 or because citizens are less likely to file false

complaints due to the availability of video evidence.

III. Research Context

The Chicago Police Department and Adjudication of Citizen Complaints

         The Chicago Police Department (CPD) is the second-largest municipal law enforcement

agency in the United States, with 22 different police districts and more than 12,500 sworn

officers as of January 2021. As is the case with other large municipalities in the US, the city has



6
  The assumption of a civilizing effect of BWCs on police follows a basic tenet of routine activities theory (Cohen &
Felson, 1979), where offenders (here, rule-breaking police) are assumed to be deterred from criminal behaviors
(here, infractions of due process) by the presence of a capable guardian (here, video evidence). However, this
assumption of accountability discounts the extent to which humans habituate to the presence of social monitoring
systems or processes. In developmental psychology this effect (or the lack thereof) is a cornerstone of observational
studies of parent/child interactions in the home ­ many of which employ camera technology ­ to observe family
dynamics. Despite concerns that the presence of cameras would influence parents to engage in impression
management (Tedeschi, 2013) with researchers by tempering their behavior toward children, research finds
overwhelmingly that camera presence in the home is quickly discounted by parents via habituation and that their
behavior reverts to pre-study behavior patterns, even those that would be strongly criticized for being
counterproductive, overly harsh, or inappropriate (see Aspland & Gardner, 2003; Gardner, 2000; Vuchnich, 1988).
This same phenomenon has been raised as a concern with BWCs and policing (Fan, 2018; Katz, Kurtenbach, Choate
& White, 2015).


                                                         9
a controversial history of police misconduct, disproportionately directed against the African

American community (Balto, 2020). The report on the Investigation of the Chicago Police

Department, published by the Department of Justice Civil Rights Division and US Attorney's

Office for the Northern District of Illinois in 2017 7 highlights the role of flaws in the police

accountability system on the extensive level of CPD officers' involvement in unreasonable use of

force and other misconducts against citizens.

         Until the Illinois State Appellate Court decided in Kalven v. the City of Chicago (2014),

the information on citizen complaints against CPD members were not open to the public. In

Kalven v. the City of Chicago (2014), the court ruled that the documents of citizen complaints

and allegations of police misconduct are public information and should be shared under the

Freedom of Information Act. Subsequently, the Invisible Institute, incorporated as a non-profit

organization whose aim was to promote social and racial injustice in Chicago, created the

Citizens Police Data Project's complaint level dataset based on the recorded misconduct

allegations against CPD members. 8 The dataset includes information on incident types,

demographics of the complainant(s) and police officer(s), beat numbers, the date of complaints,

and investigation outcomes.

         Once the data became public, the Invisible Institute revealed that there had been 111,698

civilian complaints against CPD officers between January 2000 and June 2015 9 of which only

2.1% were sustained. Complaints were more likely to originate in neighborhoods from the south

and west of the city, which are occupied by a higher proportion of minorities. Only 1.6% of

Black residents' complaints were sustained between 2011 and 2015, while the overall rate of


7
  https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/925846/download.
8
  https://invisible.institute/police-data.
9
  The data includes information about the final findings of the investigation and information on the pending cases
and cases that ended with "no findings."


                                                         10
sustained complaints was just 2.6% during this period, suggesting a potential imbalance of

investigative outcomes along racial lines. 10

Investigations of Citizen Complaints

        The Chicago City Council established the Civilian Office of Police Accountability

(COPA) as a successor of the Independent Police Review Authority (IPRA), which had

previously overseen complaints against the Chicago Police Department 11. Operating

independently from the CPD, its charge has been to promote police accountability 12 by

investigating citizen complaints against CPD members regarding, "bias-based verbal abuse,

coercion, death or serious bodily injury in custody, domestic violence, excessive force, improper

search and seizure, firearm discharge, taser discharge that results in death or serious bodily

injury, pattern or practices of misconduct, (and) unlawful denial of access to counsel." 13 COPA

has explicit authority to access all the information from the CPD and other city departments

regarding ongoing investigations that fall under COPA jurisdiction including immediate access

to BWC video footage related to citizen complaints against the CPD officers through

Evidence.com. 14

        COPA intakes complaints from civilians and notifications from the members of CPD.

Civilians can initiate their complaints in multiple ways, via phone, mail, the Internet, or in person

at the COPA office or any CPD police station. There is no specific time limit to initiate a

complaint. COPA also receives notifications from the CPD members related to firearm and taser

discharge, and police custody incidents. 15 Once COPA receives any complaint or notification,



10
   http://data.huffingtonpost.com/2015/12/chicago-officer-misconduct-allegations.
11
   https://www.chicagocopa.org/about-copa/mission-history/
12
   https://www.chicagocopa.org/faqs/
13
   https://www.chicagocopa.org/investigations/jurisdiction/
14
   Evidence.com is a cloud-based data storage system for BWC video footages.
15
   https://www.chicagocopa.org/investigations/investigative-process/


                                                        11
they sort and classify the allegations based on COPA and CPD's Bureau of Internal Affairs

(BIA)'s jurisdictions. In simple terms, if the alleged misconduct harm citizens, 16 the complaint

goes to COPA; all other complaints of police misconducts are directed to the BIA. Within the

five business days upon receiving a complaint or notification, COPA informs the complainant

whether COPA or BIA will investigate the incident. 17 Within the 30 days after a complaint is

filed, the State of Illinois requires the complainant's signed affidavit assuring that the allegations

against the members of CPD are 100% factual. The complainant must visit the oversight agency

(COPA) and sign the affidavit in-person to initiate the investigation process. 18

         After COPA determines that the incident falls under their jurisdiction and upon obtaining

a signed affidavit from the complainant (or following the issuance of an affidavit override) 19 they

appoint an investigator to the case. COPA bases its investigation on the acquisition and analysis

of evidence from various sources that include:

         1) interviews with complainants, witnesses, and subjects; 2) relevant Department reports

         and other documents; 3) observations made at the scene of an incident within COPA's

         jurisdiction; 4) canvass of a scene to identify witnesses and other relevant evidence; 5)




16
   Domestic violence cases committed by police officers are also investigated by COPA.
17
   https://www.chicagocopa.org/investigations/investigative-process/
18
   Not all complaints are followed by an affidavit nor do they result in an investigation. There are several reasons for
complainants not to submit an affidavit following a complaint. Signing an affidavit represents a greater commitment
than the initial reporting of police misconduct. For example, complainants must sign the affidavit in person at the
address of the oversight agency (i.e., COPA). Accordingly, any complainants who are time and resource constrained
(e.g., lacking transportation) may fail to follow up on their initial complaint with an affidavit. Between 2012 and
2020, about 32% of complainants did not provide a signed affidavit, and COPA dismissed them unless the oversight
agency issued an affidavit override.
19
   The Chief Administrator of the oversight agency (COPA and IPRA) can issue an affidavit override authority
considering the following circumstances: i) the nature and seriousness of the alleged misconduct; ii) the credibility,
reliability, and accuracy of the information in the complaint based on COPA's knowledge of the facts and
circumstances, and iii) the degree to which the alleged misconduct concerns the integrity of the officers involved or
otherwise may undermine public confidence in the Department" (COPA Rules and Regulations, pages 6-7). However,
the City of Chicago Office of Inspector General (OIG) reported that the oversight agencies had underused the affidavit
override process.



                                                          12
         analysis of digital evidence, including audio and video recordings; 6) physical evidence;

         and 7) forensic analysis of evidence (COPA Rules and Regulations, page 11). 20

Dispositions of Adjudication

         A COPA investigation is completed with one of the following conclusions (which are

featured as variables in our results, below): 21

     ·   Unfounded ­ where the investigation determined the allegation is false and there are no

         facts to support that the incident complained of actually occurred.

     ·   Not sustained ­ where there are insufficient facts or evidence to determine the alleged

         misconduct occurred.

     ·   Sustained ­ where the complainant's allegation is supported by sufficient evidence to

         indicate that the incident occurred, and the conduct of the officer was improper.

     ·   Exonerated ­ where the evidence shows that the alleged conduct did occur but did not

         violate CPD policies, procedures, or training.

         COPA can conclude the investigation with a 'finding' with the above four different

potential outcomes. For our analysis, three categories (unfounded, not sustained, and exonerated)

can be grouped as 'unsustained,' since CPD members do not receive any disciplinary actions

following these three outcomes. 22 The investigation can find the complaint 'sustained' when the

allegation of misconduct is supported with sufficient evidence. In the case of sustained

complaints, CPD members may receive a disciplinary action varying from 'violation noted' to

'separation from the department.'




20
   http://www.chicagocopa.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Final-COPA-Rules-and-Regulations-April-2018.pdf
21
   https://data.cpdp.co/glossary/.
22
    The Citizens Data Project of Chicago defines "unsustained" as "a broad category of any complaints that haven't
been sustained, including `not sustained' `unfounded' and `exonerated.' Source: https://data.cpdp.co/glossary/.


                                                        13
         A COPA investigation may result in an outcome of "no finding" in the following

dispositions: "Administratively Closed, Administratively Terminated, No Affidavit, and Within

Policy OIS" (Chicago COPA, 2019). COPA can administratively close a case for various

reasons, including in the case of complaints against non-CPD members, mistakenly given

duplicate log number for an already initiated investigation, and the lack of signed affidavit from

complainant unless the COPA administration exempts the affidavit requirement with an affidavit

override

Criticisms of the Investigation Process

         CPD has received criticism for their investigations of citizen complaints and lack of

effective oversight on police misconduct. In their inquiry of citizen allegations against CPD

members between 2011 and 2014, Faber and Kalbfeld (2019) found that IPRA, the precursor

oversight agency to COPA, sustained only 5.7% of 10,077 complaints. Their analysis also

revealed a racial disparity in the sustained over not-sustained cases, with White residents'

complaints about ten times more likely to be found sustained than those of Black residents.

Complaints from Latino residents were about 3.5 times more likely to be sustained than

complaints from Black residents. Controlling for situational factors in police misconduct, race

continued to be a significant factor in investigations. The pattern of racial disparity also persists

when sorting out the cases with no affidavit and the investigation outcomes of allegations with

an affidavit from complainants (Faber & Kalbfeld, 2019). 23

         In a similar vein, the Department of Justice (DOJ) investigation report 24 on the Chicago

Police Department (2017) criticizes the police misconduct investigation and accountability



23
   They also find that police officers' race matters in investigation outcomes; complaints against White officers are
less likely to be sustained than Black police officers, suggesting a systemic issue.
24
   https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/925846/download.


                                                          14
process. It highlights a lack of thorough investigations on most of the complaints against CPD

members and a low level of sustained complaints. According to the report, only 2% of citizen

complaints led to a disciplinary sanction against police officers based on their analysis of citizen

allegations made between January 2011 and June 2016. Like Faber & Kalbfeld (2019), the DOJ

report notes an extensive level of racial disproportionality in police officers' accountability for

their misconduct.

CPD Implementation of Police BWCs

        The CPD has kept pace with the national trend of gradually deploying BWCs for all of

their patrol officers. 25 The rollout was implemented on a police-district basis, with the 14th.

district the first to deploy BWCs on June 1st, 2016 for all of its patrol officers. By December

2017, all 22 CPD districts deployed BWCs for all of their 7,000 patrol officers. CPD patrol

officers are required to wear BWCs during their duties and are to activate their BWCs at the

beginning of any law-enforcement related incident to record its entirety, including, but not

limited to: "Calls for service," "investigatory stops," "traffic stops," "traffic control," "foot and

vehicle pursuits," "arrests," "use of force incidents," "seizure of evidence," "searches including

searches of people, items, vehicles, buildings, and places" (City of Chicago OIG, 2019 page 28).

        CPD members must inform the person(s) that they are activating their BWC and

recording their interactions. CPD members cannot deactivate their BWC until the assignment is

cleared, the police officer leaves the scene, or the arrestee is secured and transferred to a

processing room. Also, a CPD officer may deactivate BWC recording if requested by a victim,

witness of crime, or a community member who wishes to report a crime. A police officer can

also deactivate the camera when they interact with a confidential informant. In such


25
  The BWC implementation dates for each district is given in Appendix Table 1. We obtained the CPD's BWC
implementation timeline for the 22 police districts from OIG File #18-0103 (City of Chicago OIG, 2019).


                                                     15
circumstances, the officer must justify their deactivation with a verbal statement on the BWC

before turning the camera off (pages. 28-29).

       CPD members are not allowed to activate BWCs to record individuals "in residences and

other private areas not open to the public and medical facilities unless there is a crime in progress

and other circumstances that would allow a police officer to be lawfully present without a

warrant" (page 30) in court facilities and during strip searches and daily personal activities of

other police officers.

BWC Footage as Investigative Evidence

       BWCs have been a major source of objective video and audio evidence for criminal

investigations and adjudication of citizen complaints against police officers. Police supervisors

and investigators may review BWC recordings during the resolution of citizen complaints' use-

of-force incidents. In addition,

       "...all authorized department members and any authorized outside agency
       personnel have access to view recordings on the Evidence.com
       database...Supervisors, members of the Bureau of Internal Affairs, members of the
       Inspections Division, and Civilian Office of Police Accountability (COPA)
       investigators may view the digitally recorded footage from BWCs on
       Evidence.com as determined by their clearance level and as authorized by the
       Information Services Division" (page 33)

       In the case of officer-involved shootings, recordings are mandated to be available for

immediate viewing by an authorized investigation officer on Evidence.com. They are to be

flagged when encounters result in a citizen complaint against a department member, detention,

investigatory stops or an arrest, use of force, or the recordings have evidentiary value in a

criminal investigation (page 34).




                                                 16
IV. Data

       We focus on investigations on allegations of police misconduct against citizens.

Specifically, our analysis considers complaints investigated by the COPA and its predecessor,

IPRA. COPA and its predecessor also examine complaints about domestic violence cases

committed by police officers. These cases are excluded from our analysis as our focus is the

effect of BWCs on investigation outcomes for citizen complaints against police and it is unlikely

that police officers use BWC during their interactions with and violence against their intimate

partners. In a similar vein, the complaints that occurred while citizens are in custody are also

excluded from the analysis since detention and jails are continuously monitored with mounted

in-door cameras regardless of a BWC.

       The dataset includes information on complaint date, basic demographics, and

characteristics of complaint(s) and police officer(s), reason for complaint, investigation status

(pending, review process, or closed), and investigation outcome as discussed previously. The

COPA data do not include information on the district where the incident occurred. Rather, the

location information is provided at the beat level. We identified the police district by matching

beat assignments of police officers with district information obtained from the CPD CLEARMap

(Citizen Law Enforcement Analysis and Reporting) interactive data source. 26

       According to the City of Chicago, Inspector of General Office's report 27 on BWCs,

BWCs were deployed among the CPD districts between June 1st, 2016, and December 4th, 2017.

As shown in Appendix Table 1, the BWC deployment date varies among districts and this

staggered implementation is key to our identification of the casual impact of BWCs on



26
  https://gis.chicagopolice.org
27
  https://igchicago.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/CPDs-Random-Reviews-of-Body-Worn-Camera-
Recordings.pdf.


                                                  17
investigation outcomes. By matching district number, complaint date, and BWC implementation

dates for districts, we generated a binary variable of whether a patrol officer(s) had a BWC

during the interaction that led to a citizen complaint.

        After we imposed several restrictions by excluding cases labeled as "Notification" or

"Miscellaneous" and sorting out complaints with no affidavit and no finding outcomes, there

remains numerous types of incidents that become the subject of complaints. The most common

types of incidents are listed as "Excessive force", "Firearm discharge", "Verbal abuse",

"Unnecessary display of weapon", "Civil suits", "Coercion", and "4th Amendment." There are

also 730 complaints filed against police officers who are allegedly involved in domestic

violence. We excluded these cases from the analysis. Another 691 complaints occurred while the

complaint is in custody. We also excluded these cases from the analysis since they are closely

monitored regardless of the BWC. Finally, some district boundaries in Chicago had been

redrawn in 2012. To maintain a consistent set of districts, we limit our empirical analysis to

2013-2020. These exclusion criteria result in an analysis sample of 2,117 complaints. The

investigations of these 2,117 complaints resulted in 178 findings of "exonerated", 856 findings

of "not sustained", 422 findings of "sustained", and 661 findings of "unfounded." Our focus is

the outcomes of "sustained" and "not sustained." 28

        In our analysis, we control for several characteristics of the complainant as well as the

police officers against whom the complaint is filed. These characteristics include indicator

variables for the age, gender, and race of both the complaint and the police officer, the number of

years of experience of the police officer, and an indicator variable for whether the incident


28
  However, we present the results for the "Exonerated" and "Unfounded" outcomes in Appendix Table 2. Note that
given the small sample size for the "Exonerated" outcome, the non-parametric model for this outcome is not
reliable. As shown in Appendix Table 2, there appears to be no relationship between BWC and either of these
outcomes as the estimates are neither statistically significant nor sizeable.


                                                     18
involved a police shooting. The means and standard deviations for the variables used in the

analysis for the full sample as well as separately for the sub-sample with and without a BWC are

reported in Table 1.

V. Estimation Strategy

            Our baseline approach to estimating the causal relationship between BWC and the

outcomes of complaint investigation exploits the temporal and spatial variation in the

implementation of the BWC across Chicago police districts using a difference-in-differences

framework. This approach can be expressed formally by the following regression equation:

            Yidmy=0+Xidmy1+2 BWCdmy +m+y +d + idmy,                                      (1)

where Yidmy is a binary indicator if the investigation for the complaint i in district d month m and

year y resulted in one of the following outcomes: exonerated, sustained, not-sustained, and

unfounded. BWCdmy is a binary indicator for whether the district has BWCs in place in a

particular month and year. Xidmy is a vector of demographic characteristics of the complainants

and the police officers against whom the complaint was made, including age, race, and gender.

We also control for an indicator of whether the complaint involved a police shooting. 29

            Equation (1) includes a series of fixed effects and trend variables to account for various

types of confounding factors. Specifically, m is month fixed effects that capture any seasonality

in complaints. Similarly, y is year fixed effects that accounts for any common trends and shocks

to the number of the composition of complaints that might occur at the city or national level

affecting all districts. For example, any news of police misconduct captured in the national

media may influence the police-citizen encounters at the district level in ways that lead to an

increase in certain type of complaints. These shocks would be gauged by year fixed effects.


29
     Our results are not sensitive to controlling for this variable.


                                                               19
Finally, d represents district-fixed effects that would account for any time-invariant differences

across districts. For instance, if the deployment of the BWC is correlated with some pre-existing

district level factors, such as initial poverty or level of crime, then the district fixed effects would

account for such factors.

        It is important to note that the identification of the treatment effect in equation (1) comes

from the variation in outcome categories within districts rather than comparisons between, for

example, districts with a high crime rate and those with a low crime rate, or between districts

with a high concentration of poverty and those districts that are more affluent. One particular

advantage of using case level complaint data is that we are able control for complainant and

police officer characteristics as well as characteristics of the incident such as whether a police

shooting is involved. In equation (1), we compare the likelihood of a complaint investigation

resulting in a particular outcome between two complainants who are identical in terms of own

race and gender, the age indicators, the race, gender, and the age indicators of the police officer

subject to the complaint, and whether a police shooting had occurred in the same month and

year, except that one complainant is subject to the BWC policy while the other one is not.

Finally, prt is the idiosyncratic error term. Finally, we cluster standard errors at the district level

to account for arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and serial correlation within provinces over

time (Bertrand et al., 2004).

        Note that the empirical model specified in equation (1) imposes the assumption that the

BWC effect remains constant over time. Such a specification can produce biased estimates if the

effect of treatment grows stronger (or weaker) over time (Goodman-Bacon 2019). In our case,

heterogeneity in the treatment effect can occur, if, for example, citizens in a particular district

adjust the way in which they engage with police officers over time following the deployment of




                                                  20
BWCs as they become aware of the new policy. Similarly, police officers may also change their

style of engagement or adjust the way they conduct themselves when they interact with citizens.

For instance, police officers could initially be extra vigilant to handle situations peacefully

immediately after the deployment of BWCs, but gradually revert back to their pre-BWC style if

they do not sense any detectable reactions to their behavior (Katz et al., 2015; Peterson &

Lawrence, 2020). Therefore, there are reasons to expect the relationship between BWCs and

complaint outcomes to follow a non-linear pattern over time. A more flexible, non-parametric

specification that allows the BWC impact to vary over time can be expressed as follows:

                       +5
       Yidmy=0+Xidmy 1+=0  k_quarters_since_BWCdmy + m+ y + d + idmy, (2)


where ___ refers to a set of binary indicators, in which k represents the

number of quarters elapsed since the deployment of BWC (i.e., 1, 2, 3, 4, 5plus).

       A causal interpretation of the BWC effects in equations (1) and (2) hinges on the

"parallel trends" assumption required by the difference-in-differences method. Intuitively, this

means that while there may be pre-existing differences in the prevalence of a certain outcome

between districts with a BWC policy and those without one, there are no pre-existing differential

trends between the two. If, for example, certain districts were experiencing an increase in the

number of complaints resolved as "not sustained" prior to the deployment of the BWC relative to

other districts, this would be a violation of the "parallel trends" assumption, leading to biased

estimates of the effect of the BWC.

       We formally test the validity of the "parallel trends" assumption by performing an event-

study analysis that allows the BWCs to have an impact on the outcomes in the periods prior to

deployment. This analysis involves estimating an augmented version of equation (2), in which

both the lead and lagged values of the BWC indicator are included in the model. If the estimates


                                                 21
on the lead (placebo) indicators are meaningful in the statistical sense, then we would worry that

this critical assumption fails and that any effect identified in equations (1) and (2) are spuriously

driven by existing differentials in trends. Appendix Table 3 reports the estimates from the event-

study analysis for the outcomes of "not sustained" and "sustained" outcomes. As shown in the

table, there is no evidence of any systematic changes in the prevalence of these outcomes in the

quarters prior to the deployment of the BWC policy. In particular, all of the placebo indicators of

the BWC are statistically insignificant. 30

         Another threat to the validity of our identification strategy is the change in the

composition of individuals who file complaints against police officers. For example, it could be

that individuals of a particular race or ethnicity may be more likely to file complaints or the

investigations of their complaints may be more likely to result in a particular outcome. If the

racial or ethnic composition of the complainants change over time in a way that is correlated

with the deployment of BWCs, then the estimate on the BWCs' effect may, at least partially,

reflect these racial or ethnic differences rather than the causal impact of the policy on the

outcome categories. However, this would imply that citizens are aware of it when a BWC policy

is in effect in their district. While we believe that this is an unlikely scenario, we address it in

two ways. First, we explore the relationship between the race and ethnicity of the complainants

and the presence of a BWC policy. To do so, we estimated regressions similar to those specified

in equations (1) and (2), in which the outcome variable was a binary indicator reflecting the race

or ethnicity of the complainant. The estimates on the BWC policies are both statistically and




30
   Goodman-Bacon (2020) develops an alternative method of detrending, in which he suggests estimating separate
pre-treatment trends based on the timing of treatment. Then these pre-treatment trends are projected onto the post-
treatment period and used to detrend the outcome variable. Our results are robust to using this alternative method of
accounting for pre-trends. These results are available upon request.


                                                         22
economically insignificant. 31 Second, we later estimate our models separately by race to provide

insights into the relationship between BWCs and investigation outcomes along racial and ethnic

dimensions.

VI. Results

        The results from the estimation of equations (1) and (2) are presented in Table 2. Column

(1) of the table shows the results for the model of the "not sustained" outcome, while the results

for the model of the "sustained" outcome are shown in column (2). Panel A illustrates the results

from the baseline model with a single treatment indicator as specified in equation (1) and Panel

B shows the results from the non-parametric model specified in equation (2).

        The estimates in Panel A of Table 2 indicate that deployment of BWC decreases the

likelihood of "not sustained" finding and increases the likelihood of "sustained" finding, though

only the latter is statistically significant at conventional levels. According to the point estimate,

presence of a BWC is associated with a 9.9 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a

"sustained" finding. Given that the mean of "sustained" finding for the non-BWC sample is 15.4

percent, this estimate translates into an effect size of approximately 64 percent.

        The estimates from the non-parametric specification that allows the effect of the BWC to

evolve over time are shown in Panel B. These estimates reveal that the relationship between the

deployment of BWCs and complaint investigation outcomes has a time-specific pattern.

Specifically, there appears to be no effect of BWCs on both "not sustained" and "sustained"

findings in the first quarter following the deployment of BWCs. This is not surprising since we

used complaint dates as we do not know when the incident that led to the complaint had occurred



31
   For example, the estimate on BWC policy is -0.007 (p=0.845) in the model for the likelihood of the complainant
being White, - 0.018 (p=0.641) for the likelihood of the complainant being Black, and -0.022 (p=0.851) for the
likelihood of complainant being Hispanic.


                                                        23
32
     In the data, we match the BWC implementation dates with the complaint dates to identify

whether the police had BWC during the incident. Since complaints might be filed some days

after the incident took place, it is possible that some incidents, especially in the first quarters,

might be coded as post-BWC deployment but occurred prior to the deployment of BWCs, and

therefore no camera footage are available for them.

         While there appears to be no BWC effect on either of these outcomes initially,

statistically significant impacts emerge later on. For example, the presence of BWCs in a district

decreases the likelihood of "not sustained" finding in the 2nd and 3rd quarters following the

deployment as well as 5th quarter and afterwards. Similarly, the effect on the "sustained" finding

is positive for all periods after the 1st quarter, and the point estimate is statistically significant for

the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th quarters post-BWC deployment.

         Taken together, the results shown in Table 2 suggests that the presence of a BWC

provides information which make an investigation less likely to end with "insufficient evidence

to either prove or disprove the complaint" (i.e., a not sustained finding). Furthermore, it makes

an investigation more likely to result in finding "the allegation (complaint) was supported by

sufficient evidence to justify disciplinary action." (i.e., sustained).

         The rates of "not sustained" and "sustained" findings exhibit significant differences

across complainant race and ethnicity. For example, prior to BWC deployment, complaint

investigations are much more likely have a finding of "not sustained" for Black complainants (53

percent) and Hispanic complainants (50 percent) compared to White complainants (38 percent).

Similarly, White complainants have a much higher prevalence of having a sustained finding (21


32
  Our conversations with the COPA officials indicated that the average duration of time from a misconduct incident
and filing of a complaint is 11 days. To assess the sensitivity of our results to this misalignment in some of our
observations, we re-estimated our models excluding the observations within 10, 20, 30, and 45 days of the
introduction of BWCs. These results are very similar to those presented in Table 2.


                                                       24
percent) compared to Black complainants (10 percent) and Hispanic complainants (14 percent)

prior to BWC deployment. According to descriptive statistics, the disparities in "not sustained"

findings largely disappeared following the deployment of BWCs. The prevalence of "not

sustained" findings after BWCs is 16 percent among White complainants, 18 percent among

Black complainants, and 15 percent among Hispanic complainants. Concerning the "sustained"

finding, it appears that the presence of a BWC helps investigation of cases regardless of

complainant's race and ethnicity. In the post-BWC period, the sample means for "sustained"

complaints goes up to 45 percent among White complainants, 31 percent among Black

complainants, and 27 percent among Hispanic complainants. While these patterns are

informative of the role that BWCs might have played in reducing racial and ethnic disparities in

investigation outcomes, they are based on raw statistics that are not adjusted for other differences

among complainants as well as the differences in the characteristics of police officers against

whom the complaints are filed. To adjust for these differences, we estimated an augmented

version of equation (1) in which we interact the BWC indicator with race and ethnicity of the

complainant. 33 The results from this model are shown in Table 3. As illustrated in the table,

Black and Hispanic complainants are more likely to face an investigation finding of "not

sustained" and less likely to face the outcome of "sustained" compared to White complainants.

The interaction term between BWC indicator and Black complainant in column 1 indicates that

BWCs reduce the likelihood of a "not sustained" finding by about 16.2 percentage point among

Blacks and Hispanics compared to White complainants, though only the estimate on the Black

complainant interaction is statistically significant at conventional levels. This evidence is



33
  It is not straightforward to interpret the interaction terms in the non-parametric model specified by equation (2).
To keep it tractable, we only consider an augmented version of equation (1) in which we interact BWC with race
and ethnicity of the complainants.


                                                          25
consistent with the descriptive statistics discussed above and lends further support for the

contention that the presence of a BWC helps eliminate ambiguities of conflicting accounts in the

complaints of Black and Hispanic complainants more than it does for White complainants,

resulting in the narrowing of disparities along racial lines. Regarding the outcome of "sustained",

the emerging picture from Table 3 is less clear. The estimates on the interaction terms for Black

and Hispanic complainants are both small and neither are statistically significant, suggesting that

the impact of BWCs on the "sustained" finding for Black and Hispanic complainants does not

differ from that of White complainants. That said, it is important to stress that these estimates do

not imply that BWCs fail to help the cases of Black and Hispanic complainants. On the contrary,

they suggest that they are equally beneficial for all racial groups. This is because the estimate on

the first row represents the impact of BWCs on the likelihood of "sustained" finding among

White complainants, which has a positive sign though not statistically significant.

VII. Conclusions and Discussion

       We explored the role of BWC technology in adjudicating the outcome of investigations

involving citizen complaints against the police. Our analytic strategy was predicated on

determining whether the availability of BWC footage enhances the efficacy of evidence used to

formulate a conclusion of responsibility, and on whether racial disparities in the outcomes of

complaint investigations would subsequently be reduced. Regarding the former, the notion that

BWC footage introduces an objective enhancement to investigations of citizen complaints is

demonstrated in our analysis by the decrease in "not sustained" findings and the concomitant

increase in "sustained" findings (by roughly 10%). Recall that "not sustained" findings mean

there is "insufficient evidence to either prove or disprove the complaint" and that "sustained"

findings mean "the allegation (complaint) was supported by sufficient evidence to justify




                                                 26
disciplinary action." Thus, the drop in "not sustained" versus the rise in "sustained" findings

resulting from BWC policy implementation supports the notion that BWC footage provides

objective and less controvertible evidence for investigations, helping them clear the bar for

identifying whether an officer has engaged in an infraction or not.

       How does this putative increase in the accuracy of adjudication outcomes influence our

understanding of race effects in complaints against the police? If claims of racial bias are

accurate, we would expect an improvement in adjudication outcomes for minorities in particular.

In fact, the pattern of results supports this hypothesis. Disparities in complaints across racial

groups for the "not sustained" findings disappear with the deployment of BWCs. That said,

initial analyses show "sustained" findings increased across the board following BWC

deployment, but with persistent disparities across race, with White complainants receiving the

highest percentage of sustained findings and Black complainants the lowest, albeit higher than

pre-BWC levels. This finding is tempered however by our analysis on the interaction between

BWC and Black complainant, which shows that the implementation of BWC technology reduces

the likelihood of "not sustained" finding among Black and Hispanic complainants compared to

White complainants.

       The suggestion here is that while Black complainants are taken less seriously and White

complainants are taken more seriously (in line with extant research on citizen complaints and

race; see Terrill & Ingram, 2016), the presence of BWC technology serves to even the playing

field by introducing objective evidence into the investigation process. In other words, Black

complainants were not given the same level of consideration as White complainants before the

deployment of BWCs in Chicago, and BWC technology is an effective tool in minimizing the

racial disparity in citizen complaint investigation outcomes.




                                                 27
       As BWCs have strong potential to provide enhanced documentation of police and citizen

behaviors and situational factors during a citizen and police interaction, this technology can

provide visual and audio evidence to help investigators objectively assess police misconduct

allegations. It is especially important when police officers dispute the complainants' allegations,

and there are no witnesses to confirm or deny their statements. Even so, there may be cases

where police officers may bring counterarguments against citizens and make claims against

citizens for misdemeanors, such as resisting or obstructing an officer, or physical assault on of an

officer. It can be quite challenging for the investigators to distinguish truth from falsehood when

police officers and citizens make contradictory statements. In these cases, the video footages can

provide critical objective information about the incident and the credibility of police officers' and

complainants' statements. By viewing the video footages, the investigators can identify

additional witnesses, who can bring additional information about the interaction and alleged

police misconduct.

        Our analysis is not without limitations and caveats. For example, the data for this

analysis allow us to assess whether a BWC was available during the police and citizen

interaction, however, it does not provide information on whether the incident was properly

captured (despite the mandatory policies requiring police officers to turn on their BWCs during

citizen interactions) with a few exceptions. Consequently, our conclusions regarding the benefits

of BWC technology as a tool to improve outcomes, especially in terms of resolving race-based

disparities regarding the adjudication of investigative outcomes, should be interpreted with that

limitation in mind. Moreover, even in a citizen interaction in which footage is available, the

video captured may not include potentially pertinent information for an effective investigation.

Given the extent to which citizens assume high efficacy of BWCs, this too must be considered,




                                                 28
especially when contextualizing what BWC footage can and cannot accomplish in terms of

adjudication outcomes.

       There are a variety of logistical and operational challenges related to the incorporation of

BWC footages in the resolution process for complaints. As the proportion of officers with BWCs

grows over time, there are bound to be challenges involved in assessing the video footage

associated with a complaint. Even though COPA investigators have authority to access BWC

video footage, they may need assistance from the CPD to pinpoint the relevant videos and

integrate them into the investigation and adjudication process. This may jeopardize the desired

independent nature of investigations and corrode confidence in the process overall. It's important

for COPA to provide technical and logistical support to investigators in their efforts to seek and

incorporate BWC video evidence into the investigation. Easy access to BWC videos could

improve the adjudication process further.

       Despite the above-mentioned challenges, our research provides practitioners with

evidence of the effectiveness of these systems in minimizing racial disparity in responses to

citizen complaints and facilitating misconduct investigations by visualizing the incident. The role

of race on dispositional outcomes in police misconduct cases has been addressed in a handful of

studies, the majority of which find that an allegation is less likely to be "Sustained" when the

complainant is a minority group member (Headley et al., 2017; Pate & Fridell, 1993; Terrill &

Ingram, 2016). Furthermore, minority complainants might be afforded less credibility in the

absence of BWC footage as some police officers may have perceptions of minority community

members as "lawless" or "troublemakers" (Sahin, 2014; Weitzer & Tuch, 2004). Our research

suggests that BWCs have an impact on closing the Black-White citizen gap in police misconduct

investigations.




                                                29
       People living in minority communities complain that they are subject to biased and

aggressive policing practices (Brooks, 2000). In addition to personal and vicarious experiences,

highly publicized police misconduct incidents in minority communities are disseminated through

social media and blog posts, news stories, and video sharing platforms. Both feed perceptions of

biased policing among minority communities (Evans & Williams, 2017; Ray et al., 2017;

Warren, 2011) making the task of policing far more difficult. These perceptions could possibly

be altered through effective and transparent police misconduct investigations. The employment

of BWC footage for investigating misconduct allegations and disciplining wrongdoers could help

agencies address citizen expectations of impartial and accountable policing and improve

confidence in the motivations and performance of police as impartial societal guardians.




                                               30
                                           References

Ariel, B., Farrar, W. A., & Sutherland, A. (2015). The effect of police body-worn cameras on use
of force and citizen's complaints against the police: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of
Quantitative Criminology, 31, 509­535.

Ariel, B., Sutherland, A., Henstock, D., Young, J., Drover, P., Sykes, J., ... & Henderson, R.
(2016). Report: Increases in police use of force in the presence of body-worn cameras are driven
by officer discretion: A protocol-based subgroup analysis of ten randomized
experiments. Journal of experimental criminology, 12(3), 453-463.

Ariel, B., Sutherland, A., Henstock, D., Young, J., Drover, P., Sykes, J., Megicks, S., &
Henderson, R. (2018). Paradoxical effects of self-awareness of being observed: Testing the effect
of police body-worn cameras on assaults and aggression against officers. Journal of
Experimental Criminology. 12, 19-47.

Aspland, H., & Gardner, F. (2003). Observational measures of parentchild interaction: An
introductory review. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 8(3), 136­143.

Balto, S. (2020). Occupied territory. The University of North Carolina Press.

Bell, M. C. (2017). Police reform and the dismantling of legal estrangement. The Yale Law
Journal, 126(7), 2054­2150.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we trust differences-in-
differences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249­275.

Bowling, B., & Iyer, S. (2019). Automated policing: The case of bod-worn video. International
Journal of Law in Context, 15(2), 140­161.

Braga, A. A., Coldren, Jr., J. R., Sousa, W. H., Rodriquez, D., & Alper, O. (2017). The Las
Vegas body-worn camera experiment: Research summary. UNLV Center for Crime and Justice
Policy.

Braga, A. A., Sousa, W. H., Coldren, Jr., J. R., & Rodriguez, D. (2018). The effects of body-
worn cameras on police avticity and police-citizen encounters: A randomized controlled trial.
Criminology, 108(3), 511­538.

Brooks, R. R. W. (2000). Fear and fairness in the city: Criminal enforcement and perceptions of
fairness in minority communities. Southern California Law Review, 73, 1219­1273.

City of Chicago Civilian Office of Police Accountability. (2018). Civilian Office of Police
Accountability rules and regulations. http://www.chicagocopa.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/Final-COPA-Rules-and-Regulations-April-2018.pdf.




                                               31
City of Chicago Civilian Office of Police Accountability. (n.d.). FAQS.
https://www.chicagocopa.org/faqs/.

City of Chicago Civilian Office of Police Accountability. (n.d.). Vision and mission.
https://www.chicagocopa.org/about-copa/mission-history/.

City of Chicago Civilian Office of Police Accountability. (n.d.). Jurisdiction.
https://www.chicagocopa.org/investigations/jurisdiction/.

City of Chicago Civilian Office of Police Accountability. (n.d.). Investigative process.
https://www.chicagocopa.org/investigations/investigative-process/

City of Chicago Office of Inspector General. (2019 July). Evaluation of the Chicago Police
Department's random reviews of body-worn camera recordings. https://igchicago.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/CPDs-Random-Reviews-of-Body-Worn-Camera-Recordings.pdf.

Chicago Police Department. (n.d.). Chicago Police Department CLEARMap.
https://gis.chicagopolice.org/.

Coudert, F., Butin, D., & Le Metayer, D. (2015). Body-worn cameras for police accountability:
Opportunities and risks. Computer Law & Security Review, 31(6), 749­762.

Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity
approach. American Sociological Review, 44(4), 588­608.

Culhane, S. E., Bowman, IV, J. H., & Schweitzer, K. (2016). Public perceptions of the
justifiability of police shootings: The role of body cameras in a pre- and post-Ferguson
experiment. Police Quarterly, 19(3), 251­274.

Evans, D. N., & Williams, C.-L. (2017). Stop, question, and frisk in New York City: A study of
public opinions. Criminal Justice Policy Review, 28(7), 687­709.

Faber, J. W., & Kalbfeld, J. R. (2019). Complaining while Black: Racial disparities in the
adjudication of complains against the police. City & Community, 18(3), 1028­1067.

Gallup, I. (2020, August 12). Amid Pandemic, Confidence in Key U.S. Institutions Surges.
Gallup.Com. https://news.gallup.com/poll/317135/amid-pandemic-confidence-key-institutions-
surges.aspx

Gardner, F. (2000). Methodological issues in the direct observation of parent­child interaction:
Do observational findings reflect the natural behavior of participants? Clinical Child and Family
Psychology Review, 3(3), 185­198.

Granot, Y., Balcetis, E., Feigenson, N., & Tyler, T. (2018). In the eyes of the law: Perception
versus reality in appraisals of video evidence. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 24(1), 93­
104.



                                                32
Groff, E., Haberman, C., & Wood, J. (2020). The effects of body-worn cameras on police-citizen
encounters and police activity: evaluation of a pilot implementation in Philadelphia, PA. Journal
of Experimental Criminology, 16, 463­480.

Headley, A. M., D'Alessio, S. J., & Stolzenberg, L. (2017). The effect of a complainant's race
and ethnicity on dispositional outcome in police misconduct cases in Chigaco. Race and Justice,
10(1), 43­61.

Hinds, L. (2009). Public satisfaction with police: The influence of general attitudes and police-
citizen encounters. International Journal of Police Science & Management, 11(1), 54­66.

Hollis, M. E., & Jennings, W. G. (2018). Racial disparities in police use-of-force: a state-of-the-
art review. Policing: An International Journal, 41(2), 178­193

Horrace, W. C., & Rohlin, S. M. (2016). How dark is dark? Bright lights, big city, racial
profiling. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2), 226­232.

Huff, J., Katz, C. M., & Webb, V. J. (2018). Understanding police officer resistance to body-
worn cameras. Policing: An International Journal, 41(4), 482­495.

Jennings, W. G., Lynch, M. D., & Fridell, L. A. (2015). Evaluating the impact of police officer
body-worn cameras (BWCs) on response-to-resistance and serious external complaints:
Evidence from the Orland police department (OPD) experience utilizing a randomized controlled
experiment. Journal of Criminal Justice, 43(6), 480­486.

Kalven v. The City of Chicago, 2014 Ill. App. (1st) 121846.

Katz, C. M., Choate, D. E., Ready, J. R., & Nuno, L. (2014). Evaluating the Impact of Officer
Worn Body Cameras in the Phoenix Police Department. Phoenix, AZ: Center for Violence
Prevention & Community Safety, Arizona State University. Stable url:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282981216_Evaluating_the_Impact_of_Officer_Worn
_Body_Cameras_in_the_Phoenix_Police_Department.

Koslicki, W. M., Lytle, D. J., Willits, D. W., & Brooks, R. (in press). `Rhetoric without reality'
or effective policing strategy? An analysis of the relationship between community policing and
police fatal force. Journal of Criminal Justice.

Kyle, M. J., & White, D. R. (2017) The impact of law enforcement officer perceptions of
organizational justice on their attitudes regarding body-worn cameras. Journal of Crime and
Justice, 40(1), 68­83.

Lawshe, N. L., Burruss, G. W., Giblin, M. J., & Schafer, J. A. (2019). Behind the lens: police
attitudes toward body-worn cameras and organizational justice. Journal of Crime and
Justice, 42(1), 78-97.




                                                33
Lotan, G. T. (June 15, 2020). Data show Boston police stop Black people most often. Boston
Globe. Stable url: https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/06/15/metro/data-show-boston-police-
stop-black-people-most-often/.

Lum, C., Stoltz, M., Koper, C. S., & Scherer, J. A. (2019). Research on bodyworn cameras:
What we know, what we need to know. Criminology & Public Policy, 18(1), 93-118.

Maghan, J., O'Reilly, G. W., & Shon, P. C. H. (2002). Technology, Policing, and Implications of
in-car videos. Police Quarterly, 5(1), 25­42.

Mastrofski, S. D. (2004). Controlling street-level police discretion. The Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science, 593(1), 100­118.

McManus, H. D., Graham, A., Cullen, F. T., Burton Jr, V. S., & Jonson, C. L. (2019). Friend not
foe? Reconsidering race, the police, and community relations. Race and Justice, Article
2153368719849486.

Meares, T. (2009). The legitimacy of police among young African-American men. Marquette
Law Review, 92(4), 651­666.

Miethe, T. D., Lieberman, J. D., Heen, M. S., & Sousa, W. H. (2019). Public attitudes about
body-worn cameras in police work: A national study of the sources of their contextual
variability. Criminal Justice Review, 44(3), 263­283.

New York Civil Liberties Union. (2012). Stop and frisk 2012.
https://www.nyclu.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012_Report_NYCLU_0.pdf.

Nix, J., & Wolfe, S. E. (2018). Management-level officers' experiences with the Ferguson
effect. Policing: An International Journal, 41(2), 262­275.

Nowacki, J. S., & Willits, D. (2018). Adoption of body cameras by United States police
agencies: an organisational analysis. Policing and Society, 28(7), 841-853.

Pate, A. M., & Fridell, L. A. (1993). Police use of force: Official reports citizen complaints, and
legal consequences. Police Foundation, Washington D.C. stable url:
https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/Digitization/146825NCJRS.pdf.

Peterson, B. E., & Lawrence, D. S. (2020). Do the effects of police body-worn cameras on use of
force and complaints change over time? Results from a panel analysis in the Milwaukee police
department. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 48960, 734­754.

Phillips, S. W., Kim, D.-Y.,& Gramaglia, J. (2020). The impact of general police officer
outlooks on their attitudes toward body-worn cameras. Policing: An International Journal, 43(3),
451­467.




                                                34
Quispe-Torreblanca, E. G., & Stewart, N. (2019). Causal peer effects in police
misconduct. Nature Human Behaviour, 3(8), 797­807.

Ray, R., Brown, M., Fraistat, N., & Summers, E. (2017). Ferguson and the death of Michael
Brown on Twitter: #BlackLivesMatter, #TCOT, and the evolution of collective identities. Ethnic
and Racial Studies, 40(11), 1797­1813.

Reiner, R. (2017). Is police culture cultural?. Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 11(3),
236­241.

Sahin, N. M. (2014). Legitimacy, procedural justice, and police-citizen encounters: A
randomized controlled trial of the impact of procedural justice on citizen perceptions of the
police during traffic stops in Turkey. Rutgers University.

Smith, J. P., & Merolla, D. M. (2019). Black, blue, and blow: the effect of race and criminal
history on perceptions of police violence. Sociological Inquiry, 89(4), 624­644.

Smykla, J. O., Crow, M. S., Crichlow, V. J., & Snyder, J. A. (2016). Police body-worn cameras:
Perceptions of law enforcement leadership. American Journal of Criminal Justice, 41(3), 424­
443.

Sousa, W. H., Miethe, T. D., & Sakiyama, M. (2018). Inconsistencies in public opinion of body-
worn cameras on police: Transparency, trust, and improved police­citizen
relationships. Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 12(1), 100­108.

Stuart, F. (2011). Constructing police abuse after Rodney King: How skid row residents and the
Los Angeles Police Department contest video evidence. Law & Social Inquiry, 36(2), 327­353.

Sutherland, A., Ariel, B., Farrar, W., & De Anda, R. (2017). Post-experimental follow-ups--
Fade-out versus persistence effects: The Rialto police body-worn camera experiment four years
on. Journal of Criminal Justice, 53, 110­116.

Taylor, T. J., Holleran, D., & Topalli, V. (2009). Racial bias in case processing: Does victim race
affect police clearance of violent crime incidents? Justice Quarterly, 26(3), 562­591.

Tedeschi, J. T. (Ed.). (2013). Impression management theory and social psychological research.
Academic Press.

Terrill, W., & Ingram, J. R. (2016). Citizen complaints against the police: An eight city
examination. Police Quarterly, 19(2), 150­179.

Umansky, E., & Simon, M. (2020). The NYPD is withholding evidence from investigations into
police abuse. Propublica. https://www.propublica.org/article/the-nypd-is-withholding-evidence-
from-investigations-into-police-abuse.




                                                35
United States Attorney's Office Northern District of Illinois. (2017). Investigation of the Chicago
Police Department. United States Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division.
https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/925846/download.

Vuchinich, S., Emery, R. E., & Cassidy, J. (1988). Family members and third parties in dyadic
family conflict: Strategies, alliances, and outcomes. Child Development, 59(5), 1293­1302.

Warren, P.Y. (2011). Perceptions of police disrespect during vehicle stops: A race-based
analysis. Crime & Delinquency, 57(3), 356­376.

Weitzer, R., & Tuch, S. A. (2004). Race and perceptions of police misconduct. Social Problems,
51(3), 305­325.

White, M. D., Todak, N., & Gaub, J. E. (2017). Assessing citizen perceptions of body-worn
cameras after encounters with police. Policing: An International Journal, 40(4), 689­703..

Yokum, D., Ravishankar, A., & Coppock, A. (October 20, 2017). Evaluating the effects of police
body-worn cameras: A randomized controlled trial. Working Paper. The Lab @ DC. Stable url:
https://discover.pbcgov.org/criminaljustice/BodyWorn%20Camera%20Clearinghouse/TheLabD
C_MPD_BWC_Working_Paper_10.20.17.pdf.

Zhao, J. S., Schneider, M., & Thurman, Q. (2002). The effect of police presence on public fear
reduction and satisfaction: A review of the literature. The Justice Professional, 15(3), 273­299.




                                                36
                                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Variable                                         Full Sample       BWC=0     BWC=1
Not Sustained                                    0.404             0.486     0.168
                                                 (0.491)           (0.500)   (0.374)
Sustained                                        0.199             0.154     0.330
                                                 (0.400)           (0.361)   (0.471)
Exonerated                                       0.084             0.028     0.247
                                                 (0.278)           (0.165)   (0.432)
Unfounded                                        0.312             0.332     0.255
                                                 (0.464)           (0.471)   (0.436)
BWC                                              0.256             0         1
                                                 (0.437)
Male Complainant                                 0.630             0.622     0.653
                                                 (0.483)           (0.485)   (0.476)
Female Complainant                               0.0221            0.222     0.218
                                                 (0.415)           (0.416)   (0.413)
Male and Female Complainant                      0.088             0.097     0.061
                                                 (0.283)           (0.296)   (0.239)
White Complainant                                0.088             0.094     0.070
                                                 (0.284)           (0.293)   (0.256)
Black Complainant                                0.685             0.667     0.736
                                                 (0.465)           (0.471)   (0.096)
Hispanic Complainant                             0.121             0.132     0.089
                                                 (0.326)           (0.339)   (0.284)
Mixed Race Complainant                           0.088             0.087     0.096
                                                 (0.283)           (0.281)   (0.295)
Age of Complainant=0-19                          0.099             0.119     0.041
                                                 (0.298)           (0.324)   (0.198)
Age of Complainant=20-29                         0.241             0.245     0.231
                                                 (0.428)           (0.430)   (0.421)
Age of Complainant=30-39                         0.219             0.206     0.258
                                                 (0.414)           (0.405)   (0.438)
Age of Complainant=40-49                         0.143             0.134     0.170
                                                 (0.350)           (0.341)   (0.376)
Age of Complainant=50-59                         0.070             0.060     0.101
                                                 (0.256)           (0.237)   (0.302)
Age of Complainant=70+                           0.008             0.006     0.015
                                                 (0.089)           (0.075)   (0.121)
Male Police Officer                              0.704             0.695     0.731
                                                 (0.457)           (0.461)   (0.444)
Female Police Officer                            0.075             0.071     0.085
                                                 (0.263)           (0.257)   (0.279)
Male and Female Police Officer                   0.110             0.091     0.168
                                                 (0.314)           (0.287)   (0.374)
White Police Officer                             0.313             0.328     0.269
                                                 (0.464)           (0.470)   (0.444)
Black Police Officer                             0.168             0.173     0.153
                                                 (0.374)           (0.336)   (0.360)
Hispanic Police Officer                          0.130             0.130     0.132



                                                  37
                                                     (0.337)   (0.336)   (0.340)
Mixed Race Police Officer                            0.261     0.210     0.408
                                                     (0.439)   (0.408)   (0.189)
Age of Police Officer=20-29                          0.038     0.030     0.063
                                                     (0.192)   (0.170)   (0.243)
Age of Police Officer =30-39                         0.231     0.252     0.168
                                                     (0.421)   (0.434)   (0.374)
Age of Police Officer =40-49                         0.210     0.228     0.157
                                                     (0.407)   (0.420)   (0.364)
Age of Police Officer =50-59                         0.078     0.077     0.079
                                                     (0.268)   (0.267)   (0.271)
Age of Police Officer =60-69                         0.004     0.003     0.006
                                                     (0.061)   (0.056)   (0.074)
Number of Years of Service of Police Officer=0-4     0.132     0.098     0.231
                                                     (0.339)   (0.298)   (0.422)
Number of Years of Service of Police Officer=5-9     0.109     0.126     0.061
                                                     (0.312)   (0.332)   (0.239)
Number of Years of Service of Police Officer=10-14   0.123     0.138     0.079
                                                     (0.329)   (0.345)   (0.271)
Number of Years of Service of Police Officer=15-19   0.097     0.107     0.070
                                                     (0.296)   (0.309)   (0.256)
Number of Years of Service of Police Officer=20-24   0.069     0.070     0.068
                                                     (0.254)   (0.255)   (0.252)
Number of Years of Service of Police Officer=25-29   0.026     0.021     0.039
                                                     (0.158)   (0.143)   (0.193)
Number of Years of Service of Police Officer=30+     0.001     0.002     0.000
                                                     (0.038)   (0.044)   (0.000)
Complaint Involves Police Shooting                   0.017     0.019     0.009
                                                     (0.128)   (0.137)   (0.096)

Number of Observations                               2,117     1,575     542




                                                     38
      Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of Body Worn Cameras on Complaint Outcomes
                                          Not Sustained    Sustained
      Panel A

          BWC                                        -0.055                      0.099*
                                                     (0.054)                     (0.052)

      Panel B

         1 quarter post BWC                          0.015                       -0.046
                                                     (0.099)                     (0.098)
         2 quarters post BWC                         -0.122*                     0.210**
                                                     (0.069)                     (0.090)
         3 quarters post BWC                         -0.169***                   0.151*
                                                     (0.050)                     (0.085)
         4 quarters post BWC                         -0.001                      0.202**
                                                     (0.074)                     (0.076)
         5 or more quarters post BWC                 -0.112*                     0.098
                                                     (0.063)                     (0.077)

      Number of Observations                         2,117                       2,117
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                           39
Table 3: Estimates of the Effect of Body Worn Cameras on Complaint Outcomes by Race
and Ethnicity
 Variable                       Not Sustained              Sustained
 BWC                            0.071                      0.125
                                (0.092)                    (0.102)
 Black Complainant              0.165***                   -0.112***
                                (0.051)                    (0.037)
 Hispanic Complainant           0.156**                    -0.087*
                                (0.068)                    (0.047)
 BWC*Black Complainant          -0.162*                    -0.005
                                (0.088)                    (0.078)
 BWC*Hispanic Complainant -0.165                           -0.067
                                (0.125)                    (0.101)

 Number of Observations                   2,117                                   2,117
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                           40
Appendix Table1: Deployment Dates for BWCs across Chicago Police Districts
 District                   Date for the Deployment of BWCs
 #1                         03/10/2017
 #2                         06/29/2016
 #3                         11/06/2017
 #4                         07/09/2017
 #5                         11/20/2017
 #6                         08/04/2016
 #7                         05/01/2017
 #8                         10/02/2017
 #9                         08/18/2016
 #10                        07/25/2016
 #11                        07/05/2017
 #12                        12/03/2017
 #14                        06/01/2016
 #15                        06/13/2016
 #16                        11/20/2017
 #17                        11/20/2017
 #18                        03/29/2017
 #19                        10/30/2017
 #20                        10/23/2017
 #22                        10/30/2017
 #24                        10/16/2017
 #25                        12/04/2017
Note: We do not have information on the BWC deployment date for districts 13, 21, and 23. Data from these
districts are excluded from the analysis.




                                                      41
Appendix Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of Body Worn Cameras on Exonerated and
Unfounded Outcomes
                                       Exonerated         Unfounded
    Panel A

          BWC                                        -0.028                      -0.016
                                                     (0.024)                     (0.065)

      Panel B

         1 quarter post BWC                                                       0.099
                                                                                 (0.098)
         2 quarters post BWC                                                     -0.090
                                                                                 (0.090)
         3 quarters post BWC                                                     0.050
                                                                                 (0.085)
         4 quarters post BWC                                                     -0.149*
                                                                                 (0.084)
         5 or more quarters post BWC                                             -0.040
                                                                                 (0.085)

      Number of Observations                         2,117                       2,117
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                           42
Appendix Table 3: Event-Study Estimates of the Effect of Body Worn Cameras on
Complaint Outcomes
                                      Not Sustained            Sustained
 5 or more quarters prior to BWC      -0.041                   0.137
                                      (0.086)                  (0.110)
 4 quarters prior to BWC              -0.016                   0.051
                                      (0.091)                  (0.096)
 3 quarters prior to BWC              -0.091                   -0.020
                                      (0.095)                  (0.073)
 2 quarters prior to BWC              -0.023                   0.035
                                      (0.103)                  (0.101)
 1 quarter post BWC                   -0.015                   -0.023
                                      (0.121)                  (0.115)
 2 quarters post BWC                  -0.149*                  0.223*
                                      (0.085)                  (0.119)
 3 quarters post BWC                  -0.196**                 0.156
                                      (0.084)                  (0.108)
 4 quarters post BWC                  -0.026                   0.206**
                                      (0.089)                  (0.094)
 5 or more quarters post BWC          -0.136                   0.094
                                      (0.088)                  (0.096)

 Number of Observations                               2,117                          2,117
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. * and ** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent and 5 percent levels, respectively. 1 quarter prior to BWC is the omitted category.




                                                          43
