                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     TRADE, COMPETITIVE EXCLUSION, AND THE SLOW-MOTION EXTINCTION
               OF THE SOUTHERN RESIDENT KILLER WHALES

                                        M. Scott Taylor

                                      Working Paper 29014
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29014


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




Funding was provided by the SSHRC; excellent research assistance provided by Fruzsina Mayer,
Chetan Sharma, and Samira Ayache. The ideas behind this paper were first presented to the
Statistical and Economic Society of Basel, in November of 2018, and then in complete form in
2021 at the Krannert School of Management, Purdue University, the Public and Environmental
Economics workshop at Stanford, and at my Presidential Address to the Canadian Economics
Association. I would like to thank without implicating participants for their helpful comments.
Special thanks to Brian Copeland for numerous comments and conversations. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Trade, Competitive Exclusion, and the Slow-Motion Extinction of the Southern Resident Killer
Whales
M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 29014
July 2021
JEL No. F18,F64,Q37,Q5,Q57

                                         ABSTRACT

Orcinus Orca is the world's largest predator, and simultaneously a significant tourist asset and
cultural icon for much of the Pacific Northwest. In the past two decades, the Southern Resident
Killer whales (SRKW) have declined by more than 25 percent, and this population appears on a
slow-motion path towards extinction. This paper combines elements from biology and
economics to put forward a new methodology for investigating their collapse and presents
empirical work supporting its novel explanation - the Orca Conjecture. The key mechanism is
ecological - Gause's law of competitive exclusion -combined with a shock coming from booming
trade with Asia. Using three different empirical methods drawn from economics, I find the
attendant noise disturbance from increased ship traffic post-1998 has lowered births and raised
deaths significantly, placing the SRKW on a slow-motion path towards extinction.


M. Scott Taylor
Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
The University of Calgary
2500 University Drive, N.W.
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and NBER
m.scott.taylor1@gmail.com




A Online appendix is available at https://www.mstaylor1.org/
I       Introduction
Orcinus Orca is the world's largest predator, and simultaneously a significant tourist asset
and cultural icon for much of the Pacific Northwest region. In the past two decades the
Southern Resident Killer whales (SRKW) have declined by more than 25 percent, and now
appear on a slow motion path towards extinction. Despite extensive scientific inquiry, several
government task forces, and millions of dollars of research money being spent, there is as
yet no consensus as to the key driving forces behind their decline. Limitations in prey,
disturbance by whale watching vessels, and contamination by PCBs all feature prominently
in current discussion, but it is unclear which of these is the most significant driver of the
decline. Surprisingly, other Orca populations have not fared as poorly. For example, the
Northern Resident Killer whales (NRKW), whose range overlaps with that of the South, has
grown over this same period.
    This paper combines elements of biology and economics to put forward a new method
for investigating, and a new rationale for explaining, the severe decline in the SRKW. The
paper makes three contributions.
    First, I show how to construct from widely available information on commercial vessel
landings in ports, a measure of the km travelled in the critical habitat of killer whales. Such
a calculation could be made from satellite data that keeps track of transmissions from vessels
using their automated identification system (AIS), but this data is only available after 2009;
my method allows researchers to construct commercial vessel km travelled within a habitat
from the late 1970s onward. The post-2009 period is, after all, just far too short to be useful
to researchers studying population dynamics of long lived marine mammals.1 In particular,
the trouble with the SRKW started in the 1990s and has continued since. Therefore, a
retrospective study using this longer, over 40 year, time period is likely to be critical to
identifying cause and effect.2
    The method I employ is not complicated and is in fact transparent. To determine both
the scale of transport within the habitat and the composition of these km across foreign
    1
     Cetaceans, like killer whales, have gestation periods measured in terms of years; they live incredibly
long periods of time before sexual maturity and after; and have considerable fat stores that can smooth out
short run variations in foraging success. Ten years is not long in the lifetime of any one whale, let alone a
population.
   2
     A very small number of studies have exploited AIS data to look at vessel traffic in the Salish Sea. For
example, McWhinnie et al. (2021) exploits vessel traffic data for only 24 months spread over the period
2012-2016. The author's goal is to understand traffic hot spots, vessel speeds, and the distribution of vessel
types. Perhaps not surprisingly, they do not link their vessel traffic measures to KW health or population
processes as I do.


                                                      1
and domestic destined vessels, I need only a relatively straightforward application of two
principles drawn from economics: value-added accounting from National Income Accounting;
and Walras' law from general equilibrium theory. With these two simple tools I am able to
reconstruct potential measures of vessel disturbances by month, year, location, and vessel
type. This new method may prove very useful in the study of marine mammal interference
more generally, since there is a growing interest in marine pollution and the impact of noise
pollution on whales in particular.
    The second contribution is to provide a rationale for the divergent histories of the SRKW
and NRKW that is based in theory and provides two testable hypotheses. The key mecha-
nism linking the two populations is familiar to economists - competition for scarce resources
- although ecological speaking, it goes by Gause's Law of Competitive Exclusion and is
embedded in the Lotkka-Volterra model of competing species I employ.3
    The intuition of the model and its results are decidedly simple. A positive shock to vessel
traffic in the critical habitat of the SRKW lowers their hunting productivity and directly
weakens their ability to compete for the prey they share with the NRKW. This shock falls
primarily on the South, but also potentially weakens the North. The logic of competitive
exclusion means the unequal sharing of the shock is then magnified by across-population
competition and becomes, in principle, many times more potent. If the shock is large and
asymmetric, it will lead to extinction of the SRKW.
    The hypothesis linking an asymmetric shock all the way through to probable extinction,
is what I refer to as The Orca Conjecture. It proves useful to refine this hypothesis further,
by dividing it into a weak and strong version. The strong version remains just as described
above; the weak version assumes there is no across-population competition between the
NRKW and the SRKW, and hence no magnification of the shock driving extinction. The
two populations may still move in sympathy but only if they face similar shocks.
    With new data in hand and two hypotheses in play, the last contribution must be em-
pirical. I first provide evidence for the weak and strong conjecture, and then employ an
analysis of whale cohorts to examine the likelihood of extinction. Across three different em-
pirical approaches, I find consistent evidence for a vessel shock driving the SRKW population
downwards. Using the change in average vessel traffic pre and post 1998 as my metric, I find
the odds of a SRKW birth fall by about 30%, while the odds of death rise by more than
40%. These are large and significant effects. To put them in context, I also find a strong and
  3
    See Begon, Harper and Townsend (1996) for a textbook treatment of the model, and Gause (1932) for
the original work giving rise to the law.



                                                 2
consistently positive impact of salmon availability on KW fecundity and mortality. Using
these results, I find that only a permanent, three standard deviation, increase in salmon
availability above its historic mean, could offset the negative impacts of vessel disturbance.
These results constitute the very first evidence we have connecting noise disturbance from
commercial vessels to lower births and higher deaths of a marine mammal.
    The empirical evidence also favors the strong vs. the weak conjecture. Not only do I
find strong evidence for across-population competition when I evaluate the strong conjecture,
there is also suggestive evidence in the evaluation of the weak conjecture of omitted variables.
This finding may be unwelcome news to the many researchers who have treated the two
populations as if they evolve independently. To study extinction, I exploit a feature of KW
biology to argue that an analysis of female whale cohorts is sufficient to settle the question.
The cohort analysis - which neatly encapsulates the grand sum of salmon and vessel noise
impacts - shows SRKW fertility is now well below replacement. Given the evidence on
the weak and strong conjecture, the forces driving this result are permanent: the obvious
conclusion is that the SRKW are on a slow-motion path to extinction.
    This paper uses tools drawn from several fields of economics to provide, what I hope,
is a convincing solution to an important biological puzzle - what is responsible for the pre-
cipitous decline of the Southern resident killer whales? Since an effective policy response
can only come from a good scientific understanding of the issue, the findings may also pro-
vide guidance for policy design. Current policy options range from the dramatic breaching
of important dams, a moratorium on sport and some commercial fishing, an elimination of
whale watching, and the redirection of vessel shipping lanes. While I provide no explicit pol-
icy recommendations, the analysis I provide and its conclusions could very well inform such
decisions. This study also provides important evidence of the complicated and sometimes
subtle links between economic activity and conservation outcomes.
    While economics can be a powerful lever, this paper owes its existence to the hundreds
of researchers, academic and otherwise, who collected and collated the many sources of data
needed; and it also owes its existence to lucky happenstance.
    The data comes from three sources. First, I acquired a complete inventory of all Southern
and Northern resident whales starting from the very first exploratory whale census in the
1970s, through to the latest figures up to 2020. Data before the late 1970s is a growing sample
and not a complete census until the last pod was identified and catalogued, but since 1979 it
represents a complete accounting of all killer whale births and deaths for either population,
for every year. This data is quite extensive, and is the work of a large scientific community


                                               3
spanning professional government scientists, whale enthusiasts, and a large community driven
whale spotting network.
    Second, I have obtained a series of salmon abundance measures for key salmon stocks from
the Pacific Salmon Commission. Some of these stocks have been used previously, but were
less complete in geographic coverage or in terms of the time period considered. These stocks
are aggregated by the commission into three different abundance measures for geographically
distinct stocks. The movement of these indices is however, highly correlated, and I aggregate
further to obtain one measure of salmon abundance.
    Finally, since the shock under consideration is trade related, I need trade related data.
While trade per se is likely to track vessel movements reasonably well over very short periods,
there has of course been both major technological (the movement to container shipping) and
policy (the accession of China to the WTO) changes during the study period which makes
using trade flows problematic. As well, measures of noise disturbance from the scientific
community show a strong relationship across vessel type, size and speed necessitating a more
detailed look at the externality generating process. Fortunately, data on ship movements from
Lloyds of London has been collected for over a hundred years, and I exploit their records
from 1977 to 2019.
    The critical summer habitat for the SRKW is in and around several small islands and
deep straits in the Salish Sea. And these same waters contain several very busy shipping
lanes leading to Canadian and US ports (33 ports in fact). To understand the time series and
geographic variation in this potential disturbance, I obtained a (complete) list of all trading
vessels landing at over 120 ports across the coast of North America from the Baja peninsula
to the Alaskan panhandle. This data documents, the month of arrival in port, vessel size,
type, and last two ports of call. It captures approximately 5 million vessel movements over
the period. This level of detail and coverage was important to obtain as I exploit it in the
empirical work.
    At bottom, this study is an attempt to determine, using quasi-experimental methods,
the cause of a rapid population change for a subject that ranges over several thousand miles,
across two countries, while mostly underwater. Moving this exercise from the realm of science
fiction to that of social science requires a bit of luck. And as luck would have it, the SRKW
happen to be the world's most intensively studied population of whales; their critical habitat
happens to coincide with several of the world's busiest ports; and these ports happened to
have experienced a rapid change in the composition and scale of their vessel traffic over the
precise period the KW started to fail. It is, for these reasons, that I am able to provide a


                                              4
tentative answer to what ails the SRKW.
    There is of course an existing, and large, literature examining killer whales in general, and
the more recent poor performance of the Southern residents, in particular.4 A recent, and
authoritative study undertaken by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Association
(NOAA Fisheries (2014)) summarized the findings over ten years of federally funded research
studying killer whales. It provides an excellent introduction to the main conservation issues,
research, and remaining unknowns. A similarly targeted, but more recent summary is pro-
vided in Lacy et al. (2017). Similar work focusing on Canadian issues is Ford et al. (2017)
and Ford (2006).
    While there are literally hundreds of articles discussing the conservation, reproduction and
protection of killer whales, there has been relatively few studies examining population events
empirically. One early approach to studying the populations was through the construction
and use of life tables. (Olesiuk, Bigg and Ellis (1990),Olesiuk, Ellis and Ford (2005a),Olesiuk,
Ellis and Ford (2005b)). Life tables have been a staple of demographers for many years, and
they have been used extensively to reconstruct population histories in economic history. Life
tables are of course very useful devices for predicting the likelihood of future events, when
populations are stable or in steady state. The life histories of the NRKW and SRKW have,
however, been anything but stable - starting with a period of early harassment and wanton
killing, to interference by the capture industry, to increasing vessel traffic, and more recently
variable salmon returns. These facts, make any analysis based on life tables suspect.
    Alternatively, a handful of researchers have tried to explain population growth via regres-
sion methods. For example, Ward, Holmes and Balcomb (2009) employs data from 1981 to
2007 on both the NRKW and SRKW to evaluate how salmon abundance and climatic factors
may affect KW. Their most important finding is that salmon abundance has a large positive
effect on fertility, whereas matriline and pod related variables do not. Salmon abundance has
also been found to be important by Ford et al. (2010) and Ford, Ellis and Olesiuk (2005).
Related work has examined the stress hormone responses of KW to summer traffic pulses in
the Salish Sea (Ayres et al. (2012)), while many others have documented behavioural changes
arising from vessel traffic and associated noise (e.g. (Williams et al. (2014)).
    I follow the tradition in biology by modelling the probability of KW birth and deaths
using a logistic, but depart from this earlier work in several significant ways. I construct
measures of commercial vessel km travelled in the critical habitat of KW that simply did not
  4
    See for example Wiles (2004) and the most recent action plan and report for the Washington state
government.



                                                 5
exist before. These data allow me to evaluate, much more rigorously, the impacts of vessel
disturbance. I also introduce two hypotheses drawn directly from theory and evaluate them
empirically; in contrast, the existing literature is largely devoid of theory. And I conduct this
investigation by using the many tools of economics - from the mundane to the reasonably
sophisticated.
    This work is also a contribution to the large and growing literature examining the en-
vironmental consequences of international trade (See Copeland, Shapiro and Taylor (2021)
forthcoming for a review). The closest connection is to the small set of studies linking the
international transport of goods to carbon emissions. Cristea et al. (2013) was the first to
document trade and transport emissions, with valuable subsequent work by Shapiro (2016).
This paper is related to these earlier contributions in the sense that vessel noise, just like
carbon emissions, are unintended consequences of commercial shipping. Vessel noise is now
thought to be a major form of underwater pollution which can affect all types of marine life,
especially marine mammals. This paper also bears a family resemblance to earlier work I
have conducted using the tools of economics to solve other mysteries in the social sciences,
be they anthropological (Brander and Taylor (1998)) or historical (Taylor (2011)).
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents the relevant history and
necessary biology with a focus on the NRKW and SRKW. In section III, I use the competing
species model to show how a large negative shock to one of the whales' habitat affects
KW populations, and may lead to extinction. These theoretical results define the weak
and strong form of The Conjecture. Section IV establishes that a negative shock to the
SRKW critical habitat did occur by employing data on vessel landings and my new methods
for constructing vessel miles travelled. With the existence of a negative shock established,
section V turns to empirical evaluation of the weak and strong conjecture, while section
VI discusses extinction and alternative hypotheses. A short conclusion ends the paper. An
online appendix, at https://www.mstaylor1.org/, contains supplementary tables, figures, and
background material that may be of interest to the reader.


II     Killer Whale (Orcinus Orca) Background
II.I    History
The history of Orcinus Orca and human interaction is somewhat tortured. In the period
before the early 1960s, very little was known about the species. During this time, KW were


                                               6
viewed as a pest and dangerous to humans. A quote by well-known US naturalist William
Temple Hornaday (Hornaday, 1914, p.148) from the turn of the century was still commonly
held wisdom sixty years later:

        The Killer "Whale," or Orca, is the demon of the seas. This creature has the
        appetite of a hog, the cruelty of a wolf, the courage of a bulldog and the most
        terrible jaws afloat. Its teeth are surpassed in size only by those of the sperm
        whale. It attacks whales of the largest size, and devours sea-lions, seals and small
        porpoises as a hungry longshoreman destroy's saddle-rock oysters.

    Not surprisingly, KW were often shot by fishermen, boaters and sometimes by the US
airforce.5 Following the initial (and inadvertent) capture of a live killer whale off the BC
coast in the early 1960s, the display and live capture industry started with the Vancouver
Aquarium taking a leading role. The industry is still in existence today.
    In response to the demand for display specimens, and the lack of regulation on capture,
both US and Canadian authorities started to fund research into killer whales. Initially this
research was to calculate what might be a "sustainable" harvest of killer whales for the
display industry, but eventually branched out to become an important area of research on
marine mammals. Almost all of our current scientific knowledge was discovered from the
early 1970s onwards.
    This knowledge includes an understanding of the different eco-types (offshore, transient,
and resident); the structure of their society (its a matriarchy); and detailed knowledge of
their communicative, reproductive, and foraging behaviors. Importantly, a Canadian fisheries
scientist - Michael Biggs - developed a method of identification relying on each KW's unique
saddle patch and fin notches. Using these methods, researchers could now count and identify
individual whales. This facilitated a whale census starting in the early 1970s that provided
researchers (including this one) with invaluable data on killer whale (KW) numbers. This
census continues to this day. It covers whales from both the Northern Resident population,
those KW mostly resident in Canada, and whales from the Southern Resident population,
those KW mostly resident in the U.S. Subsequent work has identified each pod and each
matriline within populations, as well as establishing our understanding of their interactions.
A map of the habitats for US and Canadian whales is below, together with a graph of the
SRKW population history.
  5
      See "Air Force Guns to Shoot Whales", Seattle Times, October 16, 1955.




                                                    7
                                                SRKW Population History
                        100




                        90
               Whales




                        80




                        70
                              1977         1987                1997                2007                2017
                                                                 Time



                                      Figure 2: A Tumultuous History




                        Figure 1: Northern and Southern Overlapping Habitats
          Known geographical ranges of northern (left) and southern (right) resident killer whales. Extent of movement
          offshore is unknown. Source: Figure 1. in Ford (2006)




   Killer whales (KW) were protected under the Canadian Fisheries Act since 1970, and in
the USA by the Marine Mammal Protection Act since 1972. The capture industry was first


                                                               8
regulated in the early 1970s and then banned entirely. The two populations initially grew
from their early 1970s numbers, but the recovery of the SRKW has been uneven at best with
the population peaking in the late 1990s before falling more or less continuously as shown by
the figure.
    In response to the precipitous decline shown, the SRKW were listed as Depleted under the
MMPA in 2003; Endangered by Washington state in 2004, and Endangered under the U.S.
Endangered Species Act in 2006. The NRKW were listed by the Committee on the Status
of Endangered Wildlife in Canada as threatened and the SRKW as Endangered in 2001
due to their low population sizes, low population growth, and recent unexplained population
declines (Fisheries and Oceans Canada: Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat, 2017). These
Canadian listings became law under the Species at risk act (SARA) in 2003. A recovery
strategy document was completed in 2011, the primary purpose of which is to identify critical
habitat for KW.
    In the last five or so years, increased national and international attention on the plight
of the SRKW has followed from the release of an extensive ten year review of research by
NOAA scientists, the recommendations of the Orca Task force put together by Washington
Govenor J. Inslee, but perhaps most salient to outside observers was the international media
attention given to the one SRKW female who pushed and kept afloat her stillborn calf for
17 days before abandoning it. Emotions aside, the SRKW population has continued its
slide downward while the age and sex composition of the population only worsens. After
what appeared to be a swift recovery from the end of the live capture industry in the 1970s,
and given protection as an endangered species in the early 2000s, why have the Southern
Residents failed to recover?


II.II    Biology
Killer whales are within the toothed whale family, Odontoceti, whose closest relatives are
the oceanic dolphins (spinner, bottlenose, common).6 Killer whales are the world's largest
predator; the world's most cosmopolitan whale species with populations in all seven seas;
and probably the world's most easily recognizable whale given their striking black and white
coloration.
    There are several features of their biology relevant to the argument I will present. The
first is that killer whales exhibit sexual dimorphism with the males considerably larger than
  6
    The other major group of whales is the Mysticeti or baleen whales. This group includes for example
gray, humpback, right, blue, and fin.

                                                  9
females. For example, fully grown male Orcas can reach 7 or 8 meters in length and weigh up
to 6,000 kg. In contrast, females are significantly smaller at 5-6 meters, and only 3,000 kg.
It is typical, but not a rule, that sexually dimorphic species rely on only a few mature males
for reproduction. This feature is important to questions of extinction, and to my empirical
methods for examining the likelihood of extinction.
    Second, there are three different types of killer whales defined by their ecological niche.
While these three eco-types differ in their social structure, their size and body structure,
and their movement and communication patterns, it is simplest to define them by their
prey. Resident killer whales eat fish; Transient killer whales eat marine mammals (seals,
sea lions, whales); and Offshore killer whales eat sharks, squids and rays. Both the SRKW
and the NRKW are Resident KW, although all three eco-types have been spotted in both
Canadian and US waters. Residency means that, almost every year, every living whale in
the resident populations are spotted, counted, and recorded in my data. No whale has ever
switched matrilines; and only one orphaned whale changed pods. This means if a whale is
continuously absent, it is dead. The only population events missing from the data could be
unsuccessful births or neonatal deaths of very young whales yet to be recorded.
    Third, the NRKW do not reproduce with the SRKW population. The societal structure
of a family grouping or pod, consists of a series of matrilines, which in turn are composed of
a senior female and all living offspring (both males and females). Reproductive maturity for
females occurs at about year ten and continues until their early forties. Calves tend to be
born in autumn and winter months, and gestation is 16 to 18 months. This places conception
in the important spring and summer months of the preceding year when the whales are often
resident in the Salish Sea. The length of gestation suggests I adjust for the fact this year's
conditions may largely determine next year's fecundity.
    Fourth, killer whales are very specialized predators. The two resident populations not
only specialize in eating almost exclusively members of the salmon family, they are highly
dependent on Chinook salmon. Estimates of this reliance vary across studies, but salmon
make up perhaps 70-80% percent of their diet with Chinook salmon being 70-80% this total.
This heavy reliance on salmon, and Chinook in particular, is true for both the NRKW and
the SRKW populations.
    While the habitats of the NRKW and SRKW overlap, it is unclear to what extent they
compete with each other for prey. However, recent acoustic and photo identification studies
suggest the NRKW and SRKW share the very important Chinook feeding grounds off the
southwestern tip of Vancouver Island. This new emerging evidence strengthens the cases


                                              10
for the competing species interpretation. In fact, there appears to be mutual indifference.
Pods from each population ignore each other; there is no fighting, no interbreeding, and
no communication either. Language or calls are specific to pods and differ significantly
across members of the NRKW and SRKW. Therefore, the only point of contact between
these populations is over prey, and the non-interference and non-reproduction features are
necessary assumptions of the competing species model. Whether and to what extent they
compete for salmon and habitat is for the data to decide.
    Finally, although it may seem obvious that the continuous presence of large and very noisy
vessels in a critical habitat would interfere with hunting, mating, and other social behaviors,
recent work has made several important connections that complete the line of logic from vessel
activity to potential disturbance. For example, it is now well documented that commercial
vessels create significant noise in frequencies used by KW for both communication (lower
frequencies) and echolocation (higher frequencies).7 This suggests large vessels interfere with
foraging, socializing, and may raise stress hormone levels. As well, observational studies have
now provided dose-response estimates of how behaviour changes when large boats are near,
implying an energetic cost to KW.8 Moreover, different vessel types radiate sound at different
amplitudes and frequencies therefore it may be important to distinguish across vessel types
and over time.9 Any noise disturbance shock could come from either a change in the overall
scale of vessel traffic, a change in its composition, or both.


III       Theory
III.I     The NRKW and SRKW as Competing Species
I assume the NRKW and SRKW are, at least potentially, competing species. While they
do not appear to compete for habitat and do not interbreed, they both prey very heavily
on Chinook salmon. Chinook returning to spawning grounds in the Salish Sea (primarily
the Fraser river), and along West Coast of Vancouver Island are prey of both NRKW and
   7
     Early work by Hall and Johnson (1972) established an initial range of KW hearing from 500 Hz to 32
kHz using a captive whale at Sea World San Diego.
   8
     There are many observational studies showing avoidance behaviour by KW from nearby surface vessels,
but fewer studies explicitly linking the acoustic signature of different nearby vessels to changes in observed
behaviour. For an example of this latter type, which also includes many references to the former type, see
Williams et al. (2014)
   9
     For example, McKenna et al. (2012) studies the noise signature of 7 different vessel classes using acoustic
data from the Santa Barbara channel finding the acoustic level, frequency (Hz), and spectral shapes, (across
dB) vary significantly.


                                                      11
SRKW. In particular, salmon returning via the inside passage between Vancouver Island and
the continent must run through the critical habitat of the NRKW in Johnstone Strait before
returning to spawn further south.10 It is of course possible that sharing prey has little effect
on population growth given the relative magnitudes of salmon runs, commercial fishing, and
natural mortality. Modelling them as competing species may be a distinction that makes
little difference empirically.11 As such, in the empirical section I will distinguish between a
strong and weak version of The Conjecture. The strong version assumes that competition
across the populations is empirically relevant; the weak version assumes the populations
evolve independently but may be affected by correlated shocks.


III.II       Within and Across Population Competition
I focus on the dynamics of the NRKW and SRKW populations and ignore that of their
common prey, which in the case of Orcinus Orca, is largely Chinook salmon. A reduction in
foraging efficiency created by increased vessel disturbance or reduced Chinook availability is
modelled as a fall in the maximum population either could obtain (its carrying capacity).12
The benefit of adopting this simple specification is that it provides us with a very clean (state
space) method of analysis.
    Denote the size of the Northern Resident population by N , and that of the Southern by
S . I treat both as real numbers, and ignore the age and sex composition of the populations
although these will be accounted for in the empirics. The evolution of population sizes, from
given initial conditions, is driven by two non-linear differential equations:

                                       dN            N    S
                                           = rN [1 -    -    ]                                           (1)
                                        dt           KN   KN

                                        dS           S    N
                                           = rS [1 -    -    ]                                           (2)
                                        dt           KS   KS
       where r, , , KN , KS are strictly positive given parameters of the system (defined below).
  10
      For example, 80% of the Chinook taken by KW off southwestern Vancouver island and in the Strait of
Juan de Fuca are destined for the Fraser River, and 88% of all observed predation events involve Chinook
Salmon. Fisheries and Oceans Canada: Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat (2017)
   11
      Estimates of KW daily fish take suggest otherwise. Estimates of their dietary requirements range widely
(from 100 to 400 kg/day) and are based on a mix of information gleaned from the capture industry and
theoretical models of their energetic requirements in the wild. If we take the 100-400 kg/day at face value,
then the 300 plus NRKW alone would consume tens of thousands of kg of salmon daily and this is not
inconsequential. Therefore, it would be unwise to reject the competing species model out of hand.
   12
      A less transparent three species model can deliver qualitatively similar results.

                                                     12
Initial populations are assumed to be non-negative (N (0)  0, S (0)  0).
    Consider equation (1). It says that per capita growth in N is a linearly declining function
of both population levels. This implies that growth is density dependent. Absent density
dependence effects, the NRKW would grow exponentially at rate r which is sometimes re-
ferred to as their intrinsic rate of growth. A similar interpretation holds for the SRKW in
(2). Exponential growth at r is not possible because competition for prey limits growth.
Competition for prey comes from members within the same population ­ within-competition
­ and from members of the opposing population ­ across-population competition. If we
ignore across-population competition by setting  =  = 0, the equations tell us that in-
creases in own population size lowers growth from its theoretical maximum of r down to zero
when each population approaches its carrying capacity population of KS or KN . With no
across-population competition, it is simple to show that starting from any positive biomass,
populations grow monotonically towards their steady state values. Shocks can of course
disturb these paths and alter eventual steady states, but extinction is never an outcome.
    When there is competition across populations, extinction is now a possibility, but so too
is mutual co-existence. Which case is relevant depends on the relative magnitudes of two sets
of parameters. The first set is determined by the relative strength of across versus within
competition. A one unit increase in, say S , lowers potential per capita growth of S by 1/KS
­ this is the magnitude of within-population competition; whereas, a one unit change in N
lowers per capita growth in S by /KS . Therefore for the system as a whole, the (relative
to one) magnitude of the competition terms  and  determines the strength of across vs
within, competition. The natural, and common, assumption is that within-competition is
more potent than across-population competition. Since the NRKW and SRKW habitat
overlap to a limited extent (both geographically and temporally) and yet the populations
are physiologically identical with identical foraging behavior and nutritional requirements, I
assume both competition terms are weakly positive but less than one in magnitude.


III.III    The Existence and Stability of Steady States
The Salish Sea has seen tremendous increases in vessel traffic over the last thirty years, and
since this interferes with the whales ability to forage it represents an effective reduction in
the environment's carrying capacity. Similarly, changes in the availability of Chinook salmon
or increased PCB pollution could also be shocks to the system. Exploring the implications
of these shocks requires a comparative steady state analysis.


                                              13
   While understanding how shocks affect steady states is important, it cannot be everything.
The data on NRKW and SRKW population numbers are very unlikely to reflect repeated
observations at the steady state of this natural system. One simple reason is that prior
to the early 1970s, KW were largely considered a nuisance to fishermen and a potential
threat to humans. Large scale destruction, incidental shooting and slaughter were common.
Public sentiment started to change with the advent of the live capture and display industry,
but this of course created other problems. My data starts in the mid 1970s, when both
populations were still subject to a sometimes very destructive live capture hunt and runs
until 2019. Over this more than forty year period, many important conditions (such as
salmon availability, habitat protection, etc.) have changed dramatically. Killer whales, like
most marine mammals, are a very long-lived species and this means shocks may take literally
decades to play out. To cover the breadth of these processes, I first employ empirical methods
based on approximations to contemporaneous birth and death processes consistent with (1)
and (2); and then employ a cohort analysis identifying long run trends reflective of transition
paths when discussing the likelihood of extinction.
   To understand both the short and the long run response to shocks, I present in Figure
2 below the two isoclines (N   = 0 and S    = 0 loci) from the system (1) and (2), under
an assumption on parameters that ensures both populations survive in steady state. The




                                          Figure 3:

isoclines are indeed linear as shown because Northern growth is zero whenever: N +S = KN .


                                              14
Similarly, Southern growth is zero whenever: S + N = KS . The interior steady state, when
it exists, is shown at a point like A. In drawing the figure I have assumed both  < 1, and
 < 1. This ensures the relative slopes of the isoclines are as shown.
    While A is the interior steady state, it is relatively easy to see that there are in fact four
possible states as indicated by the bolded dots. The steady states along the North or South
axis represent possible steady states, as does the steady state at the origin. None of these
steady states can be reached from any interior starting point.13 Therefore, A is the only
interesting option. It is also apparent from the arrows of motion that A is globally stable. It
is less clear that there are a number of possible paths to A, depending on initial conditions.
And less clear still that a limit cycle cannot arise, but this is a very well studied system with
known results. Limit cycles do not exist and starting from any interior point the system
converges to point A.
    The figure is drawn for a given degree of within vs across competition that sets relative
slopes, but if the carrying capacities differ too greatly, point A would move towards one
or the other axis eliminating the interior steady state. At this point the system with mu-
tual co-existence turns into one of competitive exclusion. Therefore, the second (relative)
requirement needed for mutual co-existence is a restriction on relative carrying capacities.
Although Figure 3 depicts a roughly symmetric situation there is no requirement for KN to
equal KS nor for  and  to be the same or similar. The resulting steady state could be
highly asymmetric with one population much larger than the other as long as the condition
in (3) is met.
                                           1    KN
                                             >      >                                          (3)
                                                KS
Given our assumptions on within vs. across competition, this is a restriction on the relative
size of carrying capacities. In biological terms, the Southern population can only survive, if
there is, in some sense, "excess carrying capacity" that its members can exploit even when
the Northern population becomes very large. To see why rearrange the leftmost inequality in
(3) to find it requires KS - KN > 0. This is a measure of available carrying capacity excess
to the needs of its Northern competitor when its Northern competitor is at its theoretical
maximum. Rearranging the rightmost inequality, the Northern population survives when
KN - KS > 0. Again, a measure of excess capacity is positive. These inequalities are of
course important because large shocks to the steady state at A, could easily run afoul of
  13
    For example the steady state at N = KN and S = 0 can only be reached if the arrows of motion for S
are made irrelevant by setting S = 0 to start with. This initial condition then allows an approach along the
vertical axis; a similar argument applies to the steady state at S = KS and N = 0.


                                                    15
the restriction for mutual co-existence. This intuition is reinforced by the solutions for the
steady states at A which are:


                          KN - KS                          KS - KN
                   N =             > 0,      and     S =            > 0.                   (4)
                           [1 -  ]                          [1 -  ]

   A key suspect for the violation of (3) is of course increased vessel disturbance.


III.IV     The Impact of Vessel Disturbance
To understand how a shock lowering one KW carrying capacity more than the other can lead
to extinction, I start with a shock altering both carrying capacities equiproportionately. I
refer to this as a common shock. The figure below makes things transparent. Starting from
A, the shock shifts both isoclines out or in, and the new steady states would lie along a ray
from the origin thru A as both populations respond. One such possibility is a move to D
created by a equiproportionate reduction in both NRKW and SRKW carrying capacities.
Another would be a positive shock (a permanent positive change in salmon availability will
be one such shock), moving the steady state upwards from A.




                                         Figure 4:

    Things are however quite different if the shocks are not common. Suppose the South
suffers a reduction in the carrying capacity from KS to KS while KN remains constant. This
is what I refer to as an asymmetric shock. The resulting steady state moves from A to

                                             16
B. A key and surprising feature of this movement is the beneficial change in the Northern
population from the negative shock to the South's habitat ­ despite the fact that Northern
whales share some of the Southern habitat. The logic is simple. The direct impact of the
shock is to lower the carrying capacity of the South's primary habitat and this shock lowers
the Southern population directly (as it would in the absence of any across population). But as
a consequence of the Southern population shrinking, the North experiences less competition
for its own resources, and grows. This feature is of course why the model is called " the
competing species " model, as competition for scarce resources is at its core.
    Next, consider a situation where both North and South suffer a shock to their carrying
capacity, but the Northern shock is relatively smaller. This is the case of correlated shocks.
From the geometry of the set up its easy to see that keeping the shock to the South in play,
a simultaneous fall in the carrying capacity of the Northern population to KN could lead
to a new steady state at C or in fact at any point along the ray with arrows BD. Point C
with its associated reduction is the North's carrying capacity, represent an important special
case. For Northern shocks smaller than the reduction to KN , the North's population rises
with the correlated shock despite the reduction in its own carrying capacity. This is because
the beneficial reduction in across-population competition swamps the direct negative effect
of the fall in its carrying capacity. For Northern shocks larger than the one represented by
KN , both the Northern and Southern populations fall.
    One final possibility is an extinguishing shock. Without doing too much violence to the
figure, consider the case with a large shock that falls primarily on the South's carrying
                                                                   X
capacity. This shock lowers the South's carrying capacity to KS      , and the North's to KN .
The shock is highly asymmetric and correlated. The new dashed S         = 0 isocline intersects
the new N   = 0 isocline at X along the vertical axis. In this case, the only remaining steady
state features extinction of the Southern population. And in this case, the existence of the
Northern population facilitates and indeed speeds the path to extinction.14
  14
     None of these results should be a surprise to any student of the two-sector Neoclassical model underlying
much of general equilibrium trade theory. When both populations co-exist, the two isoclines are isomorphic
to full employment constraints for northern and southern carrying capacities. Northern whales are intensive
in their use of the Northern habitat; Southern whales intensive in the use of theirs. The surprising result
coming from an asymmetric shock would be, to a biologist, the workings of Gause's Law of Competitive
Exclusion, we would associate it with the Rybczynski Theorem. The extinction result at X, is nothing more
than a movement to specialization in one good (or one whale population). And yes, the condition in (3) is
the sometimes dreaded cone of diversification.




                                                     17
III.V         The Weak and Strong Conjecture
With the classification of shocks in hand, it is now possible to distinguish between two
important cases underlying The Conjecture. The previous section made it very clear that a
large asymmetric shock to the South's carrying capacity, or one that is largely asymmetric but
correlated, could move the system from one of mutual co-existence to one with competitive
exclusion and extinction. In the next section, I develop measures of vessel disturbance that
arguably, represent exactly these large and asymmetric shocks. In support of the empirical
strategy I employ, a further refinement of asymmetric shocks is needed.
    Consider the impact of a marginal negative shock on the South's carrying capacity (par-
allel results holds for a Northern shock). The impact of this shock on the South's population
can be written as:

                                                           
                                          S = [1 +              ]KS                        (5)
                                                        [1 -  ]
    Written this way its clear that there are two different forces driving the South towards
extinction. First, is the direct and proportional change in the South's population from the
shock to its carrying capacity KS . This is identical to what would have occurred in an
isolated environment with no across-population competition. The hypothesis that vessel
disturbance is in fact the cause of this negative change in carrying capacity, and there is no
across-population competition, is the hypothesis I refer to as the weak conjecture. Under the
weak conjecture, shocks to either or both carrying capacities drive their relevant populations
downward but these processes are only linked if the shocks come from a common source; i.e.
they are correlated.
    But when the two populations are engaged in across-population competition, the second
term in (5) comes into play and the original shock is magnified. This is Gause's Law of
Competitive Exclusion at work.15 If the shock is large enough only the North survives while
the South is, to some extent, the victim of the North's success. I refer to this hypothesis as
the strong conjecture. The second term in (5) is, in fact, exactly the change in N created by
this same shock multiplied by the relevant competition coefficient. Therefore, when across-
population competition is present, separately identifying the direct and indirect impacts of
any vessel disturbance shock is likely to be challenging and may require different empirical
methods than those examining the weak conjecture.
 15
      To a trade theorist its Jones' Magnification effect.




                                                        18
IV       The Data
There are many ways to degrade the carrying capacity of the Southern Residents. Three
prime suspects mentioned in the literature, and press, are: (1) a reduction in the availability
of prey species caused by over-fishing, dam construction, or increased predation by seals;
(2), an increase in vessel traffic interfering with hunting, socializing, and mating behaviors;
(3) reduced fecundity caused by exposure to PCBs that continue to leach into the waters of
the critical habitat. These alternative explanations are not mutually exclusive. In fact, they
may well be reinforcing; however, thus far, no research has been able to quantify the impact
of any one (or combination) of channels given the extreme difficulty of observing and then
measuring the potential causal effects on a population which ranges over thousands of square
miles of habitat and is, for the majority of the time, below the surface.16
    To investigate I have collected data from six major sources, and three minor sources.
Data on vessel landings and vessel characteristics obtained from Lloyd's of London; data
on travel distances between ports and other important locations obtained from the vessel
tracking service Sea Routes ; data on the location of critical habitat zones taken from US and
Canadian government websites; information on the potential magnitude of noise disturbances
by vessel class (drawn from Veirs, Veirs and D. (2016)); data on the availability of salmon
made available by the Pacific Salmon Commission et al. (2017); and data on the populations
of the Northern and Southern Residents was obtained from various whale census documents.
    In addition, I have also collected data, primarily used for cross-checking from three other
sources. These are vessel pilotage assignments from the Pacific Pilotage Association from
1973-2020; vessel movement data from the State of Washington for various years; and inter-
national trade data from both US and CDN government sources. Of all of these data sources,
the Lloyd's data is by far the most important given its geographic and temporal coverage.


IV.I      Vessels: The Lloyd's List Data
Lloyd's list has been providing data on international shipping since 1778, and is the premier
data provider of shipping data worldwide. Important to my study, is that unlike the many
newer data providers, Lloyd's has vessel traffic data prior to the introduction of Automated
  16
     One commonly mentioned, and seemingly plausible, chain of causation is that reduced salmon availability
(for whatever reason) lowers fat stores in the whales which then releases the previously trapped (in fat) PCBs
into their system lowering their fecundity. Some populations of killer whales have extremely high levels of
PCBs stored in fat tissues; and concentrations at these levels have been linked to lower fecundity in other
marine mammals.


                                                     19
Identification System or AIS. Prior to approximately 2010 (the exact date varies by location
and vessel type), Lloyd's relied on human intelligence and terrestrial sightings. Post 2010
these reports are buttressed with AIS readings. While this change in measurement methods
poses some challenges, the use of a long time series of data is absolutely necessary if we are
to identify changes in the fecundity of a long-lived marine mammal such as killer whales.17
    The data obtained from Lloyd's list is contained in two related subsets. One subset of
data contains, 'previous movements'. The 'previous movements' data contains information
on the current port of arrival and the last two ports visited, for vessels making a landing at
one of 121 ports on the west coast of North America from 1977 to 2019.18 I refer to this set
of ports as the Ports of Interest (PoI). Each entry includes the port landing, the count of
vessels landing, their vessel class, and the month/year of the landing. Vessel classes include
fishing vessels, research vessels, dredging vessels, tugs, passenger, and military vessels but
most importantly, it contains a set of vessels commonly employed in international trade:
these are, two types of tankers, two types of bulk carriers, and three classes of cargo vessels.
In total, the data contains approximately 1.8 million current landings, which combined with
information on their past two landings, yields information on over 5 million vessel movements.
    The remaining subset is the 'vessel characteristics' set. It contains average vessel charac-
teristics for the same vessel landings by ports/vessel type/month/year. The characteristics
recorded include dead-weight tonnage, vessel length, year of build, and several measures of
container capacity (when relevant). These data provide a little over 100,000 additional, but
related, observations by month/year/port/vessel type.19 The two subsets of data report in-
formation on the same set of trips, and therefore provides an internal consistency check on
the data itself. Every individual vessel landing recorded in the previous movements data,
must also be present in the counts recorded in the vessel characteristics data.
    The data is incredibly rich with detail, and after cleaning, checking and organizing, it
  17
      While vessels of a certain size (greater than 500 gross tons for example) or trip type (interna-
tional/national, passenger carrying) have been subject to requirements on AIS since 2004, finding AIS data
prior to 2009 has proven very difficult. This is not surprising since AIS is first a ship-to-ship navigation aid,
then when in range, a ship-to-shore navigation aid, and only recently has it become a useful tracking data
source when it moved to ship-to-satellite.
   18
      See the Online appendix at mstaylor1.org for a list of ports and map of their location.
   19
      In theory, the purpose of obtaining this information is to ensure I am comparing apples to apples in terms
of vessel type and potential for vessel disturbance. The length, breadth and weight of vessels has changed
dramatically over time and it also varies with the port of landing within a given vessel class. This data allows
me to 'normalize' vessel trips much as we would normalize or deflate nominal variables for inflation. This
work is ongoing and future versions of this paper will compare these normalized measures to the raw data I
use here.



                                                       20
allows me to make statements like the following: 8 tankers arrived in Vancouver harbour in
December of 1983, they had an average length of 121 meters, average dead-weight tonnage
of 316 tonnes, and were on average 13.4 years old. Of the 8 tankers, 5 came directly from
the Cherry point refinery in Washington State, 2 of the tankers stopped at ports in Oregon
before arriving in Vancouver, and one tanker came directly from outside North America. The
purpose of the data is, of course, to determine the magnitude of vessel movements within the
critical habitat of killer whales. Before introducing my methods for doing just that, I need
to define the critical habitat under study.

IV.I.1    Defining the Critical Habitat

Both the US and Canadian government have identified critical habitat for the SRKW (see
figure below). These designations occurred in 2009 and 2006 respectively, although they
have been subject to review and expansion very recently.20 In this paper, I will employ these
original designations of CH. Critical habitat should "include sufficient quantity and quality
of prey species, particularly Chinook Salmon, water of a sufficient level so as not to result in
loss of function, and an acoustic environment that does not interfere with communication or
echolocation.."(Fisheries and Oceans Canada: Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat (2017),
p2.)
    If all vessel trips were simple one stop voyages arriving at a port in the critical habitat
from outside and exiting similarly, then the landing data could be easily matched with route
distances to calculate distance travelled in the critical habitat. The world however is not that
simple: many vessels make several stops in the critical habitat before exiting; some vessels
stay within the critical habitat and never leave; some vessels traverse the critical habitat
without every landing at any port within; and others leave the critical habitat and then
re-enter before turning towards the Pacific. Therefore, the number of port landings is at best
a very gross measure of vessel traffic. In the next section, I describe a method to transform
the landing data into km travelled in the critical habitat for all of these trip types. Since
the method is tailored to the relevant geography, it is necessary to discuss this first. Figure
6 presents a map of an area of the west coast near Vancouver, Seattle, and Puget sound,
commonly referred to as the 'Salish Sea'.
  20
     In December of 2018, the critical habitat for KW has been recently expanded to include additional areas
off the southwest of Vancouver Island. This is an area of prey abundance, and both the NRKW and SRKW
have been identified in this area throughout the year. The Online Appendix contains a map of this new area
(Fisheries and Oceans Canada: Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat, 2017).



                                                    21
          Figure 5: Designated critical habitats for Southern Resident Killer Whales

    The map shows three shaded areas, and ports of interest shown with a dot. I have drawn
in two bolded lines to demarcate entrances and exits from what I refer to as the critical
habitat plus. The critical habitat plus (henceforth CH) is sum of the three shaded areas.
Any vessel enters the CH does so in only one of two ways: it could enter via the inside
passage down the east side of Vancouver island or it could enter through the international
shipping lanes in Juan de Fuca Strait which separates the Southwest tip of Vancouver Island
from the Northwest tip of Washington state. The vast majority of traffic enters and exits via
the Juan de Fuca strait. Travel up Georgia Strait and exiting to the Pacific via the Queen
Charlotte Strait is difficult, somewhat treacherous, and time consuming. Small cargo vessels,
tugs, some cruise ships, and fishing vessels are the primary users of the inside passage.21 As
  21
    In particular any vessel must travel through Discovery Passage and Seymour Narrows to Johnstone Strait
before reaching Queen Charlotte strait. Seymour narrows, where the Pacific Ocean and inside water currents
meet, remains a difficult passage. Historically, hundreds of ships have wrecked on the Narrows' Ripple rock
and no one less than Captain George Vancouver referred to it as one of the vilest stretches of water in the



                                                    22
a consequence of this geography, vessel trips can be classified into a limited number of types.
    The western entrance lines is drawn at Swiftsure banks off the western tip of Vancouver
island. This line captures the movement of a vessel when it enters (or exits) national waters
off either the US or Canada. I refer to this as the Swiftsure line or just Swiftsure. The second
line is drawn from Horsehoe Bay on the mainland coast just north of Vancouver, to Naniamo
on Vancouver Island, and I refer to this as the Ferry line. In this way, I close off the critical
habitat in Salish sea to the north by the Ferry line, and to the west by the Swiftsure line.
    The remaining parts of the Salish sea trapped by these boundaries are taken to be the
area of critical habitat for the purposes of this study. This is a slight over estimate of the
actual area since there are small areas which are not included such as bays, some ports etc.
In all cases of significance, getting to these ports requires a vessel traverse the official critical
habitat, and hence I believe my critical habitat plus assumption is innocuous. For example
the Port of Vancouver is not within the official critical habitat but entry from the Juan de
Fuca requires passage through the zone, and I will count km to the Port itself rather than the
entrance to Burrard inlet. The same is true for several other ports. This will inflate the km
travelled within the zone slightly, but consistently over time. It is also true that vessels do
not necessarily follow their proscribed minimum km routes to ports as given by Sea Routes 22
The purpose of this simplification is solely to allow me to calculate distances to a port rather
than pick an arbitrarily chosen exit point along the edge of the official habitat.


IV.II      Vessel Arithmetic
With the critical habitat defined, I now divide vessel trips into one of five, mutually exclusive
and exhaustive, trip categories: incoming, within, outgoing, pass through, and irrelevant.
Since I would like to identify the role of international trade, it proves useful to divide outgoing
trips into those outgoing to domestic ports (somewhere else in North America) and those
outgoing to foreign ports. To do so I exploit, what is in effect, a vessel-version of Walras's
Law.
world. In 1958, the Canadian government used underwater explosives to lower Ripple Rock and make passage
easier. Nevertheless, even today large ships can only pass during slack tide.
  22
     For example, many vessels lay up in the sheltered coast of Vancouver Island near Valdes, Thetis, and
Penelakut island before proceeding to Vancouver or other major ports.




                                                   23
IV.II.1    Vessel Trip Types

A trip is identified by its origin (previous port) denoted by o, and its destination (landing
port) denoted by d. Although the data contains detail on vessel types and month of landing,
this level of detail is not required to define trip types and is ignored here. Let Xodt be the
number of trips from origin o to destination d at time t. The "length" of t can be as short
as one month, but for the most part it is useful to think of time in calendar years.
    Incoming trips are vessel trips originating outside the CH but landing in the CH . Let
uc be the set of ports (33 elements) within the CH, then incoming trips during t, or It , are:

                                        It =                Xijt                               (6)
                                               i/ uc j uc


where i  / uc is the set of all ports (domestic and foreign) not in the CH .
    Trips with origin and destination ports within the CH are defined as Within trips. These
are given by Wt where:

                                        Wt =                Xijt                               (7)
                                               iuc j uc


  Outgoing trips are trips originating within the CH , but having destinations outside the
CH . In obvious notation, these are trips satisfying:

                                        Ot =                Xijt                               (8)
                                               iuc j / uc


    Pass Through trips are trips originating and ending outside the CH , but whose voyage
traverses the CH . Denote by up the set of Pass through ports outside the critical habitat but
connected by a voyage traversing the critical habitat. In obvious notation, these are trips
satisfying:

                                        Pt =                Xijt                               (9)
                                               iup j up


If we let U be the universe of all ports in the world, then Irrelevant trips are trips with origins
and destinations in U but not in any of the four categories defined above.
    An example of the routes reflected in Incoming and Outgoing trips together with their
destinations/origins is presented in the figure below.


                                                  24
                        Figure 6: Incoming and Outgoing Trip Types

IV.II.2   Walras' Law

Because pass through trips by definition - pass through the habitat - total vessel landings in
the CH over period t, V Lt , are simply the sum of incoming and within trip landings:

                                        V Lt = It + Wt                                      (10)

All vessels landings lead to subsequent port exits. Exits from a port in the CH must also,
be recorded as either outgoing trips or exits arising from within trips. Putting this together,
implies:

                                        V Lt = V Et
                                        V Et = Ot + Wt                                      (11)

The equations in (11) reflect a vessel in / vessel out assumption. The data itself is described
by Lloyd's as representing both a landing and its exit, so the only assumption involved is
that both occur in the same period t. Therefore, all landing vessels in t exit in t; as a result,

                                               25
V Lt = V Et . This is effectively budget balance applied to vessel trips in aggregate over the
period of t. Another application of the assumption is reflected in the division of exits given
in the second line. Every within trip creates both a landing and an exit within the CH;
therefore total exits equal within trip exits and outgoing trips.
    My data only contains landings at North American ports. This implies that any vessel
exiting from a CH port to a foreign port is not observed in the data. However, if the vessel
in / vessel out assumption holds, we can, however, measure these foreign destined trips as
well.
    To see how, first note using (10) and (11) we have

                                                    It = Ot                                              (12)

   Because incoming trips are measured, and outgoing trips consist of both outgoing trips
to domestic ports (measured), and outgoing trips to foreign ports (unmeasured), it follows
that:

                                    It =                Xijt +                Xijt                       (13)
                                           iuc j / uc            iuc j / uc
                                                j u                   j u ¯


where u is the set of ports in North America (PoI) and u ¯ is the set of ports outside of North
America (PoI). In obvious notation, the first term in (13) is outgoing domestic trips, ODt ,
and the second is, outgoing foreign trips, OFt . Using this notation, and rearranging shows

                                              OFt = It - ODt                                             (14)

Outgoing foreign vessel trips can be found by use of landing data relevant to the CH , and
outgoing trips to domestic ports.23

IV.II.3     Result 1: Walras Law

In Table 1, I leverage the Vessel Arithmetic developed above to provide trip figures for vessels
departing the CH over two time periods. The time periods divide the sample years into two
  23
     This is indeed Walras' Law. The vessel in/out assumption is budget balance and it implies that demand
for landings (across all trip types) must be met with supply of exits (across all trip types); i.e, the sum of
excess demands by trip type must sum to zero. Every within trip creates its own demand and its own supply
which then necessarily balance. Incoming trips create a demand for landings that must be met with a supply
of exits coming from either domestic destined exits (measured) or foreign destined exits (unmeasured).


                                                         26
roughly equal time periods, and differ greatly in the extent of vessel traffic.24 I have included
in this table only departing trips taken by large commercial vessels: bulk carriers, tankers,
cargo ships, etc. since these are well known to be the largest and noisiest ships. Although
the table is rather busy, several features stand out.
    First, summing the two period totals from the All Departures column shows there were
approximately 300,000 trips by large commercial vessels recorded as departures from CH
ports over the entire time period. The majority of these trips are recorded in the later 1998-
2019 period which recorded about 55,000 more trips than the earlier 1977-1997 period. The
increase in 55,000 represents a 46% increase in trips. Therefore in some sense traffic in the
Salish Sea has increased significantly.
    Columns (2), (3), and (4) tell us where these departures are destined to land. For ex-
ample, the Domestic departures column represents those departures from US (CDN) ports
within the CH that were destined for other ports in the US (Canada). These trips are not
directly involved in international trade, and their share of total departures fell from 51%
of total departures to 42%. Their absolute number grew however by approximately 12,000
trips. Therefore, it seems safe to assume that 12,0000 of the increase in 55,000 trips are not
associated with growing international trade.
    The last two columns record departures tied to international trade. The third column
contains departures originating in a US or CDN port within the CH, but bound for a port
in the other. Surprisingly, these within North America trips fell over the period, not only in
percentage terms but in absolute numbers from 53,987 to 40,106. Therefore, traffic in the
Salish Sea generated by US/Canada trade has been falling.
    What then is responsible for the 46% growth in trips? Column (4) tells us that departures
leaving the CH bound for foreign ports have skyrocketed. In percentage terms they rose from
4% of all departures to 35%. In absolute numbers, they jumped from only 4600 in the earlier
period to 61,061 over the latter. One conclusion is inescapable: commercial vessel traffic in
the Salish Sea has growth tremendously over these two time periods, not because of rising
US/Canada trade (it fell by almost 14,000 trips), or rising traffic within US or CDN waters
(this rose by only approximately 12,000 trips), but because of an explosion of new trips to
international markets outside of North America.
    A second, and somewhat speculative, conclusion is that when we substitute, a (shorter)
within US/Canada trip with a (longer) US/Canada to third foreign market trips, total vessel
  24
   A similar table can be constructed directly from the data on arrivals, and can be found in the Online
Appendix at mstaylor1.org.



                                                  27
            Table 1: Departures by commercial vessels from the ports in the
            Critical Habitat , aggregated over 1977-2019
                        (1)=(2)+(3)+(4)          (2)                  (3)                  (4)
              Country         All             Domestic           International        International
                           departures        departuresa          departures           departures
                                                              to U.S. or Canadab   to third countriesc
                                                         b) 1977-1997
              Canada         58,192             19,418              35,584               3,190
              U.S.A.         61,846             42,033              18,403               1,410
              Total          120,038            61,451              53,987               4,600
                        As percentage of (1):
              Canada         100%                33%                 61%                  5%
              U.S.A.         100%                68%                 30%                  2%
              Total          100%                51%                 45%                  4%
                                                         c) 1998-2019
              Canada         100,276            34,236              25,515               40,525
              U.S.A.         74,635             39,508              14,591               20,536
              Total          174,911            73,744              40,106               61,061
                        As percentage of (1):
              Canada         100%                34%                 25%                  40%
              U.S.A.         100%                53%                 20%                  28%
              Total          100%                42%                 23%                  35%
               :   Commercial vessels: bulk, combined carrier, gas tanker, general cargo, misc. general
               cargo, tank, unitised.
                : Including Orcas Is. (U.S.A.) and Vancouver Anchorage (Canada).
               a : Goes from Canada to Canada and from U.S. to U.S.; arrival port may be outside the

               critical habitat
               b : Goes from Canada to U.S. and from U.S. to Canada; arrival port may be outside the

               critical habitat
               c : Goes from Canada and from U.S. to third country




km travelled within the CH would rise even absent a change in overall trip numbers. There-
fore, dividing trip data by trip types is bound to be important: the composition of trips
matters.
    Finally, the table provides a warning. Departures did rise by 55,000 over a twenty year
period. This amounts to an annual increase of perhaps 2750 departures spread out over
potentially many ports. Since departures must be matched by arrivals, this could represent
5500 in and out trips. If each trip was to a large port (Seattle, Tacoma, Vancouver) far from
Swiftsure Banks, the km travelled would be about 300 km each way, implying that Annual
vessel km travelled in the habitat grew by 1.65 million km over the time period - which is a
very large number! As it turns out, this figure is almost double of what actually occurred,
and the method of its calculation flawed because of serious double counting. This is exactly
why we need the Vessel Arithmetic outlined previously. Traffic and total trip numbers alone
are almost useless.



                                                         28
IV.II.4   Result 2: Distances in the Critical Habitat

To find the km travelled within the critical habitat, I transform the information on trip types
into measures of the net distance added by each vessel trip within the critical habitat.
     It is useful to fix ideas by considering an artificial vessel trip made by a cargo ship
originating in the port of Los Angeles. After leaving port and heading north past the coast
of Washington State it enters the Salish Sea via the strait of Juan de Fuca. Its first stop
is Tacoma WA where it unloads containers before leaving for the port of Point Roberts BC
where it unloads more containers and takes on bulk cargo. It then turns north moving
through Georgia Strait leaving the CH at the ferry line, and eventually landing in Campbell
River BC. It again offloads cargo and adds frozen salmon to its hold. It leaves Campbell
River, turns south and re-enters the CH, traverses Boundary pass and then exits to the
Pacific Ocean via the Juan de Fuca strait. There it turns west for an ocean voyage landing
in Asia in 50 days time.
     This one voyage would appear as four current landings in the data: Los Angeles, Tacoma,
Point Roberts and Campbell River, but only two of these are in the critical habitat. The
eventual landing in Asia does not appear in the data. Each landing will appear as one of
perhaps many cargo vessels arriving in these busy ports during the relevant month/year
combination. There is little hope of tracing the vessel's exact path through data, and less
still in identifying its characteristics. There are of course millions of trips like these in the
Lloyd's data.
     For each landing observed in the data, I count only the net contribution in terms of
km traveled from its previous port to its current landing port. In essence, I am calculating
something akin to value-added (km in the CH) from transactions data (all possible landings)
by only counting the value of final sales net of intermediate purchases (the distance from
the current landing from previous port). The distance this same vessel travelled in the zone
to get to the previous port is ignored, since, in theory, it will be captured elsewhere when
it appears as this vessel landing at that specific port (just as intermediate goods producers
will record final sales they made to producers). Using this method, I do not need to track
individuals vessels to count up their movements within the critical habitat ­ just as we do
not need to access firm level data to calculate GDP: industry - read vessel/port - aggregates
will do just fine.
     To see the method in action, reconsider the artificial voyage. The first trip to Tacoma
would add km in the critical habitat equal to the distance from Swiftsure Banks to the port of
Tacoma. It would be identified in the data by using the fact that its current port is Tacoma,

                                               29
its previous port Los Angeles was outside the critical habitat, and this previous port is not
located anywhere north of the ferry line along the inside passage. Therefore, this vessel must
have entered via international shipping lanes from Swiftsure to the Port of Tacoma. The km
of this travel is collected from the voyage planning company, Sea Routes, and entered as an
incoming trip distance for that vessel type in a given month/year.25 Aggregating across all
incoming trips of this type, gives us the km travelled by incoming trips in period t, which I
denote by KIt . It is simply:

                                           KIt =                Xijt ksj                                (15)
                                                   i/ uc j uc


where ksj is the km distance travelled from Swiftsure banks, s, to port j in the CH . The
trip from Tacoma to the Fraser River would be identified by its current port being the Fraser
River while its previous port was Tacoma. Since both are within the critical habitat this trip
would contribute to the within distances travelled in the critical habitat. I aggregate across
all trips of this type to find the total within distances during t, are given by KW t . This is
simply:

                                          KW t =                Xijt kij                                (16)
                                                   iuc j uc


where kij is the km travelled from port i to j both in the CH .
    The next leg of the vessel's journey to Campbell River on Vancouver Island would be
identified by its current port Campbell river, which is outside the critical habitat, but with
its previous port, the Fraser River port, being within. Since Campbell River is north of the
ferry line in Georgia Strait, this landing would be allocated a distance from the Fraser River
port to the ferry line. Again this distance is obtained from Sea Routes and would add to the
distance for outgoing trips for this vessel type/month/year.
    Using now similar notation, the sum total of these trips is given by:

                                           KOt =                Xijt kig                                (17)
                                                   iuc j / uc


      where the outgoing distance kig is either to Swiftsure kis or the Ferry line, kif .
      The next part of the journey is a Pass through trip. It is identified by three criteria: one,
 25
      SeaRoutes is a professional tool for route and distance calculation: see, https://www.searoutes.com



                                                      30
its current port is outside the critical habitat; two, its previous port was within Georgia Strait
north of the ferry line; and three, its current port is not further north along inside passage.
There are a relatively small number of ports along the inside passage, in Georgia Strait and
below Seymour narrows. For trips involving these ports, I assume vessels turn south and
retrace their step down Georgia Strait to Juan de Fuca, and then exit to the Pacific. The km
given to this trip are from the ferry line in Georgia Strait down through the Salish Sea and
out to the Pacific passing the line at Swiftsure. This distance is obtained from Sea Routes
and would add to the distance for pass through trips for this vessel type/month/year.
    In obvious notation, these trip distances are given by:

                                        KP t =              Xijt kf s                                (18)
                                                 iup j up


    The sum total of incoming, within, outgoing and pass through trips in any given year is
the kilometer total denoted by KTt .26 Since the vessel landing data has both vessel type and
month variation, this total can be made vessel type specific (Unitised or Bulk for example),
can weigh vessel km of different vessel by impact factors tied to vintage, dwt or length, and
can limit the time dimension to any portion of the years thought to be especially important
for foraging or reproduction (such as the very important summer months). Therefore, if vessel
disturbance is sensitive to vessel type or more important for some months of the year than
others, it is possible to alter the relevant sum of vessel miles in the habitat to investigate these
possibilities. The method appears to be a very powerful tool for examining the likelihood of
vessel disturbance on marine mammals.
    Below I plot the calculated vessel km in the CH, for various vessel types, over the entire
time period.
  26
    Outgoing trips to foreign ports from a port X in the CH are allocated the average distance of incoming
trips to that port in the relevant vessel type/month/year cell.




                                                   31
                                                  Figure 7: Vessel Km in Critical Habitat
                                                          Commercial Vessels (Commodities)



                             1500000
                               1000000
                  Km in Critical Habitat
                  500000     0




                                           1975    1980   1985   1990    1995 2000          2005   2010   2015   2020
                                                                             Year

                                                             Gas Tanker                      Tanker
                                                             Combined Carrier                Bulk Commodity



                                                             Commercial Vessels (Cargo)
                             1500000
                               1000000
                  Km in Critical Habitat
                  500000     0




                                           1975    1980   1985   1990    1995        2000   2005   2010   2015   2020
                                                                                yr

                                                             Misc. General Cargo               General Cargo
                                                             Unitised Cargo




                                                                     Figure 8:

   Four features stand out. First, the vast majority of km in the critical habitat come from
Bulk carriers and Unitised (container) Cargo ships. Tankers and Combined Carriers make
up an infinitesimal contribution, followed by that of Gas Tankers. Second, there appears
to be some substitution across cargo vessel types during the period. General Cargo falls
throughout being replaced by both Misc. General Cargo and Unitised vessels. Third, the


                                                                          32
total vessel km grew tremendously over this period more than doubling from a little over 1.5
million km in 1977 to over 3.5 million in 2019. In annual average terms, over the pre-and-post
1998 periods indicated by the vertical line, vessel km in the CH rose from 2.1 million to 2.9
million. This represents an annual average increase of 800,000 km or 36%. This difference
in means is also highly significant. Note that this 800,000 figure is about half of the 1.65
million km of my earlier naive calculation. Fourth, and finally, it is obvious that what is
driving most of the increase is the change in km travelled by Unitised (container) shipping.
Moreover this increase first takes off in the late 1990s remains very high for almost ten years
only to fall during the credit crisis years to then recover and continue its growth entering
2019. 27


V       Empirics
I have presented only summary statistics and simple graphs to suggest a causal link between
changing whale populations and increased vessel disturbance in the Salish Sea. To investigate
further, I proceed in two steps following the division of the Orca conjecture into its two
subsidiary hypotheses.
    The weak conjecture maintains that increased vessel disturbance linked to international
trade has lowered the quality of the SRKW critical habitat, and as a consequence the steady
state population of both the NRKW and SRKW. Under the weak conjecture,  =  = 0,
and in terms of Figure 3, the North's (now) horizontal isocline and the South's (now) vertical
isocline intersect at a point like A. Point A is, again, the only interior stable steady state.
Negative shocks to their habitats would lower their individual carrying capacities, moving
any new steady state to a point Southeast of A.
    The strong conjecture maintains that the vessel disturbance shock to the SRKW critical
habitat has been magnified by the existence of the competition from the NRKW, and, via
the principle of competitive exclusion, is driving the SRKW to extinction. Under the strong
conjecture, the NRKW and SRKW populations are linked by the competing species model
because  = 0 and  = 0. While the negative shock may partially fall on the NRKW, the
  27
    In comparison, McWhinnie et al. (2021) tracks vessel hours in the critical habitat for two classes of vessels
matching our commercial vessel categories. She finds vessel hours rise from 6,222 (4 month period) in 2013
to 12,192 by 2016. This is broadly consistent with the post crisis recovery shown in the figure but more
extreme perhaps because vessel hours are not km travelled. While there is a strong seasonal component to
whale watching, fishing and cruise ship activity none of these are in my commercial vessel categories which
show very little seasonal influence.



                                                       33
impact of the vessel disturbance shock is large enough to ensure extinction of the SRKW;
that is, it is exactly as discussed and shown in Figure 4.
    I evaluate the weak conjecture first, and then turn to examine the more nuanced, and
more difficult to evaluate, strong conjecture. To do so, I adopt methods commonly employed
by economists studying Malthusian population dynamics. Since Malthus was the inspiration
for Darwin survival of the fittest, and Darwin the inspiration for Gause's Law of Competitive
Exclusion, we have now run full circle by adopting an economic approach to solve a biological
puzzle.


V.I    Back to Malthus
Population growth is by definition the difference between births and deaths. Assuming the
stock (or biomass) of a population is proportionate to its numbers, the population growth of
SRKW whales can be rewritten using (2) as:

                                      dS
                                          = S [BS - DS ]                               (19)
                                       dt
    where in obvious notation, BS - DS is the rate of births minus deaths, which in turn
is a function of underlying parameters driving (2). Under the weak conjecture, the SRKW
population density setting (19) to zero is KS . A similar equation and implication holds for
the NRKW. In Malthusian (biological) terms, these population levels are those sustainable
given their implication for per capita income (carrying capacity).
    Births and deaths are discrete and uncertain events recorded only annually in my data.
Let dt = t equal one year and model births and deaths as Bernoulli random variables where,
in obvious notation, this implies:

                                        1 if a birth occurs
                               bN =                                                     (20)
                                        0 otherwise
                                        1 if a death occurs
                               dN =                                                     (21)
                                        0 otherwise

     Since births and deaths are not uniformly distributed across an undifferentiated biomass
of the competing species model, S , I now divide the killer whale populations into k mutually
exclusive groups. Whales within a given group i share relevant attributes (age, sex, pod
affiliation, population, etc.) and each group has ni members. The number of whales at any


                                             34
moment is just ni summed over the k groups.
    If the probability of a population event for any one member in group i, is independent of
other realizations in that group, then it is very well known that the distribution of births (or
deaths) is binomial with each whale in group i having the probability i of the relevant pop-
ulation event (birth/death).28 The expected birth rate (death rate) for the entire population
as a whole is a ni weighted average of the relevant i across the k groups.
    For simplicity, and to aid comparison to existing work in biology on KW, I model the log
odds of population events as a linear function of the factors determining k group membership;
that is:

                                         log(i /(1 - i )) = xi                                           (22)

    where xi is a vector of attributes determining membership in the i group, and i the
regression coefficients to be estimated.29 For the most part, I will follow the Malthusian
tradition of assuming the determinants of births and deaths to be the same, albeit with
some minor differences introduced by the 15-18 month gestational lag of killer whales. Prime
candidates for inclusion in xi are environmental determinants of carrying capacity (salmon
abundance and vessel disturbance) and a measure of competition for the scarce carrying
capacity (both within and across populations). Important demographic determinants of life
events are age, sex and possibly population affiliation.
    When researchers estimate an equation like (22) on human populations, the key econo-
metric issue is the endogeneity of income, which researchers address by finding exogenous
shocks to productivities which then drive exogenous variation in incomes.30 In our con-
text, matters are simpler. Unlike national income which increases with population or labor
force growth, the environment's carrying capacity is not endogenous to whale numbers. And
shocks that create exogenous variation in the per capita availability of habitat, such as the
abundance of prey, the (noise) quality of the habitat, and overall population numbers are
arguably exogenous to any k group outcome.31
  28
     The independence assumption across whales within a group rules out some silly possibilities such as
whales dying from grief when another k group member's calf dies during birth; but also some more realistic
dependence that might arise from the sharing of food and joint hunting strategies both of which have been
observed for KW.
  29
     The logit specification is commonly used by physical scientists in biology and ecology; moreover it has
been used in influential work on KW in particular. See Ward, Holmes and Balcomb (2009)
  30
     See for example Ashraf and Galor (2011) and Lagerl¨ of (2015).
  31
     Vessel km are clearly exogenous; variation in salmon availability, as shown later in Figure 18, is driven
largely by ocean wide events not KW predation; and overall KW population numbers can at best respond


                                                     35
V.II      The Weak Conjecture
Under the weak conjecture, NRKW and SRKW population events are independent although
they may be driven by similar, and sometimes common, factors. I divide these factors into
those that are species specific - such as demographic determinants of fertility by age - and
those that may be population specific - measures of vessel disturbance and whale population
density. Any fertility determinant that is (potentially) population specific calls for a main
effect and a population specific interaction term.
    Unobserved commonalities within the populations suggests errors should be clustered,
although it is unclear at what level. One option is to cluster at the matriline. Matrilines are
the most stable family unit since membership is lifelong. And whales rarely travel far from
other matrilineal members which suggests they may experience common (unobserved) shocks.
Matrilines are however quite small and as a result several matrilines die out over the sample
period, which would render the number of clusters variable and potentially endogenous.
In contrast, pods (which consist of many matrilines) are also very stable social structures.
Whales in the same pod typically travel together, suggesting common exposure to vessel
noise and prey availability, and the number of pods has been stable throughout the sample
period. Moreover, I will at times allow exposure to treatment (vessel disturbance) to vary
with pods. The acoustic grouping, clans, and the geographic grouping, populations, are
much larger aggregates, but also very heterogeneous in terms of the location and travel of
their pod members which argues against clustering to reflect common unobserved effects.
Perhaps more importantly, the number of clans and populations is also incredibly small (two
for populations). In light of these choices, I adopt the pod as the unit for clustering errors.
There are 19 pods across the sample of two populations.

V.II.1     Births

It is well known that female whales reach sexual maturity by their mid teens and remain
potentially reproductive into their early forties.32 It is of course important to develop a
baseline regression model consistent with this knowledge before introducing measures of
vessel disturbance. The profile of KW fertility rises steeply at first, reaches a peak near
the age of 20, and then falls. This feature of their reproduction is shown graphically below
and, then more concretely, in table form. The fecundity of KW is maximized near an age of
only minutely to current population events.
  32
     See the life table analyses by Olesiuk, Ellis and Ford (2005a), Olesiuk, Ellis and Ford (2005b) and Olesiuk,
Bigg and Ellis (1990).


                                                       36
20 when almost twenty percent of females in this age category will succeed in giving birth.
Fecundity falls off dramatically after the age of 40 with a lengthy period of senescence starting
in their late 20s.
    Table 9 reinforces these findings. There are only 2 births across the sample of 1645 female
whale-years when whales are aged 0-9, and 26 births post the age of 40 across 1262 female
whale-years. To capture this highly non-linear, and asymmetric, fertility profile of KW, I
employ a higher order polynomial in age.

Figure 9: Percentage of females with births by age in the pooled RKW populations, 1979-2019
                                   .2




                                  .15
              RKW Births (mean)




                                   .1




                                  .05




                                   0
                                        0   10   20                 30   40     50
                                                      Age (years)




                                                      37
                              Table 2: Births in the pooled RKW popula-
                              tions by age, 1979-2019

                                                      Birth
                               Age group    n     without with   Mean

                               0­9         1645    1643     2    0.001
                               10 ­ 19     1215     990    225   0.185
                               20 ­ 29      922    750     172   0.187
                               30 ­ 39      751    634     117   0.156
                               40 ­        1288    1262    26    0.020
                               Total       5821    5279    542   0.093


    In Table 3 below I investigate the basic demographic and environmental determinants of
KW births. The most parsimonious and restrictive models appear in the first column, with
more general versions following as we move rightwards. Several features are noteworthy. First,
the coefficient estimates governing the polynomial in age are stable across all specifications
with only small differences in magnitudes as we move from column I to IV. These coefficient
estimates are also highly significant individually and as a group. From the sign pattern, it is
obvious fertility rises steeply at first, and eventually falls although the exact shape is unclear
and best left to Figure 10 which I soon discuss.
    Second, in columns II -IV, the indicator variable for a whale belonging to the NRKW is
positive and significant. The coefficient estimates on NRKW differ somewhat across columns
with the mode of about .5. There are a variety of ways to interpret this .5 coefficient. One
way is to note it implies the odds of a birth for a NRKW is 65% higher than for a SRKW
- which is considerable.33 More concretely, recall that average fecundity at 20 was almost
.2. If we adopt this as the baseline fecundity of a SRKW 20 year old, then the estimated
NRKW coefficient implies the probability of birth of a similarly situated 20 year old NRKW
is almost .3. It therefore implies a large difference in the probability of successfully calving.
Why this would be true is unclear.
    Third, in columns III onward there is evidence that prey availability matters to fertility.
I follow the literature in using one year lags for any shock to fertility given gestation is 15
to 18 months for KW. High salmon years appear to raise subsequent fecundity, while low
salmon years reduce births considerably. The mean and standard deviation of the salmon
 33
      Because exp[.5]=1.648


                                                  38
index, over the entire period, are 1.15 and .28 respectively. Therefore a one std. deviation
good salmon year raises the odds of a birth by a little over 11%; a great, two std. deviation
salmon year raises them 23%. These are significant but not extremely large effects.

                    Table 3: Baseline Demographic Determinants of Fertility
                                             I.            II.            III.             IV              V.

         Constant                  -18.05          -18.37         -18.94          -18.82          -25.24
                                        (1.51)          (1.47)         (1.52)            (1.5)           (3.4)
         Age                          2.77            2.74           2.78             2.78            3.96
                                        (0.29)          (0.29)         (0.29)          (0.29)          (0.68)
         Age2                        -0.16           -0.16          -0.16           -0.16           -0.24
                                        (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.05)
         Age3                       0.0039          0.0039         0.0039          0.0039           0.006
                                        (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)
         Age4                     -0.00004        -0.00003       -0.00004        -0.00004        -0.00006
                                        (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)
         NRKW                                         0.54           0.54             0.83             7.95
                                                         (0.1)         (0.09)          (0.22)          (3.67)
         L1.Salmon Abundance                                         0.37             0.34            0.34
                                                                       (0.13)          (0.12)          (0.12)
         L1.Within-Competition                                                        -0.002          -0.002
                                                                                     (0.0013)        (0.0013)

         Age × NRKW                        No              No             No               No             Yes
         interactions
         Na                              5,821           5,821          5,707           5,707           5,707
         Log likelihood               -1452.72        -1440.33       -1411.76        -1410.27         -1407.6

          Standard errors are clustered at the pod level and appear in parentheses.  : p < 0.01,  : p < 0.05,
             : p < 0.1
          a : N records the number of viable female-whale-years which excludes the year preceding a birth when

          pregnant and the year post birth nursing.



    Fourth, in columns IV and V, I find what may be evidence for within-population compe-
tition. In theory it arises from competition for prey, and hence its coefficient is also lagged
one period. The coefficient estimate implies that adding 100 whales to the population, would
reduce the odds of a birth by 20%, although this estimate is not significant at standard levels.
Given the difference already found for the NRKW main effect, I allow for a full set of NRKW
x Age interactions in column V. There are small changes to the existing coefficient estimates
and a small change in the log-likelihood, but the implications for any NRKW vs. SRKW
fertility comparison are now far less clear.
    To complete our discussion of these baseline determinants, and clarify the NRKW vs
SRKW fertility differences, I plot the predicted probability of birth at various ages in Figure
10 using the regression estimates from column V. The panels differ in terms of the population

                                                        39
considered, and the two lines in each panel correspond to the state of a low salmon index
(evaluated at one std deviation below its mean) and high salmon index (evaluated at one
std. deviation above).34 The figure shows very well the rapid rise in fecundity with age,
the slower decline post its maximum near age 20, the period of senescence with the eventual
steep drop off after 40. The large differences across panels reflect the impact of the NRKW
interactions, while the smaller differences within panels reflect salmon availability. Overall,
Table 3 and Figure 10 provide a strong foundation for examining the potential impact of
vessel disturbance.

                         Figure 10: Fecundity by Age, Population, and Salmon Availability
                                                  SRKW                                           NRKW
                          .4




                          .3
             Pr(birth)




                          .2




                          .1




                           0
                               0             20             40             60     0         20          40   60
                                                                   Age of animal
                                                   Low salmon index               High salmon index
                         Within Population Graphs differ by Salmon Availability




   I now extend the demographic and environmental model to include potential effects from
vessel disturbance. One difficulty in doing so is deciding on a metric for disturbance. Guid-
ance from the relevant physical sciences literature is limited given the difficulty of observing
KW in the wild in suitable experimental conditions.35 In general, vessel noise can affect
  34
     I set the within-competition coefficient to zero in the figures.
  35
     For example, a recent Fisheries and Oceans Canada report states "Similarly, the types and levels of
underwater sound that cause short-term and long-term effects on Resident Killer Whales are poorly known.
There has been considerable recent research on the noise levels in Resident Killer Whale habitats and responses
of the animals to such noise, but thresholds that might result in critical habitat destruction are still unclear"
Fisheries and Oceans Canada: Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat (2017), p10.

                                                                         40
communication, foraging, reproduction, navigation and in some cases, predator avoidance.
    Despite the difficulties involved in evaluating the hearing of marine mammals in the
wild, novel work by ecologists and biologists has established that: commercial vessels emit
sounds at frequencies KW use for both communication and echolocation (Hall and Johnson,
1972); measured noise disturbances from marine vessels in situ are significant and long lasting
(McKenna et al., 2012); Unitised vessels (i.e. container ships) are the loudest of all commercial
vessels with vessel speed increasing disturbance (Veirs, Veirs and D., 2016); whale behaviour
changes when vessels are near with changes to diving, socializing and foraging creating an
energetic cost to whales (Williams, Trites and Bain, 2002), (Williams et al., 2014); and
finally, constant, high amplitude background noise can drive KW from an area (Morton and
Symonds, 2002).
    Since underwater noise pollution is both new and unfamiliar concern for researchers in
economics, it might be useful to put these findings in more human terms. Killer whales
spend the vast majority of their lifetime in dim to very dark deep water ( 10 m depth); not
surprisingly, hearing is by far their primary sense and they have developed very specialized
(and different) organs that use sound waves for communication (using low frequencies up to
10Khz that are received by bones in their lower jaws and transmitted to their inner ear) and
prey identification and capture via echolocation (using frequencies up to 60kHz emitted and
received by vibrating fatty tissues in their snout).36 Sounds of course travels much faster in
water than air, and typically much further in oceans than over land, which is why some baleen
whales can communicate over hundreds if not thousands of miles. Against this backdrop,
its important to recognize that large commercial vessels are surprisingly noisy with decibel
levels at the source of up to 180 db; to put this in perspective, humans suffer permanent
hearing loss if exposed to 100 db for 5 minutes, while the US Marine Mammal Protection Act
defines level B harassment of a marine mammal to occur when there is persistent exposure
to noise exceeding 120db. Of the commercial vessels I study, the group of bulk carriers and
most cargo ships and tankers have a similar noise impact, whereas container ships (Unitised
cargo) have a significantly different noise signature.37
    Despite these major accomplishments by the biology community in detailing the probable
  36
     A very nice review of killer whale hearing is contained in Ford (2017)
  37
     For variation across vessel types see McKenna et al. (2012) and Veirs, Veirs and D. (2016). And while
most studies focus on exposure relatively near the source (3km for example), it is disconcerting that
McKenna et al. (2012) finds vessels even 20km away (cargo ships) generate noise signatures discernible from
the background. Many studies, including the two mentioned above, provide evidence linking noise output
(measured in decibels) and a vessel's speed. A good introduction to the issue of vessel noise that contains a
literature review is Southall et al. (2017).


                                                     41
chain of causation, researchers have, as of yet, failed to link increasing ocean noise pollution
to a population level event - like births or deaths of a marine mammal. In the face of this
abyss, I proceed cautiously, conservatively and hopefully transparently.
    I start by first aggregating across all vessel types to examine the impact of total vessel km
in the CH. In column I of Table 4, I simply add total vessel km (measured in millions of km per
year) to the already established model for births. Total vessel km includes all the commercial
categories shown in the two panels of Figure 7. Because whales from the NRKW spend far
less time in this CH, in column II I introduce an interaction term to differentiate between
the impacts on the NRKW and SRKW populations. Taken at face value, the coefficient
estimates and significance levels in column II indicate a strong negative relationship between
fecundity and vessel disturbance for the SRKW. To put this in perspective, the average km
travelled per year in the CH by commercial vessels over the 1977-1997 period was to 2.1
million; in the post 1998 period it rose to 2.9 million. Using this .8 million km change as
our metric, the estimates from column I imply a fall in the odds of a SRKW giving birth of
32%. Adding the relevant coefficients, the estimated impact on the NRKW is smaller but is
positive.
    Because Unitised vessels are considerably noisier and faster than other vessel classes,
I divide total vessel km into those of Unitised vessels and the sum of all other vessels in
columns II onwards. In Column II I again allow the impacts to differ by populations and
this again appears to be very important with the SRKW impact being strongly negative,
while that on the North is smaller and positive. These coefficients again imply very large
negative impacts on the SRKW and smaller, but still positive impacts on the NRKW. For
logical completeness, I evaluate the impact of all other commercial vessel km in Column III.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the measures of disturbance are now much smaller and insignificant.
Finally, in column IV I include both measures of vessel disturbance. The results are similar
to those reported in Column II. and III. The km travelled by Unitised vessels is clearly
important; other vessel km may have no effect at all. Since column IV nests column II and
III, it is possible to evaluate using standard model selection criteria; given the changes in the
log-likelihood, the more parsimonious column II is preferred.




                                               42
                     Table 4: The Impact of Vessel Disturbance on Fertility
                                                       I.            II.           III.           IV.

              Constant                        -24.00         -24.45         -24.24         -24.33
                                                  (3.42)         (3.30)         (3.71)         (3.65)
              Age                               3.98           3.96           3.99           3.97
                                                  (0.66)         (0.66)         (0.67)         (0.66)
              Age2                            -0.24          -0.24          -0.24          -0.24
                                                  (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.04)
              Age3                              0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01
                                                 (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
              Age4                           -0.0001        -0.0001        -0.0001        -0.0001
                                               (0.0000)       (0.0000)       (0.0000)       (0.0000)
              L1.Salmon Abundance               0.33           0.32           0.35           0.32
                                                  (0.13)         (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.12)
              L1.Within-Competition           -0.004         -0.004            -0.002      -0.004
                                                 (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
              Total Vessel km                 -0.49
                                                  (0.14)
              Total Vessel km × NRKW            0.73
                                                  (0.19)
              Total Unitised km                               -0.81                          -0.76
                                                                (0.06)                        (0.37)
              Total Unitised km × NRKW                         1.34                          1.30
                                                                (0.26)                        (0.48)
              Total Other km                                                     -0.65          -0.11
                                                                                  0.58           0.87
              Total Other km × NRKW                                               0.74           0.11
                                                                                  0.68           0.95

              NRKW & NRKW × Age                      Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
              N                                    5,707          5,707          5,707         5,707
              Log likelihood                  -1404.9851      -1404.273     -1406.7047    -1404.2572

               Standard errors are clustered at the pod level and appear in parentheses.  : p < 0.01,
                   : p < 0.05,  : p < 0.1
               Distances are measured in million km.
               a : "Total Other km" is the vessel total less the distance traveled by unitised vessels.
               b : N records the number of female-whale-years




    Despite the sometimes changing magnitudes across these columns there is much similar-
ity. Across all columns the basic demographic determinants of fertility remain in all cases.
The size, sign and significance of salmon abundance remains and the estimated precision of
Within-Competition improves markedly.
    One puzzling feature of the results is the small positive effects on the NRKW. Under
the weak conjecture, we would expect that a negative shock to the SRKW would have no
effect on the SRKW or perhaps a small negative effect since they shared part of the Salish
Sea CH. The finding of slightly positive effects is therefore slightly concerning, although it

                                                       43
may be reflective of across-population competition which is ruled out here by assumption.
In contrast, the vessel disturbance impacts on SRKW births are always found to be large,
negative, and significant. Vessel km are found to be important when they come from the
noisiest class of vessels, which we know have also increased the most over the sample period.

V.II.2   Deaths

The demographic and environmental determinants of death are very standard and similar to
those for births: age, access to prey and gender. Before proceeding to a regression analysis,
in Figure 11, I present the mean death rate at various ages. Since deaths early in life are
very common the 0-9 year window has been divided above and below the age of 4. As shown
there is significant neonatal fatality which declines quite quickly so that by a whale's mid-
teens mortality is at its lowest. Thereafter mortality rises with age with an especially steep
increase post 40. Although there are some very old whales in my sample, the age axis is cut
off at age 50 for presentation. This same information is presented in tabular form in Table
5 where it is easier to see that mortality does not rise to the neonatal level until whales are
past 40 years of age. The figure and table again suggest a specification for deaths with a
higher order polynomial in age.

    Figure 11: Percentage of deaths by age in the pooled RKW populations, 1979-2019

                                  .06



                                  .05
              RKW Deaths (mean)




                                  .04



                                  .03



                                  .02



                                  .01
                                        0   10   20                 30   40    50
                                                      Age (years)




                                                      44
                              Table 5: Deaths in the pooled RKW pop-
                              ulations by age, 1979-2019

                                                             Death
                               Age group          n         No   Yes      Mean

                               0­4             2432       2339      93    0.038
                               5­9             2062       2033      29    0.014
                               10 ­ 19          2716     2681      35     0.013
                               20 ­ 29          1917     1845      72     0.038
                               30 ­ 39          1199     1156      43     0.036
                               40 ­            1432       1341      91    0.064
                               Total           11758     11395     363    0.031


    In Table 6 below I investigate the basic demographic and environmental determinants of
KW deaths. As before, less restrictive models are estimated as we move rightwards. Several
features are noteworthy. First, the coefficient estimates governing the polynomial in age are
stable across all specifications with only small differences as we move from column I to V.
Differences, when they do arise, occur when I introduce a full set of Male x Age interactions
in Column III, and then a full set of NRKW x Age interactions in Column IV forwards.
Mortality falls steeply at first, and eventually rises although the exact shape is best left to
Figure 10 which I will soon present.
    Second, in Columns I-II there is a singular indicator variable for a whale being male.
These coefficient estimates are clustered around .34 and are highly significant, indicating the
odds of death are significantly higher for males. In columns IV and V, I add interactions of
Age with Male and then also Age with NRKW. Judging from the change in the log likelihood,
the Age interactions with Male appear to be the most important. This is not surprising since
many female KW live past 60 whereas this is unheard of for males.
    In columns II onward there is consistent evidence that prey availability matters to mor-
tality. Interestingly, the impact of a bad salmon year are more than twice as large as they
were for births.38 Unlike the case of births, it is unclear whether this year's or last year's
  38
    Ford et al. (2010) using quite different methods find some similar results. They employ life table statistics
from 1973 to 1996 to create a steady state expected profile for births and deaths, and then examine how
deviations from this average are related to salmon abundance. Using data from 1979 to 2004 they find both
births and deaths respond to variation in the salmon index used but the evidence for mortality being related
to abundance is much stronger.


                                                       45
prey availability matters, so in Column V I include both. It appears lagged abundance is
the more relevant of the two. Finally, there is little evidence that within-competition affects
deaths. The coefficient signs vary across columns and are never precisely estimated.

                     Table 6: Baseline Demographic Determinants of Mortality
                                              I.              II.            III.            IV.              V.

          Constant                    -2.97           -2.09            -1.14               -0.54            -0.71
                                          (0.25)          (0.45)           (0.54)          (0.46)          (0.52)
          Age                         -0.22           -0.22            -0.32           -0.41           -0.41
                                          (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.06)          (0.04)          (0.04)
          Age2                          0.01            0.01             0.01            0.02            0.02
                                        (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)
          Age3                     -0.0002         -0.0002          -0.0002         -0.0002         -0.0002
                                      (0.00002)       (0.00002)        (0.00004)       (0.00003)       (0.00003)
          Age4                     0.000001        0.000001         0.000001        0.000001        0.000001
                                    (0.000000)      (0.000000)       (0.000000)      (0.000000)      (0.000000)
          NRKW                             -0.36           -0.28            -0.36      -1.17           -1.20
                                          (0.31)          (0.30)           (0.29)          (0.39)          (0.39)
          Male                          0.34            0.34           -2.53           -2.72           -2.71
                                          (0.10)          (0.10)           (0.61)          (0.64)          (0.64)
          L1.Within-Competition            0.001         0.0002          -0.0004         -0.0004         -0.0002
                                        (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)
          L1.Salmon Abundance                         -0.72            -0.74           -0.74           -1.15
                                                          (0.27)           (0.28)          (0.28)          (0.30)
          Salmon Abundance                                                                                   0.18
                                                                                                           (0.14)

          Age × NRKW                        No              No               No             Yes             Yes
          Age × Male                        No              No              Yes             Yes             Yes
          N                             12,571          12,571           12,571          12,571          12,571
          Log likelihood            -1575.1001      -1568.5674       -1496.0125      -1488.3142      -1486.7264

           Standard errors are clustered at the pod level and appear in parentheses.         : p < 0.01,      :p<
           0.05,  : p < 0.1
           a : N records the number of female-whale-years




                                                         46
                          Figure 12: Mortality by Age, Salmon Availability, and Gender
                                                    SRKW                                         NRKW
                           .15




                             .1
              Pr(death)




                           .05




                             0
                                  0      10       20       30       40      50     0     10     20    30     40       50
                                                                    Age of animal
                                  Not Males with low salmon index                  Not Males with high salmon index
                          Within Population Graphs differ by Salmon Availability




    To complete our discussion of these baseline determinants, I plot the predicted probability
of death at various ages in Figure 12 using the regression estimates in column IV from Table
6. The panels differ in terms of the population considered, and the lines in each panel
correspond to the state of a low (one std. deviation below average) salmon index or not. One
complication arises in the case of mortality because whales die before their gender is revealed
which is often at the age of 10 or more. Therefore, not Male implies being either classified
as female or yet to be classified which includes almost all low-aged deaths. The figure shows
very well the rapid fall in mortality in the first few years of life, but rapid rise after the age of
30. As well, comparing the panels it appears that on all dimensions the NRKW suffer lower
mortality than do the SRKW although these differences are not large.
    Overall, Table 6 and Figure 12 provide a strong foundation for examining the potential
impact of vessel disturbance. Accordingly, in Table 7 I augment the basic demographic
determinants with measures of vessel disturbance. Again, I proceed cautiously.




                                                                          47
                        Table 7: The Impact of Vessel Disturbance on Mortality
                                                   I.             II.            III.            IV.               V.

       Constant                                 -0.89           -0.60           -0.42           -0.32           -0.36
                                               (0.65)          (0.81)          (0.54)          (0.52)          (0.54)
       Age                                 -0.42           -0.41           -0.42           -0.42           -0.42
                                               (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)
       Age2                                  0.02            0.02            0.02            0.02            0.02
                                             (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)
       Age3                             -0.0002         -0.0002         -0.0002         -0.0002         -0.0002
                                           (0.00003)       (0.00003)       (0.00003)       (0.00003)       (0.00003)
       Age4                             0.000001        0.000001        0.000001        0.000001        0.000001
                                         (0.000000)      (0.000000)      (0.000000)      (0.000000)      (0.000000)
       NRKW                                     -1.06           -0.87       -0.97          -1.09            -1.01
                                               (0.76)          (0.92)          (0.42)          (0.39)          (0.42)
       Male                                -2.73           -2.72           -2.74           -2.74           -2.73
                                               (0.65)          (0.64)          (0.65)          (0.64)          (0.64)
       L1.Salmon Abundance                 -0.76           -0.72           -0.73           -0.71           -0.73
                                               (0.27)          (0.28)          (0.25)          (0.26)          (0.26)
       L1.Within-Competition                   -0.003           0.001       -0.008         -0.008          -0.009
                                            (0.0030)        (0.0016)        (0.0043)        (0.0039)        (0.0043)
       Total Vessel km                        0.24
                                               (0.12)
       Total Vessel km × NRKW                    0.08
                                               (0.37)
       Total Other km                                          -0.03
                                                              (0.28)
       Total Otherl km × NRKW                                  -0.24
                                                              (0.52)
       Total Unitised km                                                     0.74                             2.27
                                                                              (0.17)                           (0.65)
       Total Unitised km × NRKW                                                 0.97                             -1.51
                                                                              (0.77)                           (1.08)
       L1.Total Unitised km                                                                   0.58            -1.61
                                                                                              (0.24)           (0.85)
       L1.Total Unitised km × NRKW                                                             1.14           2.71
                                                                                              (0.67)           (0.99)

       Age × NRKW                               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
       Age × Male                               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
       N                                     12,571          12,571          12,571          12,571            12,571
       Log likelihood                    -1486.8069      -1488.0229       -1479.931      -1480.3884        -1478.2748

        Standard errors are clustered at the pod level and appear in parentheses.  : p < 0.01,             : p < 0.05,
           : p < 0.1
        Distances are measured in million km.
        a : "Total Other km" is the vessel total less the distance traveled by unitised vessels.
        b : N records the number of female-whale-years




    Column I investigates the impact of total vessel km in the CH again allowing for a NRKW
interaction. The estimated coefficient on the main effect in column I is positive and precisely

                                                         48
estimated implying disturbance raises mortality; the interaction is close to zero. In column
II forward, I divide total km travelled into those of all other vessels and those travelled by
Unitised vessels. Other vessel km in Column II appear to have little impact on mortality;
whereas Unitised km in Column III drive up mortality significantly. In both cases, the NRKW
interaction terms are insignificant. Since Unitised vessel km appear to be the most important,
in Column IV I investigate whether lagged vessel km are relevant, and then in Column V
try to ascertain whether contemporaneous or lagged are key to mortality. The evidence
is similar across columns. Consider just the last column. Adding the contemporaneous
and lagged effects suggests vessel disturbance from Unitised vessels raises mortality for the
SRKW. Since vessel km are measured in millions of km, and Unitised vessel km in the CH
rose by about .5 million across the two pre and post time periods, the coefficient estimates
imply this change raises the odds of a SRKW death by almost 40%. Doing the same for
the interaction terms suggests a very similar conclusion - mortality also rises for the NRKW.
Therefore, unlike births, the mortality impacts of vessel disturbance appear to be very similar
for both the NRKW and SRKW.

V.II.3   Assessing the Weak Conjecture

Combining evidence for and against the weak conjecture, three conclusions stand out.
    First, the Malthusian methods work very well in capturing the basic demographic and
environmental determinants of population events. Salmon availability is always, and within-
competition is often, found to be important to births and deaths. The age profiles for fertility
and mortality make sense, and match, to the extent possible similar work.
    Second, the impact of vessel disturbance on the SRKW is clear; on the NRKW less so.
The SRKW population is always negatively impacted by km travelled by vessels in the habitat
- whether this be by falling birth rates or rising death rates. The evidence for impacts on
the NRKW are mixed: on births, it appears vessel km spur higher births; but on deaths it
appears to spur higher deaths. In theory, these effects could net to a zero impact on NRKW
population growth - but this is a tortured explanation. A better one is simply that the weak
conjecture is just a poor representation of reality for the NRKW: that the positive impact
of vessel km on NRKW births is indicative of model misspecification; and that by the usual
omitted variable logic, the prime candidate for such an omission is a variable highly correlated
with vessel km in the critical habitat. Third, vessel disturbance impacts for Unitised vessels
is consistently important to both births and deaths, always large in magnitude, and almost
always statistically significant. With this assessment in mind, I now turn to examine the

                                              49
strong conjecture.


V.III     The Strong Conjecture
Any empirical evaluation of the strong conjecture must be incomplete - it requires evidence
from an event that has yet to occur - the extinction of the SRKW population. Nevertheless,
I will marshall relevant evidence for and against. To do so, I present evidence showing
the SRKW do in fact compete for scarce resources with the NRKW, and show how vessel
disturbance shocks have impacted the SRKW greatly while leaving the NRKW relatively
unscathed. This evidence supports my treatment of the NRKW and SRKW as competing
species with one population subject to a much larger vessel disturbance shock. To complete
my argument, I then present evidence showing that the SRKW have indeed shifted to a
population trajectory consistent with their slow-motion extinction, and argue this shift was
created by the change in vessel disturbance over the sample period.

V.III.1   Within and Across-Population Competition

Thus far, I have assumed the two populations evolve independently, although both were
affected by increases in vessel disturbance and changes in Chinook salmon availability. Un-
der this assumption, the estimated impacts of competition from other whales reflected only
within-population competition for scarce resources (habitat and its accompanying prey). It
meant that the probability of a population event for either the NRKW and SRKW was in-
dependent of the population size of the others' population; as a result, differences in their
fertility or mortality could be captured by population specific dummies and relevant interac-
tions.
    I now relax this assumption, and allow for the possibility that competition is both within
and across-populations; i.e.,  = 0 and  = 0. Therefore, the size of the Northern popu-
lation may directly affect Southern population events and vice versa. The relevant Across-
Competition variable now enters as potential determinant of population events, replacing, at
least partially, the role played earlier by the time invariant population specific dummies and
their interactions. The importance of this substitution depends on the time-series properties
of the two populations. Since the SRKW population has ebbed and flowed over the sample
period and ended very close to where it started in the mid 1970s, excluding this variation in
the SRKW population may have had little consequence. In contrast, the NRKW population
has grown tremendously, and almost continuously, over the period more than doubling since


                                             50
the late 1970s.39 If the competing species model is correct, this is variation we would be
foolish to ignore.
    The competing species model tells us this growth in the NRKW population comes from
two conceptually distinct sources. The NRKW population should grow towards its own
biological carrying capacity even absent the SRKW; and arguably its population size in the
early 1970s was likely below this carrying capacity given the ongoing negative impacts of the
live capture industry, and commonplace harassment of KW. Therefore, some NRKW growth
over the sample period is to be expected.40 But in addition to this transitional growth, there
is also growth created by any vessel disturbance that falls primarily on the SRKW. This
growth is created by across-population competition and can be examined using phase plane
analysis. Suppose we start at a point like A in Figure 3 where all transitional growth has
been completed. From this starting point, small negative shocks to KS , coming from vessel
disturbance, would shift the S   = 0 locus inwards. This immediately places the the previous
steady state at A in the new IV quadrant of the phase plane. The dynamics necessitate an
increasing Northern population and a falling Southern population. If these negative shocks
continued they would drive KS downwards over time moving the system towards a new
steady state at B. They could of course lead to extinction. Therefore, a key implication of
the competing species model is that the time series of vessel disturbance and the NRKW
population should be positively correlated.
    To investigate this implication, in Figure 13 below I plot the NRKW population level and
millions of km by Unitised Vessels in the SRKW critical habitat over the entire time period.
Since they differ in units, I have graphed them on separate vertical axes.
    Its obvious from the figure that the two time series are strongly correlated, and in fact
the simple correlation between the two is .87.41 Two observations follow. The first is that
separately identifying the impact of vessel disturbance on SRKW population events vs. the
impact of NRKW population growth is likely to be very difficult if not impossible. This is
fundamentally a data problem. The second is that the figure presents evidence consistent
with, but not necessarily for, the competing species model underlying the strong conjecture.
The result shown could be nothing more than happenstance: the NRKW grew and so did
the activity of major ports in the Salish Sea. Both observations suggest we find other sources
  39
     The SRKW went from 83 in 1979 to 77 in 2019; the NRKW started at 139 and ended at 335.
  40
     This is exactly the growth that we would see in the phase plane of Figure 3. in the movement to point
A, when the isoclines meet at 90 degrees and the NRKW population is initially below its steady state.
  41
     A similarly large correlation exists with total vessel km at .85 which is not too far from the correlation
between Unitised and All Vessel Km which is .92!



                                                      51
of variation in the data to separate these effects to resolve the correlation vs. causation
question.

                                                 Figure 13: Correlation or Causation?
                                    350                                                             1.4




                                                                                                          Travel distance in critical habitat (million km)
                                                                                                    1.2
                                    300
                 Number of whales




                                                                                                    1
                                    250
                                                                                                    .8

                                    200
                                                                                                    .6


                                    150                                                             .4

                                          1980         1990         2000      2010           2020
                                                                   Years

                                                   NRKW population size       Unitised distance




     Two features specific to the KW context provide the necessary help. First, it is well
known that wildlife in general, including marine mammals, often habituate to human distur-
bances and develop avoidance strategies to minimize their impact.42 This suggests that while
increasing vessel disturbance in the Salish may continuously degrade the habitat, large and
rapid changes in disturbance may be especially harmful since they are new and unexpected.
Moreover, relating changes in vessel disturbance to changes in population size (via both births
and deaths) allows us to sidestep the obvious correlation problem in levels. Second, marine
mammals like the SRKW are most vulnerable during key feeding and breeding seasons. This
is, in the SRKW context, the summer months starting in May and ending in September when
they are primarily resident in the Salish Sea. Putting these together, suggests an analysis of
changes (in population) on changes (in vessel disturbance). The results of this analysis are
presented in Table 8 below.
 42
      See for example Wortzok et al. (2003).




                                                                    52
                         Table 8: First difference Impacts on Births and Deaths
                                                       Births                                         Deaths
                                               I.               II.           III.           IV.            V.                VI.

 Constant                             -17.58          -17.59            -17.58         -1.80          -1.79                -1.80
                                          (1.46)          (1.42)            (1.46)         (0.64)         (0.63)            (0.64)
 Age                                     2.80            2.79              2.80        -0.32          -0.32             -0.32
                                          (0.29)          (0.28)            (0.29)         (0.06)         (0.06)            (0.06)
 Age2                                  -0.16           -0.16             -0.16           0.01           0.01              0.01
                                          (0.02)          (0.02)            (0.02)         (0.00)         (0.00)            (0.00)
 Age3                                  0.004           0.004             0.004       -0.0002        -0.0002           -0.0002
                                         (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)      (0.0000)       (0.0000)          (0.0000)
 Age4                               -0.00004        -0.00003          -0.00004       0.00000        0.00000           0.00000
                                        (0.0000)        (0.0000)          (0.0000)      (0.0000)       (0.0000)          (0.0000)
 Male                                                                                  -2.54          -2.53             -2.54
                                                                                           (0.61)         (0.61)            (0.61)
 L1.Within-Competition                   -0.002         -0.002            -0.002         -0.0003        -0.0002           -0.0003
                                          (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
 L1.Across-Competition                  -0.01          -0.01             -0.01           0.003          0.002             0.003
                                           (0.00)         (0.00)            (0.00)       (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
 L1.Salmon Abundance                       0.29         0.32                0.29        -0.69          -0.69             -0.69
                                           (0.12)         (0.11)            (0.12)         (0.27)         (0.28)            (0.27)
 L1. Total Unitised km                  -3.24          -3.29                  0.02       1.47            1.43                 0.18
                                           (0.71)         (0.67)            (0.67)         (0.53)         (0.59)            (0.87)
 L1.Total Unitised km × NRKW             3.25           3.30                                -1.29          -1.23
                                           (0.98)         (0.95)                           (1.00)         (1.03)
 L1.Total Unitised km × J pod                                            -3.78                                               1.84
                                                                           (0.71)                                           (1.02)
 L1.Total Unitised km × K pod                                                -1.03                                            0.39
                                                                           (0.70)                                           (1.00)
 L1.Total Unitised km × L pod                                            -3.97                                                1.34
                                                                           (0.66)                                           (0.96)
 Total Unitised km                                         -1.23                                        1.86
                                                            0.90                                        (0.77)
 Total Unitised km × NRKW                                   0.21                                       -2.15
                                                            1.09                                        (0.97)

 Age × Male                                   No              No                No           Yes            Yes               Yes
 N                                         5,707           5,707             5,707        12,571         12,571            12,571
 Log likelihood                         -1403.76        -1402.39          -1403.35      -1494.25       -1492.99        -1494.1502

  Standard errors are clustered at the pod level and appear in parentheses.  : p < 0.01,      : p < 0.05,      : p < 0.1
  Distances are measured in million km.
  a :  denotes first differences.
  b : N records the number of female-whale-years for births; all whale years for deaths.




   The first three columns examine births, the remaining three examine deaths. The base
specifications for both births and deaths are very similar to those presented earlier; I then
account for vessel disturbance shocks in slightly different ways across columns. As well, the
population specific main and interaction effects are now replaced by the across-competition

                                                          53
variable. This variable measures, at each whale-year observation, the population size of the
competing population; just as the within-competition variable measures the population size
of its own population. For consistency with earlier results I retained the one year lag on all
demographic and environmental determinants.
    With these facts in mind, consider the first three columns examining births. Consistent
with earlier results, salmon abundance has a strong positive effect on births, while the neg-
ative coefficient for within-competition indicates there is competition for habitat and prey.
All of these coefficients are precisely estimated, as is the polynomial in age whose structure
is also stable across columns. Surprisingly, the across-competition variable is also negatively
signed and precisely estimated. Moreover, the coefficient estimate is large. Taken at face
value, this is strong evidence for very robust competition between the NRKW and SRKW
populations for prey.
    Turning now to vessel disturbance, in the first column I introduce the (lagged one period)
first difference in km travelled by Unitised vessels in the critical habitat. Since this impact
should or could differ across populations, it is also interacted with NRKW. The coefficient
on the change in Total Unitised is negative, large, and precisely estimated. Since km are
measured in units of millions, the estimate implies a 100,000 change in Unitised km travelled
in the CH would lower the odds of a SRKW birth the next year by 28%. A change of 100,000
km is however very large since the average yearly change is only a little over 23,000 km and
the std deviation is 76,000. Nevertheless, this is a large effect. In contrast, the size and
positive sign of the NRKW interaction on this term completely removes any direct impact
of these shocks on NRKW births. Therefore, the vessel shocks in the SRKW habitat only
affect the SRKW. In column II, I include both the contemporaneous shock to vessel km along
with its one period lag, again with the appropriate NRKW interactions. The estimates from
column I remain virtually unchanged suggesting that it is important that the shock occur
during the important breeding period one year prior to births. In column III, I divide the
impacts across the three SRKW pods, J, K and L. The impact on the NRKW is now captured
by the main effect in Total Unitised, which is close to zero - consistent with the earlier column
results. The pod specific interactions suggest a strong negative effect of vessel km shocks on
births, although the impact on the K pod is not precisely estimated. This may be due to
K pod's small size (mean of 20). The other coefficient estimates are slightly different, but
retain their sign and remain important. Overall, the results on births are surprisingly good
and very supportive of a competing species interpretation of population interaction.
    Now consider the last three columns examining deaths. Again, I estimate what is very


                                               54
close to the earlier demographic model with environmental controls. The coefficients on
within-competition are small and insignificant, similar to those estimated in in Table 6. In
contrast, the across- competition coefficients are positive and significant, although relatively
small in terms of magnitude. A 50 whale increase in the other whale population raises the
odds of death by 16%. Salmon abundance again drives deaths downward and is precisely
estimated.
    Starting in Column IV, I introduce the one period lag change in Unitised km, and in
Column V add to this the contemporaneous shock to vessel km. These columns are consistent
in finding a strong positive effect of vessel km shocks on mortality, although it is unclear
whether contemporaneous or last year's shocks are the most salient. The implied impact
on the NRKW, from the interactions, is always far less. The magnitude of the impacts is
perhaps one half of those on births. This is consistent with the known importance of the
Salish for breeding activity. Unlike the case of births, in column V, I cannot rule out a small
increase in NRKW mortality from the changes in vessel km. In the final column I again
divide the impact across the three SKRW pods. In this case, the main impact on the NRKW
may well be zero. The impact on the SRKW varies across pods, is always positively signed,
but only significant in one of the three cases. The coefficient estimates are however, again
approximately one half of those on births.
    Overall the results are very encouraging. In all cases, the basic demographic and envi-
ronmental variables hold up very well in terms of sign, significance and magnitude. Most
importantly, the across-competition variable appears with the appropriate sign and is highly
significant across all specifications. Moreover, the vessel km shocks appear to do just that -
provide an unwelcome shock to the KW during their sensitive breeding period in the Salish
Sea; the direct impact on the NRKW births is precisely estimated at zero. The evidence on
deaths is less convincing, but still consistent with the results on births. The vessel km shocks
appear to be less salient for deaths, and the timing of their effect is unclear. Interestingly, it
is a standard result in the Malthusian approach to human demographics that negative shocks
(disease, crop failures, etc.) have an immediate impact on deaths, but only impact births
next year. If we compare and contrast the results in Columns II and V we see the same basic
story - except now the same gestational logic applies to killer whales.
    Combining the results of this section with those earlier provides, in total, overwhelming
evidence that vessel shocks have a large negative impact on the SRKW. Although the weak
and strong conjecture cannot both be correct, the dissonance this may cause the reader cannot
negate the obvious implications of the empirics. The pattern of vessel traffic I documented


                                               55
earlier shows a rapid acceleration to a much higher level post 1998, and Table 8 exploits
those rapid changes to both confirm the negative impacts of vessel disturbance on the SRKW
population, and provide evidence for a supporting role played by the NRKW. The estimated
impacts on births and death are, almost uniformly, large - so large that only a several std.
deviation increase in salmon abundance could keep them at bay. The only remaining question
is how have these competing impacts played out for the two populations.


VI       Slow-Motion Extinction
There is of course an entire literature examining the conditions for extinction in both biology
and economics. Most of this work examines the likelihood of extinction based on biological
characteristics, market fundamentals, and various forms of uncertainty.43 My approach here is
to use a simple application of economic demography informed by specific biological features of
killer whales. To do so, I shift my focus away from individual whale fecundity and mortality to
focus on cohorts of whales; specifically cohorts of female whales. For many marine mammals,
and KW in particular, the ratio of mature males to females in the population is of negligible
importance to reproduction. KW exhibit sexual dimorphism (the sexes are very unequal in
sizes), which leads to only a few large males breeding. This allows me to ignore the evolution
of the male population entirely, and focus my attention on the total fertility rate (TFR)
of female whales in a cohort. A key observation is that, for a given sex ratio at birth of
50-50, if female whale total fertility rate falls below 2 - and remains there - then extinction
is inevitable.44 This extinction is likely to be a slow-motion march to oblivion given killer
whales' very long time to maturation and then senescence.
    A second key observation is that a cohort's total fertility rate neatly sums up all of
the separate impacts of changing salmon availability, increased vessel noise, and perhaps
even reduced genetic variability, on both births and deaths. For example, a shock lowering
the fertility of individual whales lowers the TFR of all females in a given cohort directly;
similarly, a shock raising individual whale mortality reduces the number of reproductive
females remaining in a cohort, again lowering cohort TFR (because either female whales do
not reach sexual maturity or they die before the end of their reproductive lifespan).
    It proves useful to consider a healthy population to fix ideas; therefore, in Figure 14 below
  43
    See for example Purvis et al. (2000) in biology and the classic work in economics by Vernon Smith (1975).
  44
    Recent work on the SRKW population has found that only two existing males are responsible for over
50% of recent offspring. There is also some evidence from SRKW births in the last 20 years, that the sex
ratio at birth has been skewed towards males making extinction even more likely.


                                                     56
I plot the cumulative number of surviving-to-one-year births (fecund births) per female whale
in five NRKW cohorts. The whales are grouped into ten year birth cohorts from 1960 to
2009. Members of the 1980 cohort have just reached an age of 40; the 1990 cohort only 30
and so on. As shown, the 1960 and 1970 cohorts' total lifetime fertility, or their TFR, is
close to 3.5 whales. This is of course well above replacement fertility of 2.0 and indicates a
healthy and growing population. These two early cohorts also seem quite similar, while the
remaining three appear somewhat different.

                                                                        Figure 14: Female NRKW Cohorts
                                                                                          NRKW
                                                             3.5
             Number of fecund births per number of females




                                                              3

                                                             2.5
                          in birth year cohort




                                                              2

                                                             1.5

                                                              1

                                                              .5

                                                              0
                                                                   20                30                  40               45
                                                                                          Age group

                                                                         1960-1969           1970-1979        1980-1989
                                                                         1990-1999           2000-2009




    In relation to the first two cohorts, the 1980 cohort has reduced fertility over the last
ten years of their reproductive life. This is also true for the 1990 cohort and for the 2000
cohort. This suggests the pattern of reduced total fertility is not a pure cohort effect. To
understand why, suppose that over time the increased leaching of PCBs and other organic
chemicals into the Salish Sea were driving births down and deaths up. In this case, we would
expect cumulative fertility at all ages to be lower with each cohort now being exposed to an
increasingly polluted sea. A similar result would hold if there was a long run reduction in
salmon availability.
    Instead what the figure shows is that the lowered fertility periods are all post 1998, and
this suggests a cohort x period explanation: those whales who reached their peak fertility

                                                                                      57
years, ages 20-30, prior to the large change in vessel disturbance have an unaltered fertility
profile; those that reached their peak after, suffer its long term effects. For example, the 2000
cohort has spent all of its (reproductive) lifetime with greater vessel traffic; the 1990 cohort
only 2/3; and the 1980 cohort only 1/2. Each has reduced fertility, but interestingly only the
fertility of the 1990 and 2000 cohort fertility are significantly different from earlier cohorts.
    With these results in mind, consider an alternative grouping of whales to highlight the
cohort x period explanation. In Figure 15 I divide the whales into two groups: those that
reached their peak fertility age of 20 before 1998, and those that reached peak fertility
after 1998. The red line now gives the total fertility per whale for a whale reaching age 20
and beyond regardless of their specific birth age cohort. As shown, the two cohorts now
differ only slightly but regularly, with the post-1998 cohort having slightly lower fertility
at all ages. Importantly, by age 40 even the post-1998 group exhibits total fertility well
above replacement. Therefore, it appears the sum total of changing salmon availability and
increased vessel disturbance has had only a relatively small effect on NRKW fertility, and
has had no effect on their long term viability.45 This is of course entirely consistent with the
estimates I provided earlier on the strong conjecture.

                                                                     Figure 15: Female NRKW Synthetic Cohorts
                                                                                                        NRKW
                                                          3.5
                Mean number of fecund births per number




                                                           3
                     of females in birth year cohort




                                                          2.5

                                                           2

                                                          1.5

                                                           1

                                                           .5

                                                           0
                                                                20                                 30                                 40      45
                                                                                                        Age group

                                                                                     Peak before 1998                       Peak after 1998
                                                                The peak before 1998 group contains the 1960 and 1970 birth cohorts.
                                                                The peak after 1998 group containts the 1980, 1990, and 2000 birth cohorts.


  45
    In fact, there is no statistically significant difference between the cumulative fertility across the two
groups at any age in the figure.


                                                                                                      58
   In Figure 16 below I now redo this analysis using the same age cohorts for the SRKW
population.

                                                                           Figure 16: Female SRKW Cohorts
                                                                                             SRKW
                                                                3.5
                Number of fecund births per number of females




                                                                 3

                                                                2.5
                             in birth year cohort




                                                                 2

                                                                1.5

                                                                 1

                                                                 .5

                                                                 0
                                                                      20                30                  40               45
                                                                                             Age group

                                                                            1960-1969           1970-1979        1980-1989
                                                                            1990-1999           2000-2009




    The two earliest cohorts now exhibit somewhat different profiles. The 1970 cohort exhibits
higher fecundity at later ages in contrast to the 1960 cohort. It is very tempting to attribute
the reduced fertility of the 1960s cohort to the live capture industry. The 1960 cohort
would have been subject to the capture industry and associated harassment for the first
20 years of life; whereas the 1970s cohort less so.46 . Whatever the reason, there are broad
similarities and in fact these two cohorts are statistically indistinguishable from one another
at all ages. Both cohorts show rising fertility with age and reproduction rates at or exceeding
replacement levels. But now consider the remain three cohorts. The 1980s cohort shows no
reduction in fertility at age 20, but a severely reduced continuing fertility at all later ages
(and these differences are statistically significant). The 1990s cohort has low age 20 fertility
and continuing low fertility at 30. The latest 2000 cohort seems, if anything, in worse shape
than its recent predecessors. Its age 20 fertility is significantly different from all but the
  46
    The very first whale "Moby Doll" was captured in 1964; and the last in 1977; in total, 68 whales were
taken primarily from the SRKW. Several, or perhaps many others, died in the capture process. For an
excellent, even handed, and very interesting account of the personalities behind the capture industry and its
evolution see Colby (2018)


                                                                                         59
reduced fertility of the 1990 cohort.
   Again the figure suggests an alternative grouping based on pre and post 1998 observations,
and hence I now provide the same calculations for the two synthetic pre and post SRKW
cohorts. This is shown in Figure 17 below.

                                                                   Figure 17: Female SRKW Synthetic Cohorts
                                                                                                      SRKW
                                                        3.5
              Mean number of fecund births per number




                                                         3
                   of females in birth year cohort




                                                        2.5

                                                         2

                                                        1.5

                                                         1

                                                         .5

                                                         0
                                                              20                                 30                                 40      45
                                                                                                      Age group

                                                                                   Peak before 1998                       Peak after 1998
                                                              The peak before 1998 group contains the 1960 and 1970 birth cohorts.
                                                              The peak after 1998 group containts the 1980, 1990, and 2000 birth cohorts.




    In the pre-1998 period, total fertility is above replacement near 2.5 whales per female by
the end their reproductive lives. In contrast, the post-1998 synthetic cohort exhibits very
low fertility. By age 40 this cohort is producing only one whale per member which is, of
course, well below replacement. The differences at age 30 and 40 are significantly different
from the pre-98 cohort. The conclusion is now painfully obvious: the total fertility profile
for SRKW cohorts reaching peak fertility before 1998 has shifted downwards post 1998; the
post 1998 cohort exhibits a total fertility rate well below the minimum replacement of 2; and
the SRKW population is on a slow-motion path to extinction.


VI.I     Alternative Hypotheses
Thus far I have kept to a tight script and entertained few alternatives. I did so primarily for
transparency and directness in presenting what is a quite unusual set of arguments. There


                                                                                                    60
are however at least two alternative hypotheses that merit discussion. The first is that
the SRKW have been struggling because of a long term reduction in their available prey -
Chinook salmon. The second is that the long term consequences of PCBs leaching into the
Salish Sea has lowered SRKW reproductive potential.
    It is certainly true, and widely recognized, that salmon returns on the West coast of B.C,
Washington and Oregon have declined from earlier levels. Whether, and to what extent,
this is due to climate change, the construction of dams blocking spawning streams, over
fishing, or other marine mammal predation of young Chinook is less clear.47 Salmon, as
a suspect, has attracted most of the attention because policies to effect salmon stocks are
well understood. For example, this could be through increased hatchery programs, stream
restoration and/or further fishing restrictions. Alternatively, and more dramatically it could
involve large changes to a set of Columbia river dams in the hope of altering the abundance
of Columbia river Chinook dramatically.48
    An important input to any evaluation would be the expected resulting impact on SRKW
populations. On this front, several estimates in the paper could be useful. For example, the
results on births in both Tables 3 and 4 and have salmon abundance coefficients between
.32 and .37. Similarly, Tables 6 and 7 show an impact almost twice that large on deaths.
Taking .35 as a point estimate for births and -.73 as that for deaths, implies a permanent
two-standard deviation rise in the value of the Aggregate Salmon Index above its mean
would raise the odds of a birth by 22% and lower the odds of death by 34%. These are very
large changes, albeit for a two-standard deviation increase in the abundance index.49 To see
whether these estimated effects are large enough and whether salmon availability fell enough
over the sample period to offer a credible alternative, I present in Figure 18 below the values
of the three Chinook salmon indices making up my Aggregate Salmon index. To facilitate
discussion about magnitudes I present them as z-scores.
    Three observations follow. First, the three indices are highly correlated which is, of
course, why I created the Aggregate Salmon index as their simple average. Second, all of the
  47
     For example, recently Welch, Porter and Rechisky (2021) finds that smolt to adult returns (the ratio of
young adults leaving the stream to the ocean to those returning) are no different on the dammed rivers than
others in the Pacific Northwest; that returrns have fallen from 1960 levels; and that ocean wide processes
rather than local ones are likely responsible.
  48
     For example, Washington State has recently proposed a $1.1-billion Orca recovery budget which includes
$750,000 to study the removal of the dams which are run by the federal government.
  49
     In fact, only a 3 std. deviation increase in the overall index could undo the effects of the increase in
Unitised vessel traffic on the SRKW. A three std. deviation increase would raise births by 34% and lower
deaths by 46%; but a 500,000 km increase in Unitised vessel km lowers births by 32%, and raises deaths by
45%.


                                                     61
                      Figure 18: Z-scores of major salmon indices over time
                                  2.5

                                    2

                                  1.5

                       Z-scores     1

                                    .5

                                    0

                                   -.5

                                   -1

                                  -1.5

                                   -2
                                         1979   1984   1989   1994        1999   2004   2009   2014   2019
                                                                          Year

                                                          WCVI               NBC           SEAK




indices are highly variable but only one index ever exceeds the two std. deviation threshold
used above. And lastly, it is easy to identify the extremely bad salmon years in the late
1990s which drove the populations downward and were the proximate cause of their listing
as endangered species; of course, the issue is why then did they not recover during the
two extremely positive periods that followed. Therefore, despite my findings that salmon
availability can have a significant impact on both births and deaths - there is little evidence
that changes in salmon availability post 1998 are key to the SRKW decline.50
    An alternative long run decline hypothesis is that PCB pollution in the marine envi-
ronment is impairing the reproductive ability of killer whales. Although PCBs produc-
tion/import/sale was banned by both US and Canadian governments in the late 1970s,
release to the environment and storage were not regulated until the mid 1980s. Nor were
PCB laden materials stripped from existing machinery. Since PCBs and other related organic
pollutants are extremely long lived in the environment, they have clearly impacted sea life
in general, and killer whales in particular. Previous work has for example found the levels of
PCBs in Salish sea fish has remained virtually unchanged over the last twenty years despite
remediation efforts; more to the point, several studies have shown that PCB concentrations
  50
    One feature of the data is missing from this figure. The indices were constructed so the average stock
abundance over the 1979-1982 period was equal to one. Since then the WCVI index has fallen slowly and
has a sample period mean of .8; conversely, NBC and SEAK have risen to 1.25 and 1.4. Therefore there are
some level differences across the indices relative to the initial period benchmarking. However as the figure
suggests replacing my aggregate index with any of the components has no little empirical effect, and nothing
significant hinges on the choice of salmon index. See the Online Appendix for details.


                                                                     62
in the fat tissues of killer whales is quite high by marine mammal standards. Higher, for
example, than similar levels known to cause reproductive impairment in other marine mam-
mals (like seals). What is missing from the PCB explanation is any variation over time
or geography consistent with the decline of the SRKW and continued growth of other KW
populations. For example, the cohort analysis I conducted previously appears to be at odds
with any explanation suggesting a long run uniform reduction in fertility arising from whales
spending more of their life in an increasingly polluted Salish Sea. More damaging still is
the observation that Transient killer whales frequenting these same waters have seen steady
population increases, despite having the very highest levels of PCB concentrations.
    Physical scientists, and social scientists alike, are - rightly so - suspect of mono-causal
explanations for complex phenomena. The impact of vessel disturbance I have highlighted
here, while significant, is unlikely to be the only cause of the SRKW decline. Vessel distur-
bance may have instead magnified the SRKW's existing vulnerabilities coming from variable
and sometimes poor salmon returns and increasingly high PCB levels. Nevertheless, the time
pattern of SRKW rapid recovery from the capture industry, and then subsequent decline, are
first-order properties of their history that are difficult, if not impossible, to reconcile with
the alternative hypotheses without a large role given to vessel disturbance.


VII      Conclusion
This paper set out a potential economic explanation for the slow-motion extinction of the
Southern Resident Killer Whales. It did so by developing a competing species model of
competitive exclusion where the Southern Residents faced competition from their Northern
relatives which share part of their habitat. Within this context I showed how shocks that
degraded their habitat could be magnified by this competition, lowering the populations of
one or both RKW. With this theory as guidance I then developed an empirical strategy
linking these potential shocks to fertility and mortality. These links were formalized in two
hypotheses I named the weak and strong conjecture. The methods I employed to evaluate
them are standard and similar to those of economic historians studying human populations
living under Malthusian constraints.
    A key input to this investigation was the collection of over 40 years of landings data at
over 120 ports on the West Coast of North America. The richness of this data allowed me
to calculate the yearly vessel km travelled, by various large vessel types, within the SRKW
critical habitat. Transforming the landings data, via my methods, to kilometers of potential

                                              63
vessel disturbance is completely novel ­ and potentially applicable to the study of vessel
disturbance on other marine mammals worldwide. Somewhat surprisingly, it comes from the
simple and judicious application of Walras' law and principles of National Income Accounting
to landings data. By doing so I am able to provide information on potential vessel disturbance
from ships, decades before the Automated Identification System and satellite tracking made
similar calculations possible.
    I find that booming trade with Asia, post 1998, created a huge increase in vessel km
travelled in the SRKW critical habitat. Annual vessel km, by large commercial vessels
within the critical habitat, rose by a little over 2 million km over the sample period. Most of
this increase in annual km travelled occurred during the post 1998 period and most comes
from large ships carrying Unitised cargo. With this newly constructed data in hand, I then
exploited parallel work in ecology and biology linking the noise emanating from these large
ships with reduced socializing and foraging by killer whales. This important work let me
complete the chain of logic from booming trade to degraded habitats through to energetic
costs on KW.
    I then conducted three different empirical evaluations of the link between my measure of
potential noise disturbance to KW births and deaths. Although the findings from my analysis
of the weak and strong conjecture differ somewhat in their details, they are unanimous in
finding a large negative impact of vessel disturbance on SRKW births and deaths. These
effects are so large that a permanent three standard deviation increase in salmon availability
would be needed to undo their impacts. Not surprisingly then, my cohort analysis shows that
total fertility in the post 1998 period has fallen well below replacement, setting the SRKW
on a slow motion path to extinction.




                                              64
References
Air Force Guns to Shoot Whales. October 16, 1955. "Air Force Guns to Shoot Whales."
 The Seattle Times.

Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2011. "Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian
 Epoch." American Economic Review, 101(5): 2003­41.

Audoly, Christian, and Enrico Rizzuto. 2015. "Ship Underwater Radiated Noise Pat-
 terns." AQUO - Achieve QUieter Oceans by shipping noise footprint reduction FP7 -
 Collaborative Project No. 314227, Deliverable R2.9.

Ayres, Katherine L., Rebecca K. Booth, Jennifer A. Hempelmann, Kari L. Koski,
 Candice K. Emmons, Robin W. Baird, Kelley Balcomb-Bartok, M. Bradley
 Hanson, Michael J. Ford, and Samuel K. Wasser. 2012. "Distinguishing the im-
 pacts of inadequate prey and vessel traffic on an endangered killer whale (Orcinus orca)
 population." PLoS One, 7(6).

Begon, M., J. L. Harper, and C. R. Townsend. 1996. Ecology: Individuals, Populations,
 and Communities. . 3 ed., Cambridge, MA:Blackwell Science Ltd.

Bigg, Michael A. 1982. "An assessment of killer whale (Orcinus orca) stocks off Vancouver
  Island, British Columbia." Report of the International Whaling Commission, 32: 655­666.

Bigg, Michael A., and Allen A. Wolman. 1975. "Live-capture killer whale (Orcinus
  orca) fishery, British Columbia and Washington, 1962­73." Journal of the Fisheries Board
  of Canada, 32(7): 1213­1221.

Bigg, Michael A., Ian B. MacAskie, and Graeme M. Ellis. 1976. Abundance and
  Movements of Killer Whales Off Eastern and Southern Vancouver Island: With Comments
  on Management. Arctic Biological Station.

Brakes, Philippa, and Sasha R. X. Dall. 2016. "Marine Mammal Behavior: A Review
 of Conservation Implications." Frontiers in Marine Science, 3: 87.

Brander, James A., and M. Scott Taylor. 1998. "The simple economics of Easter
 Island: A Ricardo-Malthus model of renewable resource use." American Economic Review,
 88(1): 119­138.


                                           65
Chasco, Brandon, Isaac C. Kaplan, Austen Thomas, Alejandro Acevedo-
 Guti´errez, Dawn Noren, Michael J. Ford, M. Bradley Hanson, Jonathan
 Scordino, Steve Jeffries, Scott Pearson, et al. 2017. "Estimates of Chinook salmon
 consumption in Washington State inland waters by four marine mammal predators from
 1970 to 2015." Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 74(8): 1173­1194.

Colby, Jason M. 2018. Orca: How we came to Know and Love the Ocean's Greatest Preda-
 tor. Oxford University Press, UK.

Committee, Chinook Technical, et al. 2017. "Exploitation Rate Analysis and Model
 Calibration: Volume One." TCChinook (15)­1 V, 1.

Copeland, Brian R., Joseph S. Shapiro, and M. Scott Taylor. 2021. "Globaliza-
 tion and the Environment." In Handbook of International Economics. Vol. V, , ed. Gita
 Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff, forthcoming.

Cristea, Anca, David L. Hummels, Laura Puzzello, and Misak Avetisyan. 2013.
 "Trade and the greenhouse gas emissions from international freight transport." Journal of
 Environmental Economics and Management, 65(1): 153­173.

Design and Equipment (DE) Sub­committee of the International Maritime Or-
 ganization (IMO). 2011. "Provisions for reduction of noise from commercial ships and
 its adverse impacts on marine life ­ proposed framework for non-mandatory guidelines."
 DE 56/24 submitted by the United States.

Erbe, Christine. 2002. "Underwater noise of whale-watching boats and potential effects on
  killer whales (Orcinus orca), based on an acoustic impact model." Marine mammal science,
  18(2): 394­418.

Fisheries and Oceans Canada: Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat. 2017. "Iden-
  tification of Habitats of special importance to Resident Killer Whales (Orcinus orca) off
  the West coast of Canada." Science Advisory Report 2017/011.

Ford, John K. B. 2006. An assessment of critical habitats of resident killer whales in waters
  off the Pacific coast of Canada. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Science.

Ford, John K. B. 2017. Marine Mammals of British Columbia. Royal BC Museum Hand-
  book published for Fisheries and Oceans Canada.


                                             66
Ford, John K. B., and Graeme M. Ellis. 2006. "Selective foraging by fish-eating killer
  whales Orcinus orca in British Columbia." Marine Ecology Progress Series, 316: 185­199.

Ford, John K. B., Graeme M. Ellis, and Peter F. Olesiuk. 2005. "Linking prey and
  population dynamics: did food limitation cause recent declines of 'resident' killer whales
  (Orcinus orca ) in British Columbia?" Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Research
  Document, 2005/42.

Ford, John K. B., Graeme M. Ellis, Peter F. Olesiuk, and Kenneth C. Balcomb.
  2010. "Linking killer whale survival and prey abundance: food limitation in the oceans'
  apex predator?" Biology Letters, 6: 139­142.

Ford, John K. B., James F. Piklington, Amalis Reira, Mayuko Otsuki, Brian
  Gisborne, Robin M. Abernethy, Eva H. Stredulinsky, Jared R. Towers, and
  Greame M. Ellis. 2017. "Habitats of Special Importance toe Resident Killer Whales
  (Orcinus orca) off the West Coast of Canada." Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Canadian
  Science Advisory Secretariat Research Document 2017/035.

Ford, Michael J., Jennifer Hempelmann, M. Bradley Hanson, Katherine L.
  Ayres, Robin W. Baird, Candice K. Emmons, Jessica I. Lundin, Gregory S.
  Schorr, Samuel K. Wasser, and Linda K. Park. 2016. "Estimation of a killer whale
  (Orcinus orca) populations diet using sequencing analysis of DNA from feces." PloS one,
  11(1).

Gause, Georgii F. 1932. "Experimental studies on the struggle for existence: I. Mixed
 population of two species of yeast." Journal of experimental biology, 9(4): 389­402.

Graham, Mike. September 13, 1975. "B.C. Declares A Moratorium on Capture of Killer
 Whales." The Vancouver Sun, 37.

Griffin, Edward I. 1966. "Making friends with a killer whale." National geographic,
 129(3): 418­446.

Hall, John D., and C. Scott Johnson. 1972. "Auditory thresholds of a killer whale
 Oricnus orca Linnaeus." The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 51(2B): 515­
 517.

Hardin, Garrett. 1960. "The competitive exclusion principle." science, 131(3409): 1292­
 1297.

                                            67
Hilborn, R., S. Cox, F. Gulland, D. Hankin, N. T. Hobbs, D. E. Schindler,
 and A. W. Trites. 2012. "The effects of salmon fisheries on Southern Resident killer
 whales: Final report of the independent science panel." Prepared with the assistance of DR
 Marmorek and AW Hall, ESSA Technologies Ltd., Vancouver, BC for National Marine
 Fisheries Service (Seattle. WA) and Fisheries and Oceans Canada (Vancouver. BC). xv.

Hornaday, William T. 1914. The American natural history: a foundation of useful knowl-
 edge of the higher animals of North America. C. Scribner's sons.

Hoyt, Erich. 2019. Orca: The Whale called Killer. Firefly Books, Ontario, Canada.

Hummels, David L., and Georg Schaur. 2013. "Time as a Trade Barrier." American
 Economic Review, 103(7): 2935­59.

Killing the Killer. 1954. "Killing the Killer." Time Magazine, 64(14): 38.

Lacy, Robert C., Rob Williams, Erin Ashe, Kenneth C. Balcomb III, Lauren J. N.
  Brent, Christopher W. Clark, Darren P. Croft, Deborah A. Giles, Misty Mac-
  Duffee, and Paul C. Paquet. 2017. "Evaluating anthropogenic threats to endangered
  killer whales to inform effective recovery plans." Scientific reports, 7(1): 1­12.

Lagerl¨
      of, Nils-Petter. 2015. "Malthus in Sweden." The Scandinavian Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 117(4): 1091­1133.

Levinson, Mark. 2016. The Box: How the Shipping Container made the World Smaller
  and the World Economy bigger. Princeton University Press, Princeton, USA.

Lloyd's List Maritime Intelligence, Informa. 2020. "Lloyd's List Intelligence: made to
  measure data fields." available at https://maritimeintelligence.informa.com/products-and-
  services/lloyds-list-intelligence/made-to-measure-data.

McKenna, Megan F., Donald Ross, Sean M. Wiggins, and John A. Hildebrand.
 2012. "Underwater radiated noise from modern commercial ships." The Journal of the
 Acoustical Society of America, 131(1): 92­103.

McWhinnie, Lauren H., Patrick D. O'Hara, Casey Hilliard, Nicole Le Baron, Leh
 Smallsahw, Ronald Pelot, and Rosaline Canessa. 2021. "Assessing vessel traffic in
 the Salish Sea using satellite AIS: An important contribution to planning, management


                                            68
  and conversation in southern resident killer whale critical habitat." Ocean and Coastal
  Management, 200: 105479.

Merk, Olaf. 2018. "Container ship size and port relocation." Discussion Paper, Interna-
 tional Transport Forum: Roundtable 169, Paris.

Morton, Alexandra. 2004. Listening to Whales: What the Orcas have taught us. Balantine
 Books, New York.

Morton, Alexandra B., and Helena K. Symonds. 2002. "Displacement of Orcinus orca
 (L.) by high amplitude sound in British Columbia, Canada." ICES Journal of Marine
 Science, 59: 71­80.

NMFS, DFO (National Marine Fisheries Service, Fisheries, and Oceans Canada.
 2011. "A Bilateral Scientific Workshop Process to Evaluate Effects of Salmon Fisheries on
 Southern Resident Killer Whales."

NOAA Fisheries. 2014. "Southern resident killer whales: 10 years of research and conser-
 vation." Northwest Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, WA.

Olesiuk, Peter F., Graeme M. Ellis, and John K. B. Ford. 2005a. Life history and
 population dynamics of northern resident killer whales (Orcinus orca) in British Columbia.
 Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Ottawa, Canada.

Olesiuk, Peter F., Graeme M. Ellis, and John K. B. Ford. 2005b. "Life history and
 population dynamics of resident killer whales Orcinus orca in the coastal waters of British
 Columbia Research Document 2005/045." Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Nanaimo, BC,
 Canada.

Olesiuk, Peter F., Michael A. Bigg, and Graeme M. Ellis. 1990. "Life history and
 population dynamics of Resident killer whales (Orcinus orca ) in the coastal waters of
 British Columbia and Washington State." Report of the International Whaling Commis-
 sion, 12: 209­243.

Pacific Salmon Commission, Chinook Technical Committee and others. 2008. "2007
 Annual Report of Catches and Escapements, Exploitation Rare Analysis and Model Cali-
 bration." TCCHINOOK (08)-1.



                                            69
Pacific Salmon Commission, Chinook Technical Committee and others. 2018a.
 "2017 Exploitation Rate Analysis and Model Calibration Volume Three: Documentation
 of circumstances and events regarding PSC model calibration 1503." TCCHINOOK (18)-
 01 V. 3, 3.

Pacific Salmon Commission, Chinook Technical Committee and others. 2018b.
 "2017 Exploitation Rate Analysis and Model Calibration Volume Two: Appendix Supple-
 ment." TCCHINOOK (18)-01 V. 2, 2.

Pacific Salmon Commission, Chinook Technical Committee, et al. 2017. "Pacific
 Salmon Commission Joint Chinook Technical Committee Report: Annual Report of Catch
 and Escapement for 2017-Appendix B." TCCHINOOK (18)-02.

Purvis, Andy, John L. Gittleman, Guy Cowlishaw, and Georgina M. Mace. 2000.
 "Predicting extinction risk in declining species." Proceedings of the Royal Society London
 B, 267: 1947­1952.

Quinn, Thomas P. 2018. The Behavior and Ecology of Pacific Salmon and Trout. University
 of Washington Press in association with the American Fisheries Society, Maryland, USA.

Reddy, K. Shiva, and N. Ch. Pattabhi Ramacharyulu. 2011. "A three species ecosys-
 tem comprising of two predators competing for a prey." Advances in Applied science re-
 search, 2(3): 208­218.

Ross, Donald. 1976. Mechanics of underwater noise. Oxford:Pergamon Press.

Shapiro, Joseph S. 2016. "Trade Costs, CO2, and the Environment." American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 8(4): 220­54.

Sigurj´onsson, J´   ohann, and Stephen Leatherwood. 1988. The Icelandic live-capture
  fishery for killer whales, 1976-1988.

Smith, Vernon L. 1975. "The Primitive Hunter Culture, Pleistocene Extinction, and the
 Rise of Agriculture ." Journal of Political Economy, 83(4): 727­755.

Southall, Brandon L., Amy R. Scholik-Schlomer, Leila Hatch, Trisha Bergmann,
  Michael Jasny, Kathy Metcalf, Lindy Weilgart, and Andrew J. Wright. 2017.
  "Underwater Noise from Large Commercial Ships ­ International Collaboration for Noise


                                            70
  Reduction." In Encyclopedia of Maritime and Offshore Engineering. , ed. J. Carlton, P.
  Jukes and Y. S. Choo, 1­9. American Cancer Society.

Southall, Brandon L., and Amy R. Scholik-Schlomer. 2008. "Potential application
  of vessel-quieting technology on large commercial vessels." In Final report of the Na-
  tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) international conference. Silver
  Spring:NOAA Fisheries.

Summary of Fraser River Tanker Traffic Study, prepared for Port Metro Van-
  couver. 2012. "Summary of Fraser River Tanker Traffic Study, prepared for Port Metro
  Vancouver." DET NORSKE VERITAS.

Taylor, M. Scott. 2011. "Buffalo Hunt: International Trade and the Virtual Extinction of
  the North American Bison." American Economic Review, 101(7): 3162­3195.

Veirs, Scott, Val Veirs, and Wood Jason D. 2016. "Ship Noise extends to frequencies
 used for echolocation by endangered killer whales." PeerJ DOI 10.7717, 4:e1657: 1­35.

V´
 elez-Espino, L. Antonio, John K. B. Ford, H. Andres Araujo, Graeme M. Ellis,
 Charles K. Parken, and Rishi Sharma. 2015. "Relative importance of chinook salmon
 abundance on resident killer whale population growth and viability." Aquatic Conservation:
 Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 25(6): 756­780.

Wales, Stephen C., and Richard M. Heitmeyer. 2002. "An ensemble source spectra
 model for merchant ship-radiated noise." The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
 111(3): 1211­1231.

Ward, Eric J., Elizabeth E. Holmes, and Kenneth C. Balcomb. 2009. "Quantifying
 the effects of prey abundance on killer whale reproduction." Journal of Applied Ecology,
 46(3): 632­640.

Wartzok, Douglas, Arthur N. Popper, Jonathan Gordon, and Jennifer Merrill.
 2003. "Factors Affecting the Responses of Marine Mammals to Acoustic Disturbance."
 Marine Technology Society Journal, 37(4): 6­15.

Washington State, Office of Marine Safety. 1993-2018. Vessel Entries and Transits for
 Washington Waters (VEAT). Department of Ecology State of Washington.



                                            71
Wasser, Samuel K., Jessica I. Lundin, Katherine Ayres, Elizabeth Seely, Deborah
 Giles, Kenneth C. Balcomb, Jennifer Hempelmann, Kim Parsons, and Rebecca
 Booth. 2017. "Population growth is limited by nutritional impacts on pregnancy success
 in endangered Southern Resident killer whales (Orcinus orca)." PLoS One, 12(6).

Welch, David W., Aswea D. Porter, and Erin L. Rechisky. 2021. "A synthesis of the
 coastwide decline in survival of West Coast Chinook Salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha,
 Salmonidae)." Fish and Fisheries, 22: 194­211.

White, Don. 1975. "Lets Not Lose Our Remaining Killer Whales." The Vancouver Sun, 6.

Wieland Shields, Monika. 2019. Endangered Orcas: The Story of the Southern Residents.
 Orca Watcher.

Wiles, Gary J. 2004. Washington State status report for the killer whale. Washington
 Department of Fish and Wildlife.

Williams, Rob, Andrew W. Trites, and David E. Bain. 2002. "Behavioural responses
 of killer whales (Orcinus orca) to whale-watching boats: opportunistic observations and
 experimental approaches." Journal of Zoology, London, 256: 255­270.

Williams, Rob, Christine Erbe, Erin Ashe, Amber Beerman, and Jodi Smith.
 2014. "Severity of killer whale behavioral responses to ship noise: a dose-response study."
 Marine Pollution Bulletin, 79(2): 254­260.

Williams, Rob, Scott Veirs, Val Veirs, Erin Ashe, and Natalie Mastick. 2019.
 "Approaches to reduce noise from ships operating in important killer whale habitats."
 Marine pollution bulletin, 139: 459­469.

Wittekind, Dietrich Kurt. 2014. "Simple Model for the Underwater Noise Source Level
 of Ships." Journal of Ship Production and Design, 30(1): 7­14.




                                            72
