                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              TASK-BASED DISCRIMINATION

                                          Erik Hurst
                                       Yona Rubinstein
                                       Kazuatsu Shimizu

                                      Working Paper 29022
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29022


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank Jack Hurst for his help in constructing some of the data files used within the paper. We
also thank David Autor, Joydeep Bhattacharya, Sandy Black, Kerwin Charles, David Deming,
Chinhui Juhn, Patrick Kehoe, Pat Kline, David de Meza, Derek Neal, Matt Notowidigdo, and
Elena Pastorino for helpful comments as well as seminar participants at Berkeley, Chicago,
Edinburgh, Houston, LSE, the 2021 SOLE meetings, and Virginia. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Erik Hurst, Yona Rubinstein, and Kazuatsu Shimizu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Task-Based Discrimination
Erik Hurst, Yona Rubinstein, and Kazuatsu Shimizu
NBER Working Paper No. 29022
July 2021
JEL No. J24,J7

                                           ABSTRACT

Why did the Black-White wage gap converge from 1960 to 1980 and why has it stagnated since?
To answer this question, we introduce a unified model that integrates notions of both taste-based
and statistical discrimination into a task-based model of occupational sorting. At the heart of our
framework is the idea that discrimination varies by the task requirement of each job. We use this
framework to identify and quantify the role of trends in race-specific factors and changing task
prices in explaining the evolution of the Black-White wage gap since 1960. In doing so, we
highlight a new task measure - Contact tasks ­ which measures the extent to which individuals
interact with others as part of their job. We provide evidence that changes in the racial gap in
Contact tasks serves as a good proxy for changes in taste-based discrimination over time. We
find that taste-based discrimination has fallen and racial skill gaps have narrowed over the last
sixty years in the United States. However, since the 1980s, the effect of declining racial skill gaps
and discrimination on the Black-White wage gap were offset by the increasing returns to Abstract
tasks which, on average, favored White workers relative to Black workers.


Erik Hurst                                        Kazuatsu Shimizu
Booth School of Business                          University of Chicago
University of Chicago                             kazuatsu@uchicago.edu
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu

Yona Rubinstein
Department of Management
London School of Economics
London
United Kingdom
y.rubinstein@lse.ac.uk




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29022
1       Introduction
Why did the Black-White wage gap decline so much during the 1960s and the 1970s, and
why has it stagnated since? After the passage of the Civil Rights Act, the unconditional
Black-White wage gap narrowed substantially from about 50 percent in the early 1960s to
about 30 percent by 1980. Some attributed the rapid growth in Black relative wages to
declining discrimination (Freeman (1973), Donohue and Heckman (1991)). Others pointed
to improvements in Blacks' school quality and market skills (Smith and Welch (1989), Card
and Krueger (1992)). However, since 1980, the Black-White wage gap has remained constant.
The relative stagnation in labor market progress of Black men during the last forty years
has been seen as a puzzle given the documentation of notable declines since 1980 in White's
reported discriminatory attitudes (Krysan and Moberg (2016), Lang and Lehmann (2012))
and a racial convergence in characteristics and skills that are rewarded in the labor market
(Altonji et al. (2012), Bayer and Charles (2018), Dickens and Flynn (2006), Murray (2007)).1
    In this paper, we introduce a framework that integrates racial skill gaps and various no-
tions of discrimination into a task-based model of occupational sorting. At the heart of our
framework is the idea that discrimination against Black workers varies by the task require-
ments of each job. For example, one can imagine that taste-based discrimination operates
more through tasks that require interactions with others, whereas statistical discrimination
is more likely to be present in tasks where there exist large racial differences in underlying
required skills.2
    Merging notions of discrimination and racial skill gaps into a task-based model of oc-
cupational sorting has two benefits. First, the framework allows us to explicitly model
and quantify how well-documented changes in task returns over time influence Black-White
wage gaps recognizing that Black and White workers sort into occupations with different
task requirements due to either labor market discrimination among equally skilled workers
or differences in endogenously determined labor market skills. Second, by measuring the
tasks content of jobs, we can better distinguish among different types of discrimination that
contribute to racial wage differentials. Disciplining this framework with detailed micro data
allows us to separately quantify the role of changing returns to tasks, declining racial prej-
    1
     While some measures of racial skill gaps have narrowed post-1980, like gaps in standardized test scores
as measured by the National Longitudinal Survey of Youths (NLSY), Neal (2006) documents that other
measures of racial skill gaps have not narrowed between 1980 and the early 2000s.
   2
     We wish to stress that taste-based and statistical-based motives for discrimination are neither mutually
exclusive nor unrelated. Specifically, the racial gaps in labor market skills reflect the intergenerational
transmission of discrimination via skills' formation in early ages (Heckman et al. (2006)) or the influence of
schooling and job training later in life (Coate and Loury (1993)). Nevertheless, separating discrimination
from racial skill gaps is particularly useful ­ especially in modern economies ­ when the labor market returns
to certain skills are large and rising (Autor and Dorn (2013), Deming (2017)).


                                                      1
udice, and narrowing racial skills gaps in explaining the decline of the male racial wage gap
between 1960 and 1980 and its stagnation thereafter.
    The paper has three main sets of findings. First, we document a new set of facts about
how the propensities of Black and White men to sort into an occupation differ by types of
labor market tasks required in the occupation, and how those differences have evolved over
time. These facts are used as ingredients to estimate the evolution of race-specific barriers
faced by Black men in each task over the last half century in our model of occupational
sorting. Second, using our structurally estimated model and reduced-form estimates, we
offer a task-based explanation as to why racial wage gaps converged from 1960 to 1980 and
then stopped converging thereafter despite a narrowing of racial skill gaps and declining
measures of discrimination during this time period. We show that increasing returns to
tasks that require complex analytical activities (Abstract tasks) post-1980 relatively disad-
vantaged Black workers and masked wage gains resulting from improvements in race-specific
factors. Finally, bringing in additional micro data which includes measures of pre-labor
market skills, we separate changes in taste-based discrimination over time from changes in
other race-specific factors. We show that changes in the racial gap with respect to working
in occupations that require individuals to interact with customers and co-workers (Contact
tasks) is a good approximation for changes in taste-based discrimination over time.
    We now provide more details on each of these findings. In the first part of the paper we
present new facts about racial differences in occupational sorting. Drawing on the work of
Autor et al. (2003), Dorn (2009), Autor and Dorn (2013) and Deming (2017), we characterize
the task content of occupations along four key labor demand factors: "Abstract ", "Routine ",
"Manual ", and "Contact ". The first three task measures come directly from Dorn (2009)
and Autor and Dorn (2013), while the last measure is new and guided by Becker (1957)'s
work on taste-based discrimination. Specifically, "Contact " measures the extent to which
an occupation requires interaction and communication with others within the organization
(co-workers) or outside the organization (customers/clients). This task provides a measure
of labor market activities where taste-based discrimination is likely to be the most salient
because the task requires interacting with others who may have discriminatory preferences.
Using data from the US Censuses and American Community Surveys (ACS), we document
that there was a large racial gap in the extent to which workers sort into jobs that require
Abstract tasks in 1960 and that gap has remained essentially constant through 2018. This
finding holds regardless of whether or not we control for trends in racial gaps in accumulated
levels of schooling. Conversely, we show that there has been a large racial convergence in
the Contact task content of jobs between 1960 and 2018. The large racial gap in the extent
to which workers sort into jobs that require Contact tasks that existed in 1960 has almost


                                              2
disappeared by 2018. These differential trends in the racial gaps in occupational sorting
associated with various tasks becomes the launching point for the rest of the paper.
    In the second part of the paper, we develop a model of task-based discrimination based on
the occupational sorting framework of Autor and Handel (2013). In our model, individuals
are endowed with task-specific skills that are drawn from a known distribution. There
are many potential tasks and, in turn, many different types of skills. Occupations are
combinations of tasks with different weights and individuals have different mixtures of skills.
We generalize the Autor and Handel (2013) model by allowing for: (1) individuals of differing
races to differ in the mean skill levels they have, (2) taste-based discrimination to differ by
task, (3) skills to be noisily observed by employers so as to have a meaningful notion of
statistical discrimination, and (4) a non-employment option so to match differential trends
in employment rates by race. The differences in pre-labor market skills and discrimination
facing Black workers give rise to differential sorting into tasks between Black and White
individuals in the spirit of Roy (1951). These sorting differences need to be accounted for
in order to parse out the effects of race-neutral driving forces (such as time trends in task
specific returns) and race-specific driving forces (such as a narrowing of racial skill gaps
and/or declining discrimination) when explaining changes in racial wage gaps over time.
Using the model structure and empirical moments on the differential occupational sorting
of Black and White men, the changing returns to various tasks, and the evolution of the
aggregate racial wage gap, we estimate the key driving forces of the model.
    Using our estimated model, we find that the stagnation in the racial wage gap post-1980
is a product of two offsetting forces. On the one hand, a narrowing of racial skill gaps and
declining discrimination between 1980 and 2018 caused the racial wage gap to narrow by 8
percentage points during this period, all else equal. On the other hand, the changing returns
to tasks since 1980 ­ particularly the increasing return to Abstract tasks ­ widened the
racial wage gap by about 7 percentage points during the same period. A rise in the return to
Abstract tasks disadvantages Black workers because they are underrepresented in these tasks
due to a combination of racial skill gaps and discrimination. In sum, the estimated model
highlights that race-specific barriers have continued to decline in the U.S. economy post-1980
but the rising relative return to Abstract tasks has favored Whites since 1980. As a result,
the Black progress stemming from narrowing racial skill gaps and/or declining discrimination
did not translate into Black-White wage convergence during this period. On the other hand,
we show that the relative wage gains of Black men relative to White men during the 1960
to 1980 period stemmed solely from declining discrimination and a narrowing of racial skill
gaps; changing task prices did not undermine any of these gains during this earlier period.
    Our structural model provides a road map to empirical researchers looking to uncover


                                              3
changing race specific factors in micro data. Specifically, the model suggests that researchers
must not only control for racial differences is skills but also for changes in the returns to
different skills when analyzing racial wage gaps over time. Using data from the NLSY, we
show that controlling for time-varying returns to skills uncovers a strong convergence in
racial wage gaps during the last four decades in the United States. The magnitude of the
convergence in the racial wage gap is similar to the effect of declining race specific factors
predicted by our structural model. With this discussion we also highlight why our task-based
model yields quantitatively different conclusions about the extent to which race-specific forces
have changed in the U.S. economy during the last forty years relative to methodologies that
rely on purely statistical decomposition procedures (e.g., Juhn et al. (1991)) which ignore
task-based sorting forces.
    In the third part of the paper, we go one step further and decompose the change in race-
specific forces over time into the part that is due to changes in racial skill gaps, the part due to
changes in taste-base discrimination, and the part due to changes in statistical discrimination.
The taste-based discrimination in our model is something akin to pure racial prejudice in
the spirit of Becker (1957) while statistical discrimination stems from employers using easily
observable characteristics such as race to forecast the expected productivity of their workers
in the spirit of Phelps (1972) and Arrow (1973). To perform this decomposition, we bring in
additional data from the 1979 and 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youths (NLSY's).
Building on the work of Heckman et al. (2006), Altonji et al. (2012), and Deming (2017),
we exploit three pre-labor market skill measures in the NLSY: cognitive, non-cognitive and
social skills. The former is determined by respondent scores on AFQT tests while the latter
two are based on responses to survey questions designed to measure personality traits like
self-motivation, self-determination, and extroversion. We use these skill measures to impute
racial gaps in model-generated task-specific skills.
    We start by documenting the mapping between worker pre-labor market skills and the oc-
cupations to which they sort. In particular, we show that cognitive skills are most predictive
of entry into occupations that require Abstract tasks while social skills are most predictive
of entry into occupations that require Contact tasks. Additionally, we document large but
declining racial gaps in cognitive skills over time but find no racial gaps in social skills in
any of the time periods we explore.
    We then develop a procedure to translate racial gaps in NLSY skill measures into racial
gaps in model-generated task-specific skill gaps. The procedure consists of two steps. First,
we load our structurally-imputed average task-specific skills by occupation onto the NLSY
measures of average cognitive, non-cognitive, and social pre-labor market skills by occupa-
tion, as measured among White workers. Second, we use these loadings and the racial gap


                                                 4
in NLSY skills to create a model-based estimate of racial skill gaps associated with each task
in each period consistent with the racial skill gaps in the NLSY.
    Based on this procedure, our model estimates that the convergence in the sorting into
occupations that require Contact tasks between 1960 and 2018 is driven almost entirely by
declining taste-based discrimination. This result stems from the fact that there are almost
no racial gaps in social skills, which implies that the racial barriers we estimate for Contact
tasks can be mainly attributed to taste-based discrimination. This finding confirms our ex-
ante conjecture that the evolution of the racial gap in Contact tasks is a good predictor of
the change in taste-based discrimination. To further provide evidence for this conclusion, we
use data from Charles and Guryan (2008), which provide survey-based measures of taste-
based discrimination for each U.S. state. Using cross-state variation, we show that racial
gaps in Contact tasks are strongly correlated with the Charles-Guryan state-level measures
of taste-based discrimination. We find a much weaker correlation with state-level measures
of racial gaps in Abstract tasks.
    Finally, we use the estimated model to quantify how much the changes in each of the
driving forces over time contributed to the evolution of the racial wage gap over the last half
century. We estimate that at least half of the decline in the overall racial wage gap between
1960 and 2018 can be attributed to declining taste-based discrimination. On the other hand,
a racial gap in skills required for Abstract tasks explains a portion of the remaining racial
wage gap post-1980; we again note that such racial skill gaps almost certainly stem from
current or past discrimination.
    Before proceeding, we note that our work is closely related to the recent paper by Bayer
and Charles (2018). Bayer and Charles (2018) importantly attribute the lack of positional
improvement for median Black men since 1940 despite the narrowing of the racial education
gaps to differential trends in the returns to high school versus post-secondary schooling. The
rising return of college education relative to high school education disadvantaged Blacks as
they still disproportionately possess lower levels of school credentials. We use their result
as a launching point for our approach and study the trends in Black-White gaps conditional
on schooling. In particular, focusing on the fact that Black-White labor market progress
has stalled even conditional on education, we extend their insights to a task-based model
of occupational sorting with multiple tasks and show that higher returns to Abstract tasks
have disadvantaged Black men relative to White men even conditional on education.
    Our paper is also related to the recent paper by Hsieh et al. (2019) which proposes and
estimates a multi-sector Roy model of occupational sorting with workers of different races
and gender who face differential frictions in both human capital and labor markets.3 The
  3
      There is an extensive literature exploring racial differences in labor market outcomes. Smith and Welch


                                                      5
goal of Hsieh et al. (2019) is to provide a framework with economically meaningful sorting
to assess the role of changes in racial and gender barriers during the last half century to
economic growth. Our work complements this paper by extending the occupational sorting
decision to a multi-dimensional task frame work in the spirit of Autor et al. (2003), Acemoglu
and Autor (2011), and Autor and Handel (2013). Instead of trying to explain U.S. economic
growth, our goal is to use our model of sorting to decompose racial wage gaps into taste-based
discrimination, racial skill gaps, and statistical discrimination. Additionally, by embedding
our model of racial differences into a task model of occupational sorting, we can address
the extent to which changes in task returns can help to reconcile the puzzle as to why the
Black-White wage gap stagnated since 1980.


2     Data and Measurement
In this section, we provide an overview of the data and measures used throughout the paper.
The online appendix provides more detail on both our data and sample selection.


2.1     Task Measures
To assess whether Black and White workers sort into different jobs, preform different tasks
and consequently earn different amounts, we measure the skill demands in each occupation
using the following data: (i) the U.S. Department of Labor's Dictionary of Occupational
Titles (DOT) and (ii) the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) sponsored by the
U.S. Department of Labor/Employment and Training Administration (USDOL/ETA). The
DOT was constructed in 1939 to help employment offices match job seekers with job openings.
It provides information on the skills demanded in over 12,000 occupations. The DOT was
updated in 1949, 1964, 1977, and 1991, and replaced by the O*NET in 1998.
    We focus on four occupational task measures that are relevant for our study: Abstract,
Routine, Manual and Contact. The first three measures are taken exactly from Autor and
Dorn (2013) and Deming (2017) using the DOT data. Below, we provide a brief summary
of these measures. The last task measure is new and was created specifically for this paper
to help get at the concept of taste-based discrimination. Building on the work in Dem-
ing (2017), Contact measures the extent to which an occupation requires interaction and
communication with others within the organization (co-workers) or outside the organization
(1989), Altonji and Blank (1999), and Lang and Lehmann (2012) provide excellent surveys of this literature.
Surveying this literature is beyond the scope of our paper. But, it should be noted that our paper builds
upon the seminal papers modeling both taste-based (Becker (1957)) and statistical discrimination (Phelps
(1972), Arrow (1973), Aigner and Cain (1977), and Coate and Loury (1993)).


                                                    6
(customers/clients). The intensity of this task hence provides a measure of labor market
activities where the intensity of taste-based discrimination is likely to be the most salient.
Our conjecture is therefore that the trend in the Black-White difference in the propensity
to sort into occupations that intensively require Contact tasks, conditional on other task
requirements, proxies the trend in the intensity of taste-based discrimination facing Black
workers. One of the main objectives of the paper is to provide evidence for this conjecture.
    We now summarize the four task measures:
    Abstract : indicates the degree to which the occupation (i) demands analytical flexibility,
creativity, reasoning, and generalized problem-solving and (ii) requires complex interpersonal
communications such as persuading, selling, and managing others. Occupations with high
measures of Abstract tasks include accountants, software developers, high school teachers,
college professors, judges, various medical professionals, engineers, and managers.
    Routine : measures the degree to which the task requires the precise attainment of
set standards and/or repetitive manual tasks. Occupations with high measures of Routine
tasks include secretaries, dental hygienists, bank tellers, machinists, textile sewing machine
operators, dressmakers, x-ray technology specialists, meter readers, pilots, drafters, auto
mechanics, and various manufacturing occupations.
    Manual : measures the degree to which the task demands eye, hand, and foot coordi-
nation. Occupations with high measures of Manual tasks include athletes, police and fire
fighters, drivers (taxi, bus, truck), skilled construction (e.g, electricians, painters, carpenters)
and landscapers/groundskeepers.
    Contact : measures the extent that the job requires the worker to interact and communi-
cate with others (i) within the organization or (ii) with external customers/clients or potential
customers/clients. To create our measure of Contact tasks we use two 1998 O*NET work
activity variables taken from Deming (2017). Specifically, we use the variables Job-Required
Social Interaction (Interact) and Deal With External Customers (Customer).4 Interact mea-
sures how much workers are required to be in contact with others in order to perform the
job. Customer measures how much workers have to deal with either external customers (e.g.,
retail sales) or the public in general (e.g., police work). To make our measure of the Contact
task content of an occupation, we take the simple average of Interact and Customer for each
   4
    Deming (2017)'s focus is creating a measure of occupational tasks that require social skills and document
how the returns to social skills have increased over time. His measure of social skills include measures of
whether the job requires the worker to have social perceptiveness and the ability to coordinate, persuade
and negotiate with others. His measure of social skills do not include measures for whether the task requires
interactions with other co-workers or customers. He uses the measures of customer (Customer ) and broader
social interactions (Interact ) as controls in some of his specifications. These questions are much more suited to
our purpose of trying to measure taste-based discrimination. We explore the relationship between Deming's
Social Skills task measure and our Contact task measure in the online appendix.



                                                        7
occupation. Occupations with high measures of Contact tasks include various health care
workers, waiter/waitress, sales clerks, lawyers, various teachers, and various managers.
    Our goal is to stay as close as possible to the definitions of task measures developed by
others so as to provide new evidence on the racial differences in these measures. However, in
the online appendix, we show that the racial differences in the task content of occupations
that we highlight are very similar using alternative task definitions. We directly download all
of our DOT and O*NET measures from the replication kit associated with Deming (2017).
The occupational task measures are available at the 3-digit occupational code level. We use
Deming (2017)'s crosswalk to merge these measures to our samples from the other data sets
we use. A full discussion can be found in the online appendix.
    Finally, we convert the task measures into z-score space by taking unweighted differences
across occupations. This transforms the units of our task measures into standard deviation
differences in the task content of a given occupation relative to all other occupations; an
Abstract task measure of 2.0 in a given occupation means that occupation has an Abstract
task requirement that is two standard deviations higher than the average occupation. Some
occupations require all tasks in relatively high intensities. For example, civil engineers have
Abstract, Routine, Manual, and Contact task intensities of 2.3, 1.2, 0.6, and 0.1, respectively.
Some other occupations require all tasks in relatively low intensities. For example, mail
carriers have Abstract, Routine, Manual, and Contact task intensities of -0.8, -1.5, -0.7, and
0.0, respectively. Other occupations are mixed in their task demands, and the differences
in task demands differentiate between occupations. For example, both physicians and retail
sales clerks are high in Contact intensities, but physicians are also high in Abstract task
intensities while retail sales clerks are low in Abstract task intensities.


2.2    Census and American Community Survey
To measure long-run trends and cross regional differences in the task content of occupations
and wages, we use data from the decennial U.S. Censuses from 1960 through 2000 and the
annual American Community Surveys (ACS) thereafter. We pool together the micro data
from the annual ACS's between 2010 and 2012 and again between 2016 and 2018. We refer
to the former as the 2012 ACS and the latter as the 2018 ACS. Given this, we have seven
separate waves of harmonized data for the years 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2012 and 2018.
Within each wave, we restrict our sample to Black and White native born men between the
ages of 25 and 54 who do not live in group quarters. We also exclude workers who are
self-employed. Finally, we always weight the data using the survey weights provided by the
Censuses and the ACS's, respectively.


                                               8
           Figure 1: Trends in Black-White Wage Gaps Since 1960, Census/ACS Data




                                              0           -.1
                              Wage Gap Relative to White Men
                             -.4     -.3        -.2
                                              -.5




                                                                1960   1970   1980       1990   2000   2012   2018




       Notes: Figure shows the trend in the demographically adjusted Black-White gap in log wages using
       Census/ACS sample. Wage gaps are conditional on individual age and education dummies.


    As discussed above, we use the DOT and O*Net data to define the task content of
occupations. We hold the task content of an occupation fixed over time. We measure wages
as self-reported annual earnings during the prior year divided by self-reported annual hours
worked during the prior year. We only measure wages for individuals who are currently
employed working at least 30 hours per week and who reported working at least 48 weeks
during the prior year. We treat individuals who are not working as being in the home sector
occupation. In most specifications, we control for the worker's age and accumulated years
of schooling. All values in the paper are in 2010 dollars.
    Figure 1 shows the difference in log wages between Black and White workers conditional
on age and education using our sample of Census/ACS individuals. In particular, for each
year, we regress an individual's log hourly wage on a race dummy and controls of age (five-
year age dummies) and series of dummies indicating the individual's accumulated level of
education. Consistent with other findings in the literature, the demographically adjusted
racial wage gap narrowed substantially between 1960 and 1980 but has been constant at a
gap of roughly 20 log points since 1980.5 Our goal is to explain both the wage convergence
in Figure 1 between 1960 and 1980 as well as its stagnation post-1980.
   5
    Chandra (2000), Heckman et al. (2000) and Bayer and Charles (2018) caution the literature about
focusing on mean racial wage gaps over time given differential trends in labor force participation between
Black and White men. For this reason, we explicitly include a margin of labor force participation in the
model we develop below and highlight that our calibrated model matches moments of the wage distribution
inclusive of those who do not work.




                                                                                     9
2.3     National Longitudinal Survey of Youths
We augment our analysis with data from 1979 and 1997 waves of the National Longitudinal
Survey of the Youth (NLSY). The NLSY data allows us to link a worker's subsequent occu-
pational choice with pre-labor market measures of cognitive, non-cognitive, and social skills.
The NLSY waves are representative surveys of 12,686 and 8,984 individuals, respectively,
who were 15 to 22 years old in 1979 or 13-17 years old in 1997 when they were first surveyed.
The surveys were conducted either annually or bi-annually every year since for each cohort.
    When using the NLSY data, we restrict the main sample to Black and White non-self-
employed men 25 years of age and older.6 As with the Census/ACS data, we hold the task
content of occupations constant across both NLSY cohorts. Finally, in specifications where
we measure the evolution of the racial gap in the task content of occupations over time, we
restrict our NLSY samples to those aged 25-37. The reason for this is the cohort nature
of the NLSY data. In the 1980s/early 1990s, respondents from the NLSY-79 were in their
mid-20s to mid-30. Likewise in the 2010's, respondents from the NLSY-97 were also aged
25-37. This restriction ensures that we are comparing the occupational sorting and monetary
rewards for young adults of similar ages when comparing across cohorts on the NLSY.
    The key reason we use the NLSY data is to have measures of racial differences in pre-
labor market skills. We use measures of performance on cognitive test and psychometric
assessments to generate a set of unified proxies for cognitive, non-cognitive and social traits
across the two NLSY waves. These skill measures were primarily collected before the indi-
viduals entered the labor market. Again, our goal is to take these skill measures directly
from the existing literature. We summarize these measures briefly here and include a more
detailed discussion in the online appendix.
    Cognitive Skills (COG) : We follow the literature and use the respondent's standard-
ized scores on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) as our measure of cognitive skills.
The AFQT is a standardized test which is designed to measure an individual's math, verbal
and analytical aptitude. The test score was collected from all respondents in their initial
year of the survey and was measured in both the 1979 and 1997 waves.7
    Non-cognitive Skills (NCOG) : We use the measures of non-cognitive skills created
by Deming (2017). Deming (2017) uses questions pertaining to the Rotter Locus of Control
  6
     As in with the Census/ACS data, we measure wages as annual earnings divided by annual hours worked.
Following Altonji et al. (2012) and Deming (2017), we trim values of deflated hourly wage that are below
$2/hour and above $500/hour.
   7
     The AFQT score has been used by many in the literature to measure respondent's cognitive skills
including Neal and Johnson (1996), Heckman et al. (2006), Neal (2006), Altonji et al. (2012) and more
recently Levine and Rubinstein (2017) and Deming (2017). We follow Altonji et al. (2012) and Deming
(2017) to generate age-adjusted AFQT scores.



                                                  10
Scale and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale for the NLSY79 cohort to make a measure of non-
cognitive skills.8 Likewise, for the NLSY97 cohort Deming (2017) uses respondent answers
(provided prior to entering the labor market) to the question "How much do you feel that
conscientious describes you as a person?" to approximate respondents' non-cognitive skill.
Deming (2017)'s non-cognitive skill measures are expressed in z-score units.
    Social Skills (SOC) : We again follow Deming (2017) to generate a unified measure
of social skills using a standardized composite of two variables that measure extroversion
in both waves. Specifically, for the NLSY79, we use self-reported measures of sociability
in childhood and sociability in adulthood. Individuals were asked to assess their current
sociability (extremely shy, somewhat shy, somewhat outgoing, or extremely outgoing) and
to retrospectively report their sociability when they were age 6. For the NLSY97, we proxy
for social skills using the two questions that were asked to capture the extroversion factor
from the commonly-used Big 5 personality inventory. For each wave, we normalize the two
questions so they have the same scale and then average them together. We then convert
the measures into z-score units. Deming (2017) shows that these measures of social skills
positively predict individual wages when they are adults even conditional on controlling for
individual measures of cognitive skills (AFQT).
    When using these skill measures, it is important to keep in mind that racial differences in
skills can be the results of current or past discrimination. A large body of research documents
the impact of interventions on different skills at different ages, suggesting that skills can
be fostered (Knudsen and Shonkoff (2006), Heckman (2008), Almond and Currie (2011),
Chetty et al. (2011) and Heckman and Kautz (2012)). Any racial differences in measures of
standardized tests or in personality assessments measured among teenagers therefore almost
certainly reflect differences in family, neighborhood or school environments stemming from
current or past discrimination.


3       Racial Differences in Occupational Tasks
In this section, we document a set of key facts on the differential evolution of the task
content of jobs between White and Black men during the last 60 years. We begin by showing
aggregate patterns from the Census/ACS data. We then use data from the NLSY to highlight
the relationship between pre-labor market skills and task-based occupational sorting.
    8
     The Rotter scale measures the degree of control individuals feel they possess over the life. The Rosenberg
scale measures perceptions of self-worth. Higher values of both are interpreted as high levels of non-cognitive
skills. For example, Heckman and Kautz (2012) documents notable associations between educational attain-
ment, health and labor market performance and these non-cognitive measures using NLSY data.



                                                      11
3.1     Trends in Racial Gaps in Tasks: Census/ACS
While much attention is focused on measuring racial wage gaps, less is known on racial
differences in occupational sorting by task requirements. In this subsection, we fill this gap
by documenting trends in racial task gaps from the early 1960s to the last 2010s. To measure
the racial gaps in task content of occupations, we estimate the following linear probability
model separately in each year restricting the sample using our sample of prime age men:

                                                         k
                             Blackijt = t +           kt ijt + kt Xit +    ijt .                        (1)
                                                  k

where Blackijt is a dummy variable equal to 1 if individual i working in occupation j during
                   k
year t is Black; ijt is the task content of task k for individual i working in occupation j in
period t; and Xit is a vector of individual 5-year age dummies and five dummies measuring
educational attainment (less than high school, high school, some college, a bachelor's degree,
or more than a bachelor's degree).9 Our coefficients of interest are the kt 's, which inform
the change in the proportion of Black workers associated with a one standard deviation
increase in task k requirements in year t, holding all other task requirements fixed. Each
yearly regression yields four kt 's ­ one for each of our four task measures.
    The results of these regressions are summarized in Figure 2. Panels A and B, respectively,
show the patterns excluding and including the vector Xit of demographic controls. The main
take-away from the figure is that both the level difference in racial task gaps in 1960 and
the subsequent time series trend differ markedly by task. The differences are especially
pronounced when we compare the racial gaps in Abstract and Contact tasks. In the early
1960s, Black workers were systematically underrepresented both in occupations that required
a high intensity of Abstract tasks and in occupations that required a high intensity of Contact
tasks. In terms of magnitudes, in 1960 a one-standard deviation increase in the Abstract
task contents of an occupation reduced the probability that an individual working in that
occupation was Black by about 3 percentage points, and a one-standard deviation increase
in the Contact task contents reduced the probability that the individual was Black by about
4 percentage points, both conditional on education. Over the last half a century, however,
Black men have made significant progress relative to White men with respect to sorting
into occupations that require Contact tasks, while they made no progress relative to White
men in the extent to which they sort into occupations that require Abstract tasks. Whereas
   9                                                      k
    In the online appendix, we show the raw trends in the ijk 's by year for Black and White men separately.
The raw patterns for Abstract, Routine, and Manual tasks for White men are similar to the findings in Autor
                                                                                               k
and Dorn (2013). In the appendix, we also show a different specification where we regress ijt     on a race
dummy and controls separately for each task in each year. The time series patterns for the coefficients on
the race dummies from this specification matches nearly identically to the patterns shown in Figure 2.


                                                      12
                                                                        Figure 2: Race Gaps in Task Trends

                    .01




                                                                                                                        .01
                    0




                                                                                                                        0
     -.06 -.05 -.04 -.03 -.02 -.01




                                                                                                         -.06 -.05 -.04 -.03 -.02 -.01
                  Task Racial Gap




                                                                                                                      Task Racial Gap
                                     1960    1970   1980         1990      2000       2012   2018                                        1960   1970   1980         1990   2000       2012   2018

                                                       Contact             Abstract                                                                       Contact          Abstract
                                                       Manual              Routine                                                                        Manual           Routine



                                            Panel A: No Controls                                                                            Panel B: With Controls

    Notes: Figure shows the estimated kt 's from the regression specified in equation (1). The co-
    efficients measure the racial gap in the task content of occupations. Sample restricted to native
    born individuals between the ages of 25 and 54 within the Censuses and ACS years who are not
    self-employed and who are working more than 30 hours per week. Panel A excludes controls for age
    and education while Panel B includes those controls. Standard errors on the coefficients (omitted
    from the figure) had a value of less than 0.001 for all asks in all years.



the racial gap in Abstract tasks remained essentially constant through 2000 and widened
slightly after 2000, the large racial gap in Contact tasks that existed in 1960 has all but
disappeared by 2018. This finding persists whether or not we control for individual age and
education (Panel A vs. Panel B), although the level of the Abstract task gap narrows once we
control for them. If discrimination took the form of co-workers and customers not wanting
to interact with Black workers in 1960, the patterns in Figure 2 are consistent with that
form of discrimination abating over time.10 Although we focus on such differences to a lesser
extent, there were only small racial differences in the propensity for Black and White men
to work in occupations that require Manual tasks. Likewise, there was some convergence in
the propensity to work in occupations that require Routine tasks between 1960 and 1980,
but large racial gaps still remain post-1980.
    There is a large body of research documenting that taste-based discrimination was ini-
tially larger in the South region of the U.S. in the 1960s and 1970s (relative to other regions)
and subsequently declined more in the South after 1980 (Charles and Guryan (2008), Bobo
et al. (2012)). If the racial gap in sorting into occupations that require Contact tasks reflects
taste-based discrimination, we should expect larger declines in the racial gap of this task
  10
     In the online appendix Figure A5, we show that both the sub-components of Contact tasks ­ interacting
with co-workers and interacting with customers ­ had large racial gaps in 1960 with those gaps narrowing
sharply through 2018.


                                                                                                    13
  Figure 3: Census/ACS Task Content of Occupations: South Region vs Other Regions

               .02




                                                                                                       .02
               0




                                                                                                       0
                    -.02




                                                                                                            -.02
       Task Racial Gap




                                                                                               Task Racial Gap
            -.04




                                                                                                    -.04
     -.06




                                                                                             -.06
               -.08




                                                                                                       -.08
               -.1




                                                                                                       -.1
                           1960     1970   1980         1990   2000       2012   2018                              1960   1970   1980         1990   2000       2012   2018

                                              Contact          Abstract                                                             Contact          Abstract



                                  Panel A: South Region                                                            Panel B: All Other Regions

    Notes: Figure replicates the analysis in Panel B of Figure 2 separately for individuals residing in
    the South region (Panel A) and individuals residing in all other regions (Panel B).



measure in the South relative to other regions. Given that, we now explore cross-region vari-
ation in racial task gaps. Figure 3 replicates the analysis in Panel B of Figure 2 separately
for the individuals in the Census/ACS data living in the South region (Panel A) and all
other regions (Panel B). Consistent with our conjecture that the racial gap in Contact tasks
proxies for taste-based discrimination, the racial gap in Contact tasks was much larger in
the South relative to all other regions in 1960, and the subsequent convergence in Contact
tasks over the last half century was also greater in the South relative to the other regions.
Note, in both the South and the other regions, there was no racial convergence in Abstract
tasks over time despite the racial gaps in Abstract tasks being larger in the South.
    The contrasting trends in racial task gaps ­ namely the persistence of the large racial gap
in Abstract tasks and the substantial narrowing of the racial gap in Contact tasks ­ highlight
the need for a task-based approach to analyzing racial discrimination in the US labor market.
The underlying factors that disadvantaged Blacks in the labor market ­ whether it may be
discrimination, racial skill gaps, or a combination of both ­ impacted Blacks differently across
tasks over time and induced differential trends in occupational sorting between Black and
White workers.
    The value-added from using a task-based approach to understand trends in racial wage
gaps further arises where there are differential trends in task prices over time. To measure
how the price of each task has evolved over time, we run the following regressions separately
by year for each race group g using the the Census/ACS data:




                                                                                        14
                                                                       g                g k
                                                                wijt = t +              kt ijt + g
                                                                                                 kt Xit +                                       ijt .                                             (2)
                                                                                  k

where wijt is the log wage of individual i working in occupation j during year t. Our
                                        g
coefficients of interest are again the kt 's, the Mincerian wage premium of task k in year t
for group g . For this regression, we use are sample of full-time workers.
    Figure 4 reports estimates of the raw wage premium by task requirement for White men
(Panel A) and the demographically adjusted Black-White gaps in the wage premium by
task requirement (Panel B). Three main findings emerge from this figure. First, the average
wage premium of Abstract tasks for White men was between 10 and 15 percent higher than
the return to the other tasks in 1960. Moreover, the relative return of Abstract tasks has
been increasing since 1980. This increase in the return to Abstract tasks has received lots
of attention in the literature (Autor and Dorn (2013), Deming (2017)). Second, in contrast,
the wage premium associated with Contact tasks was notably lower in the early 1960s and
has not changed much since then. Finally, the racial gaps in the wage premiums to tasks are
relatively small and roughly constant over time. Most of the racial gaps in the average task
returns are slightly negative suggesting that the task return to Black men are systematically
smaller than White men of similar age and education.

                                         Figure 4: Mincerian Task Premiums, White Men and Racial Gap
                  .25




                                                                                                                .25         .2
                            .2




                                                                                                  Racial Gap in Task Return
     Task Return, White Men




                                                                                                                      .15
                      .15




                                                                                                                 .1
               .1




                                                                                                          .05
        .05




                                                                                                    0           -.05
                  0
                  -.05




                                                                                                                -.1




                                 1960    1970   1980         1990   2000       2012   2018                                       1960    1970    1980             1990   2000       2012   2018

                                                   Contact          Abstract                                                                            Contact          Abstract
                                                   Manual           Routine                                                                             Manual           Routine



                                        Panel A: White Men,                                                                             Panel B: Racial Gap,
                                           Unconditional                                                                                    Conditional

    Notes: Figure shows the average labor market return to occupational task content for White men
    in Panel A using our primary Census/ACS samples with the additional restriction that individuals
    report working at least 48 weeks during the prior year. This panel shows coefficients from a
    regression of log wages on the four task measures, separately by year. Panel B shows the racial
    gap in average task returns of Black men relative to White Men conditional on education and age.



   Before concluding this subsection, we briefly mention the variety of alternate specifica-

                                                                                             15
tions we explored to examine the robustness of our results. All of the details of the robustness
exercises are discussed in more detail in the online appendix. One concern is that the task in-
tensities of occupations proxy the demand for general human capital rather than the demand
for specific tasks. To explore this concern, we re-estimated all our main analysis separately
segmenting our sample by those with less than a bachelor's degree and those with a bach-
elor's degree or more. Within both samples, we find that there was a racial convergence in
the Contact tasks and no racial convergence in Abstract tasks; although, the convergence in
the Contact tasks was much stronger among individuals with less than a bachelor's degree.
These results highlight that our main findings about the time series patterns in racial task
gaps are not being driven by the educational requirement of the occupations associated with
the task. We also explored racial gaps in the task content of occupations for different birth
cohorts (as opposed to pooling different cohorts together and exploring time series patterns).
We find that the same patterns emerge across cohorts. In particular, whereas older cohorts
and younger cohorts have the same racial gap in Abstract tasks, the racial gap in Contact
tasks is large for older cohorts and almost zero for younger cohorts.11


3.2     Occupational Sorting and Racial Skill Differences
The ACS/Census data highlight racial differences in occupational sorting and how those
differences have evolved over time. We now use data from the NLSY to assess the extent to
which racial gaps in skill supplies can potentially explain racial gaps in sorting patterns. We
begin by reporting whether the mixture of tasks demanded in each occupation predicts the
mixture of skills supplied by workers who have sorted into the occupation. Specifically, we
focus on the matching between relative task demands and pre-labor market skills for White
men between the ages of 25 and 54 pooling together respondents from both the NLSY79 and
NLSY97 samples. The results are shown in Table 1. Each column comes from a separate
regression projecting an individual's cognitive, non-cognitive or social skills on the relative
task content of the occupation in which they work. We define the relative task content of
                                                k
occupation j in which individual i works as ij     - ¯ij where  ¯ij is the simple average of the
Abstract, Routine, Manual, and Contact task measures for occupation j .12 Specifically, the
  11
     This paper focuses on labor market differences between Black and White men. The appendix, however,
also documents differences in task measures between White men and White women, as well as differences
between White women and Black women. Like their male counterparts, the gap in Abstract tasks between
Black and White women remained essentially constant since 1960. Further, the gap in Contact tasks between
Black and White women narrowed substantively between 1960 and 2018. We choose to focus on Black and
White men so as to abstract from the large trends in female labor supply that have also occurred during
this time period.
  12
     For example, suppose individual i works in occupation j = Civil Engineer. As noted above, the Abstract,
Routine, Manual, and Contact task content for the Civil Engineering occupation are, respectively, 2.3, 1.2,


                                                    16
          Table 1: The Matching Between Individual Skills and Relative Job Tasks
                                                  Cognitive   Non-Cognitive       Social
                                                   Skills         Skills          Skills

                (1) Abstract Tasks                  0.179          0.043           0.030
                                                   (0.015)        (0.021)         (0.020)

                (2) Routine Tasks                   0.077          0.010           0.004
                                                   (0.019)        (0.025)         (0.025)

                (3) Contact Tasks                   0.117          0.067           0.082
                                                   (0.019)        (0.024)         (0.023)

                Difference (1) - (3)                0.062          -0.024          -0.052
                                                   (0.021)        (0.029)         (0.029)

                Demographic Controls                Yes             Yes             Yes

    Notes: Table shows the relationship between the individual skills and the relative task content
    of the individual's occupation. Each column is a separate regression. The last row shows the
    difference between the coefficient on relative Abstract tasks and relative Contact tasks. Robust
    standard errors clustered at the individual level show in parenthesis. Data uses the pooled sample
    of the NLSY 1979 and 1997 waves. Sample restricted to White men between the ages of 25 and
    54. Individual skills and occupational task contents measured in z-score units.



regression coefficients in the first column of Table 1 come the following specification:

                              N LSY                   k
                             Sij,cog =+            k (ij -¯ij ) + Xi +      ij                           (3)
                                              k
         N LSY
where Sij,cog     is the cognitive skill measure of individual i working in occupation j and Xi
is a vector of individual age and education controls. Our coefficients of interest are the k 's.
Given collinearity, we omit the relative task measure for Manual tasks from the regression
implying that the k 's should be interpreted as the effect of working in an occupation that
requires more of task k relative to Manual tasks on the cognitive skills of workers. In columns
2 and 3, we replace the dependent variable in equation (3) with the individual's non-cognitive
         N LSY                         N LSY
skills (Sij,ncog ) and social skills (Sij,soc ), respectively.
    Table 1 highlights that individual skill supplies respond differentially to relative task de-
mands. Workers with higher cognitive skills are more likely to match with jobs that require
higher Abstract tasks and workers with higher social skills are more likely to match with jobs
0.6, and 0.1 (in z-score units). For individuals working in Civil Engineering,  ¯ij would equal 0.9 and the
relative task demand for Abstract tasks in this occupation would be 1.4 (2.3 - 0.9).

                                                    17
that require higher Contact tasks. For example, occupations where their relative Abstract
task requirement is one-standard deviation higher attract workers who score approximately
0.2 standard deviations higher on cognitive tests. Occupations where their Contact tasks
requirement is one-standard deviation higher attract workers whose social score is 0.08 stan-
dard deviation higher. The results in this table highlight that the NLSY skill measures are
informative about the types of jobs into which individuals sort.
    Having shown that the occupational task measures are associated with particular NLSY
skill measures within the sample of White men, we now explore differences in pre-labor
market skills between Black and White men within the NLSY cohorts.13 Table 2 reports
the racial gap in cognitive, non-cognitive, and social skills with various controls for the two
separate NLSY samples. The first column for each sample includes all NLSY respondents in
the sample without conditioning on employment; each of these samples has only one NLSY
respondent per regression. The remaining columns pool over all years and only include
individuals that were working. The second column within each sample adds no further
controls, while the third column controls for the individual's maximum level of education
and the last column controls also for their occupation.
    The main takeaway from this table is that the racial gap in cognitive skills is large and
narrows over time (especially for working men), whereas the gaps in non-cognitive and social
skills are relatively small and constant over time. As seen from Table 2, Black men from
the NLSY79 have AFQT scores that are 1.20 standard deviations lower than White men
from the NLSY79 cohort. The gap declines to 0.93 when we additionally control for racial
education and occupation differences. The race gap in AFQT scores narrowed somewhat
between the NLSY79 and NLSY97 cohorts but was still large at -0.58 standard deviations
conditional on education and occupation in the later period. On the other hand, the racial
skill gaps in non-cognitive and social skills conditional on education and occupation were
close to zero for both NLSY cohorts.


4      A Theory of Task Based Discrimination and Occu-
       pational Sorting
Autor and Handel (2013) propose a Roy model where workers with differential skill en-
  13
    It is worth stressing again that racial differences in measures of pre-labor market skills are likely the
result of current or past discrimination. Such a caveat should always be kept in mind when interpreting our
results. For our purposes, these skill measures do predict occupational sorting patterns for both Black and
White men as highlighted above. But, to the extent that such differences exist, the differences likely stem
from factors such as differences in parental background, neighborhood choice, or school quality that resulted
from current or past discrimination.


                                                     18
            Table 2: Racial Gaps in Skill Measures (Z-Score Differences), NLSY Data
                                             1979 Cohort                            1997 Cohort
                                    (1)      (2)     (3)        (4)         (5)      (6)    (7)        (8)

 (A) Cognitive Skills               -1.17    -1.18    -1.01    -0.93       -0.96    -0.80    -0.62    -0.58
                                   (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.03)      (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.05)   (0.05)
 (B) Non-Cog. Skills                -0.20    -0.19    -0.10    -0.05       -0.12    0.06     0.16     0.17
                                   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)      (0.05)   (0.07)   (0.07)   (0.07)
 (C) Social Skills                  -0.09    -0.11    -0.09    -0.06       -0.17    -0.15    -0.14    -0.12
                                   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)      (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.06)   (0.06)

 Employed Only Sample               No       Yes      Yes       Yes         No       Yes      Yes      Yes
 Education Controls                 No       No       Yes       Yes         No       No       Yes      Yes
 Occupation Controls                No       No       No        Yes         No       No       No       Yes

 Sample Size Clusters              4,226    3,702    3,702    3,702        2,354    1,870    1,870    1,870
 Sample Size Observations          4,226    22,479   22,479   22,479       2,354    7,923    7,923    7,923

 Note: Table shows the racial gap in various NLSY skill measures for various samples and with various
 controls. We show results separately for the 1979 cohort (columns (1)-(4)) and the 1997 cohort (columns
 (5)-(8)). Cognitive skills are measured as normalized AFQT scores. All racial gaps are measured in
 z-score differences between Black and White men. Columns (1) and (5) shows results for all individuals
 regardless of employment status; in these specifications each individual is only in the sample once. In the
 remaining columns we condition on the individual being employed in a given year. In these specifications,
 individuals can be in the sample multiple times. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.



dowments self-select into occupations according to their task requirements. We utilize the
framework to build a task-based model of discrimination where racial differences in underly-
ing skills and the existence of labor market discrimination creates differential sorting patterns
between Black and White workers. Discrimination may take a form of taste-based or statis-
tical discrimination, and the extent to which statistical discrimination impacts the returns
will differ by tasks based on underlying gaps in average skill levels across racial groups.
    As in Autor and Handel (2013), occupations are represented by bundles of K tasks, where
the relative importance of tasks differs across occupations. We denote the task content of
occupation j with a vector j = (j 1 , ..., jK )  RK    + . Workers, in turn, perform tasks by
allocating a unit of labor to the occupation of their choice, but each worker has differential
efficiencies at performing each type of tasks. We denote the skill-endowment of worker
i belonging to race group g with a vector gi = {i1 , ..., iK }  RK        + . In particular, we
suppose that each ik is drawn from a Frechet distribution with shape parameter k and
scale parameter 1, both of which are common across race groups.14
 14
      The assumption that the scale parameter of the Frechet distribution equals one is innocuous as we let


                                                     19
   In absence of discrimination or racial differences in human capital, the potential log
output of worker i belonging to race group g in occupation j is given by:

                                          ygij = j +            jk ik ,
                                                            K


where j is an occupation-specific constant that represents the potential log output of a
worker with no skills in occupation j . If employers possess perfect information on individual
worker's skills ik 's ­ an assumption we will relax below ­ workers are paid their marginal
revenue product, so that their potential log earnings in occupation j is given by:

                                   wgij  pj + ygij = Aj +              jk ik ,
                                                                   K

where pj is the log price of the output of occupation j and Aj  pj + j . Conditional on
working, each worker self-selects into the occupation j that maximizes her utility, which
is the sum of log earnings and her non-pecuniary idiosyncratic preference for occupations
log ij :
                                    ugij = wgij + log ij .

We suppose that ij is drawn from a Frechet distribution with shape parameter  and a
normalized scale parameter of 1, both of which are common to all race groups.
   Workers sort based on their comparative advantage. The optimal occupational choice of
worker i in group g is given by

                                       
                                      jgi = arg maxj =1,...,J,H {ugij } .                                    (4)

Everything else equal, occupations that require a large amount of one type of tasks tend
to attract workers who are good at performing that type of tasks. So an occupation that
requires many Abstract tasks will tend to attract workers with higher Abstract skills than an
occupation that requires few Abstract tasks, assuming that the two occupations are identical
in other task requirements. This is the basic Autor and Handel framework.15
    New to our model is differential returns to performing each type of tasks across different
the 's to be scaled freely when calibrating the model. In addition, below we will introduce a parameter that
controls differentials in overall skill-endowment levels across racial groups which is equivalent to allowing for
a differential scale parameter between Black and White individuals.
   15
      The original Autor and Handel framework does not have the idiosyncratic preference for occupations. It
is added here to give the model an extra level of flexibility to fit differentials in employment across otherwise
similar occupations. Below, we further expand on the Autor and Handel model by including racial groups
that differ by average skill levels, modeling both taste-based and statistical discrimination, and adding a
meaningful home sector.



                                                       20
race groups. We allow for three forces that can cause the returns to tasks to differ across
races. First, the average skill level may differ across race groups stemming from current or
past discrimination.16 We capture this by writing the skill endowment vector as gi = {gk +
i1 , ..., gK + iK }, where gk represents the skill (or human capital) level of group g associated
with task k . Second, workers of a particular race group may face taste-based discrimination
in performing a task. Taste-based discrimination may exist if for example customers do not
like interacting with Black employees or White workers do not like interacting with their
Black co-workers. In the presence of taste-based discrimination, we assume that employers
                                                              taste
perceive the efficiency of the discriminated workers to be gk       + gk + ik rather than gk + ik ,
          taste
where gk        is the race-specific taste-based discrimination coefficient in task k . Thus, the
potential log wages of a worker belonging to race g becomes:

                                                      taste
                              wgij = Aj +         jk (gk    + gk + ik ).
                                              K


Lastly, workers may face statistical (rather than taste-based) discrimination if their em-
ployers do not perfectly observe individual workers' skills. If skills are observed with noise,
employers form expectations about a worker's marginal product by using information about
                                                                       stat
the individual's group. The statistical discrimination coefficient, gk      , will therefore differ
by task based on underlying gaps in group mean of skills (gkt 's) used to perform the task.
   We formally incorporate the notion of statistical discrimination into the model by intro-
ducing noise to skill measurement. Suppose employers cannot observe worker's true efficiency,
gk + ik , and instead only observe a noisy skill measure given by

                                       sgik = (gk + ik ) +     ik ,


where the noise ik is drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and variance  2
(common to all race groups). Employers, however, observe a worker's group affiliation and
know the underlying distributions of gk + ik and ik . In this environment, employers set
the wage of each worker at the worker's expected marginal revenue product conditional on
  16
    This difference can proxy for racial differences in parental background, neighborhood choice or school
quality that result in differential task specific skill acquisition across racial groups.




                                                   21
observed skills (^          ^ik ) and the worker's group affiliation:17
                 si1 , ..., s

                                                   cond
                                           wgij = wgj   (^          ^ik ;  2 ).
                                                         si1 , ..., s

                      taste
Normalizing gk = gk         = 0 for the base group g = g0 (which will be White men in
our application), the expected marginal revenue product perceived by employers (who may
discriminate for taste-based motives) is given by:

   cond
  wgj   (^          ^ik ;  2 ) = Aj +
         si1 , ..., s                        jk e
                                                g0 k (jk , s
                                                                        taste
                                                           ^ik ;  2 ) + gk      stat
                                                                              + gk              ^ik ;  2 ) , (5)
                                                                                     (jk , jk , s
                                         K


where
                                                                                      1/jk
                              e          ^ik ;  2 ) = log E ejk  | sg0 ik = s
                              g0 k (jk , s                                  ^ik

is the expected efficiency of a base-group worker (e.g., White workers) in task k conditional
on observing s^ik , and

  stat                                                                 1/jk                                 1/jk
  gk              ^ik ;  2 ) = log E ejk (+gk ) | sgik = s
       (jk , jk , s                                      ^ik                  - log E ejk  | sg0 ik = s
                                                                                                      ^ik          (6)

is the statistical discrimination coefficient (measured relative to the base group). In words,
the statistical discrimination coefficient equals the gap in the conditional expected efficiency
relative to the base group and will be non-zero if gk is non-zero and  2 is positive. Overall,
racial wage gaps conditional on identical observed credentials will be a combination of taste-
based and statistical discrimination:
   cond
  wgj               ^ik ;  2 ) - wg
         si1 , ..., s
        (^                        cond
                                    0j
                                       (^          ^ik ;  2 ) =
                                        si1 , ..., s                     taste
                                                                      jk gk      stat
                                                                               + gk              ^ik ;  2 ) .
                                                                                      (jk , jk , s                 (7)
                                                                  k

                                                                                      stat
    Conceptually, it would be useful to see the statistical discrimination term gk         as a
product of a Bayesian updating process. Before they observe a signal (i.e., the observed
skill sgik ), the employers' prior on the true efficiency of a worker coincides with the true
efficiency distribution for the group to which the worker belongs. They thus expect the true
skill of a randomly-chosen worker to differ by gk across groups. However, upon observing
the signal sgik , they update their prior to reflect this new piece of information. The extent
of the updating depends on the reliability of the signal, namely the amount of noise with
  17
     Strictly speaking, the expected marginal revenue product should be conditional on the worker choosing
occupation j . However, note that workers choose occupations based on observable skills (^   si1 , ..., s
                                                                                                        ^ik ) and
not based on true efficiencies (g1 + i1 , ..., gK + iK ), as the wages depend only on the former and not on
the latter. Thus, conditional on observed skills, the distribution of  s among workers choosing occupation
j is the same as the distribution of  s among all workers. Therefore, we can omit the conditioning on
occupational choice.


                                                            22
which employers observe worker skills ( 2 ). If the signal is perfect ( 2 =0), employers set the
wages solely based on the signal and workers are paid exactly their true marginal product:

                                                     taste
                            wgij = Aj +          jk (gk    + gk + ik ).                     (8)
                                             K


In this case, there will be no statistical discrimination and the racial wage gap conditional
on observed credentials will only stem from taste-based discrimination:

                              stat
                          lim
                           2
                              gk   (^
                                    si1 , ..., s
                                               ^ik ;  2 ) = 0,    s
                                                                  ^i1 , ..., s
                                                                             ^ik .
                           0


Conversely, if the signal is completely uninformative ( 2  ), no updating takes place
and employers pay workers solely based on their initial priors. In this case, the statistical
                                            stat
discrimination term for workers of group g (gk   ) will equal the mean racial skill gap between
the group and the base group (gk ) regardless of the observed credentials:

                             stat
                         lim gk   (^          ^ik ;  2 ) = gk ,
                                   si1 , ..., s                    s
                                                                   ^i1 , ..., s
                                                                              ^ik .
                         2 


More generally, when signals are imperfect but not totally uninformative, the expected
marginal product conditional on observed skills is something akin to a weighted average
of the signal and the prior, where the relative weight on the latter increases with the vari-
ance of noise  2 . Hence, employers will tend to pay more based on the group mean and less
based on observed skills of individual workers in a noisier environment.
    Another notable implication of equation (6) is the following:
                                                    stat
Proposition 1. The statistical discrimination term, gk   (gk , jk , s
                                                                    ^ik ), tends to zero as
gk - 0.
Proof. See online appendix.

   This proposition says that there cannot be any statistical discrimination in tasks where
there is no mean gap in skills between Black and White men. When skills are noisily observed
by employers, employers put weight on their prior expected difference in skills between
workers from different groups when setting individual wages. As racial skill gaps associated
with a task tend to zero, statistical discrimination in that task will therefore also tend to
zero. We use this proposition later in the paper when decomposing racial task gaps into the
portion due to taste-based discrimination, the portion due to statistical discrimination, and
the portion due to racial skill gaps.
   We complete the model by allowing for differential sorting into employment, within and
between groups, by introducing a "home sector", denoted as j = H . Specifically, we treat

                                                   23
the home sector as another potential occupation (with task requirements H 1 , ..., HK and
occupational return AgH ) where the returns are non-pecuniary. Hence, the reservation utility
ugiH of a worker with given observable credentials equals the log of the worker's expected
marginal revenue product in an occupation with task requirements (H 1 , ..., HK ) plus the log
of the idiosyncratic preference for home sector, iH .18 Like the other occupational preferences
ij , the preference for home sector iH follows a Frechet distribution with shape  and scale
1. We however allow the occupational return to home sector, AgH , to differ by group g unlike
with other Aj 's. The differences in AgH 's across groups thus capture any forces other than
differential task returns that may create labor supply differences between racial groups.19
    In sum, our task-based model of discrimination predicts differential sorting patterns
across race groups as group-specific forces such as discrimination and racial skill differences
make the task returns differ by group. As seen from equation (7), the composite discrimi-
                 taste   stat                             total
nation term (gk        + gk   ), which we shall denote by gk    hereafter, gives rise to differential
returns to tasks across groups conditional on skills. Racial differences in skills, gk , might
further lower the task return for one group relative to the return for another. The differen-
tial returns to tasks then induce differential sorting patterns across groups. The differential
sorting across groups is a key feature of our model of task-based discrimination. Given the
model structure, one can infer the size of racial barriers faced by Black men from the extent
of differential sorting between Black and White men. We turn to such an analysis next.


5      Identifying Race-Neutral vs. Race-Specific Driving
       Forces
In this section, we discuss how we use micro data from the Census/ACS to identify and
quantify a combination of discrimination and skill differences between Black and White
                 total
workers (bkt 's+bkt    's).


5.1     Calibration and Estimation of Base Model
To estimate and calibrate the baseline model, we proceed in two steps. First, we use micro
data from O*Net and DOT combined with the occupational sorting and occupational earn-
ings of White men to discipline the key race-neutral parameters governing occupational and
  18
    The online appendix provides more detail on our exact specification of the home sector.
  19
    The relative trend over time in the racial gap in the AgH 's is small in our estimated model. This implies
that other model forces such as the changing kt 's, kt 's and 's explain the observed differential trend in
employment rate between Black and White men. Given the small quantitative importance in the change in
the relative AgH 's for our results, we relegate most of our discussion of these trends to the online appendix.


                                                      24
                          Table 3: Model Parameters and Data Targets

                               Panel A: Common Across Race Groups
 Parameter                      Variation                                   Data Target

 ~jk 's               Occupational task demands                          ONET/DOT Data

 kt 's                    Task scaling factors                  Mincerian task returns, White men
                                                                Aggregate task content, White men

 Ajt 's         Occupational marginal revenue product            Occupational shares, White men
                                                                Occupational earnings, White men

                 Shape parameter occupational tastes                  Labor supply elasticity

                      Shape parameter task skills              Variance of log earnings, White men
                                                                Abstract task returns, White men

                    Variance of noise of worker skills                    Exogenously set

                                     Panel B: Varies Across Race

       taste
 gkt + gkt        Racial differences in task skills plus            Aggregate racial wage gap
                      task-based discrimination                Aggregate racial gap in task contents
                                                                Race gap in empirical task returns

 Ag,H,t              Racial home sector preference               Share full time employed by race

     Notes: Table lists key model parameters and data moments used to discipline the parameters.



task sorting (the Ajt 's and jkt 's). We estimate the race-neutral driving forces separately
for each year of our Census/ACS samples. Second, we use racial differences in occupational
sorting, task returns and aggregate wages to pin down a composite term comprised of (gk
   taste
+gk       ) for Black men in each task. We again estimate these combined racial barrier terms
separately for each year. Table 3 lists the key parameters of the model and data moments
used to help discipline the parameters. We now provide more details.
    Specifically, we use the O*NET and DOT data to discipline the task content j =
(j 1 , ..., jK )  RK + of occupations. As in our empirical work above, we will have four types
of tasks (K = 4): Abstract, Contact, Routine, and Manual. However, we cannot directly use
the z-scores of task content we defined earlier (the  's) since j 1 , ..., jK have to be positive.
We construct j 1 , ..., jK from the z-scores as follows. First, we linearly project the z-scores
of task content to the unit interval [0, 1]. Denote the task content measure thus obtained


                                                  25
with ~jk . Then, we define jk = kt  ~jk , where kt is a scaling factor which can be interpreted
as the task's price, which we estimate. The scaling factor allows the task prices to vary over
time given that we are holding the   ~jk 's constant across years.
    As noted above, we calibrate the model for White men using the Census and ACS data
year-by-year. Specifically, the model for g = W hite is given by:

                                    ugij = wgij + log gij ,
                                    wgij = log E epj +ygij | sgi1 , ..., sgik ,
                               pj + ygij = Aj +         k ~jk ik .
                                                    K


The skill endowment ik follows a Frechet distribution with shape , while the occupational
preference ij follows a Frechet distribution with shape  . Furthermore, the conditional
expectation depends on a choice of  , the noise with which employers measure worker skills
which, as noted above, which we set to zero for this discussion. We outline how we set 
and  below. However, taking these parameters as given, the remaining parameters to be
estimated each year for White men are: Aj 's for j = 1, ..., J ; AgH for g = W hite; and the
k 's for k = 1, ..., 4. We estimate Aj , AgH and k by targeting (i) the average log income
of White men in each occupation in each year; (ii) employment share of White men in each
occupation in each year; (iii) employment share of White men in the home sector in each
year; (iv) the empirical price of each task for White men in each year (shown in Figure 4);
(v) the aggregate content of each task for White men in each year.20 These last two moments
help pin down the kt 's while the first two moments help pin down the Aj 's for the market
occupations. We compute the mean of squared deviations in each of (i) and (ii), as well
as the sum of squared deviation in (iii)-(v), and search for the set of parameter values that
minimizes the sum of these numbers.
    The Frechet shape parameters  and  are estimated from the average within-occupation
variation in log income and the labor supply elasticity for White men, respectively. Intu-
itively, a smaller  translates to a higher degree of heterogeneity in skill endowments ik 's
among workers in the same occupation (for given employment shares) and therefore a higher
variance in log earnings within each occupation; a smaller  translates to stronger occupa-
tional preferences (which means workers are less responsive to a change in wages) and hence
a lower elasticity of labor supply. We discuss in detail the mapping of the model to these
  20
     For the task content of the home sector, we use data from the Census/ACS measuring the individual's
last occupation before entering the home sector. We take the average over the years in the sample. However,
this normalization plays little role in our main quantitative results given that we allow the AgH 's to match
the actual shares in the home sector for White and Black men separately by year.



                                                     26
data moments in the online appendix. Chetty et al. (2013) suggests the extensive margin
elasticity of labor supply of about 0.25; the average of the within-occupation variance in log
earnings for White men (weighted by employment shares) is about 0.27 in the 1990 Census.
Given that some measurement error in the reported earnings is likely to have inflated the
variance, we also use the time series of the Mincerian return for Abstract tasks to pin down
. We estimate these shape parameters using the 1990 data and apply the estimates to all
years. We choose a value of  = 6 and a value of  = 4.5 to roughly match these targets.21
     In the second step, after we estimate the Aj 's, the k 's,  , and , we estimate the
                                 taste
composite race specific term bkt       + bkt ­ the sum of taste-based discrimination and the
racial skill gap (bkt ) ­ for each k . We do so by targeting (i) the conditional racial gaps
in aggregate task contents, (ii) the conditional racial gaps in task premiums (for each task
k ), and (iii) the conditional aggregate wage gap. Specifically, we target (i) the coefficients
                                                          k
obtained from regressing Blackijt on task contents ijt       with individual controls for age,
education and Census division (Panel B of Figure 2), (ii) the Black-White difference in the
Mincerian wage premiums on tasks (Panel B of Figure 4), and (iii) the conditional aggregate
wage gap presented in Figure 1. We minimize the weighted sum of squared deviations, where
we weight the aggregate task content gaps more heavily than the task price and wage gaps
in order to match the sorting pattern closely.
     One exception with our estimation strategy is with the Manual tasks. Because the
empirical wage premium on Manual tasks for White men is close to zero, the first step of
our model calibration estimates that M anual,t = 0  t. Consequently, the racial barriers
 taste
bkt    + bkt for Manual tasks contribute neither to overall racial wage gaps nor to sorting
given the model structure. Hence, we focus on estimating the bkt 's and bkt 's for Abstract,
Contact, and Routine tasks only. We thus exclude the racial gaps in aggregate Manual task
contents and Manual wage premiums from the set of moments we target.
     We start by assuming employers observe worker skills without error by setting  = 0.
We relax this assumption in subsequent sections. However, we note that our results in this
section are not overly sensitive to our assumptions about  .
     Appendix Figure A11 compares the key model moments (solid lines) against the corre-
sponding data targets (dashed lines). As seen from the various panels of the figure, our
model generally fits the data on racial gaps in tasks and wages very well.
 21
      We discuss the robustness of our key results to alternate values of  and  in the online appendix.




                                                     27
                                                  taste
               Figure 5: Model Estimates of bkt + bkt   and the Racial Gap in ikt




                                taste
       Panel A: Trends in bkt + bkt                    Panel B: Trend in Racial Gap in ikt

                                                                         taste
       Notes: Panel A of figure shows model generated estimated bkt + bkt      for Abstract, Contact, and
       Routine tasks across years. Panel B shows the racial gaps in ikt defined as the average  for
       Blacks in task k relative to the average  for Whites in task k during each year t. Positive values
       imply Blacks have higher 's than Whites. 's measured in z-score units.



                                                                taste
5.2       Estimates of Composite Racial Task Differences: bkt + bkt
                                                                               taste
Panel A of Figure 5 shows the trend in model implied sum of bkt + bkt                 for Black men
in the the Abstract, Contact, and Routine tasks.22 Given the model, these are the implied
racial differences in a combination of mean human capital levels (the bkt 's) and taste-based
                                  taste
discrimination measures (the bkt        's) for each task. The model says that the combined
       taste
bkt + bkt term explains both racial differences in occupational sorting and racial differences
in the returns to task k in year t between Black and White men. As seen in the figure, there
                                                     taste
was a reduction in the composite term bkt + bkt            for all three tasks between the 1960s
and 2018. In 1960, Black men had a combination of a deficit in mean Abstract skills and
discrimination in Abstract tasks that resulted in 38 percent lower return to Abstract tasks
than an otherwise comparable White men.23 That gap fell to 26 percent by 1980 and then
                                                                                     taste
only experienced a modest additional decline thereafter. Likewise, the bkt + bkt           for Contact
tasks fell from a 28 percent gap in 1960 to a roughly 7 percent gap in 2018.24
  22
     As a reminder, we calibrate our model to racial gaps in the task content of jobs and racial wage gaps
conditional on education and age. So the effect of education differences across groups are already controlled
                                     taste
for when estimating the bkt 's and bkt     's.
  23
     The return to tasks discussed here refers to the partial derivative wgij /jk , which equals (gk + gk +
ik ) when employers can measure skills perfectly. Noting that units are in logs, bk + bk represents percentage
point gap in the return to tasks between Black and White workers.
  24
     Our estimated kt for Contact tasks dips slightly in 1980 as seen in Figure 6 below. This causes the
estimated  +  taste for Contact tasks to dip down in 1980. This explains the non-monotonic change in
 +  taste for Contact tasks between 1970 and 1990.



                                                      28
    Panel B of Figure 5 highlights the evolution of selection over time by plotting model
estimates of the reduction in the within-occupation racial skill gaps due to sorting, sepa-
rately for Abstract, Contact, and Routine tasks in each year. Specifically, the vertical axis
measures in standardized units the Black-White gap in average ikt (individual race-neutral
task-specific skill draws) for task k in period t, conditional on task content of occupations.
Conceptually, the gap captures how much smaller the racial gap in effective skills ik + bkt
becomes when we condition on task requirements. When Black workers face racial barriers
             taste
(i.e., bkt + bkt   > 0) in task k , they will systematically sort away from occupations requiring
this task. However, those Black workers that do sort into jobs that require task k will be
positively selected on the race-neutral ikt 's relative to White workers who select into similar
jobs. The differential selection on ik 's implies that the racial gap in effective skills ik + bkt
within occupations with given task requirements (the conditional racial skill gap) will be
smaller than the population-wide racial skill gap (the unconditional gap) given by bkt ; the
vertical axis in Panel B measures the extent of the reduction (in standardized units).
    Three things are of note from the figure. First, for all tasks, Black men are positively
selected on their latent ik 's. Second, the extent of differential selection between Black and
White men is greater in Abstract tasks relative to both Contact and Routine tasks. In 1960,
the conditional racial skill gap in Abstract was about 0.2 standard deviations smaller than
                                                   taste
the unconditional racial skill gap. The bkt + bkt        gap in a task has a larger effect on sorting
                                                                                                   taste
when the Mincerian return to that task is relatively high. A combination of high bkt + bkt
in Abstract tasks and a large return in Abstract tasks explains why the selection effects are
so much larger in Abstract tasks. Finally, the racial gap in ik 's for Contact tasks was large
in 1960 but that gap essentially diminished to zero by 2018. The reason that differential
                                                                                              taste
selection was close to zero in 2018 for Contact tasks is because the composite bkt + bkt            for
Contact tasks has fallen close to zero by 2018.
    The counterfactuals we explore in subsequent sections rely on the functional form as-
sumptions we make for the various distributions for which individuals draw task specific
skills or preferences. To provide confidence in the distributional assumptions underlying our
calibrated model, we explore how our model matches the time series trends for many addi-
tional non-targeted moments. We leave the full details of these validation exercises to the
Appendix Figure A12 and only very briefly summarize them here. First, we show that de-
spite only targeting mean racial wage gaps over time, our calibrated model matches well the
racial wage rank gaps empirically documented in Bayer and Charles (2018). Using a sample
of all workers regardless of employment status, Bayer and Charles (2018) compute the per-
centile of the median and 90th percentile of Black men (in the Black men wage distribution)
in the wage distribution of White men. Not only does our model match mean racial wage


                                                  29
gaps over time, but the model also matches the relative position of Black men in the White
men's wage distribution over time at various percentile points. These findings suggest that,
even though we are targeting only mean racial wage gaps, our functional form assumptions
are sufficient to match the level and trends in relative wages throughout the wage distribu-
tion. Second, we show that our model also matches well the empirical time series patterns
of racial wage gaps conditional on the task-content of a worker's job. In particular, both in
the model and in the data, controlling for the task content of a worker's occupation does
not have much of an effect on estimated racial wage gaps in any year. The reason in the
model for this result stems from workers with differing task-specific skills and occupational
preferences differentially sorting into occupations with larger task-specific barriers. The fact
that our model matches various additional non-targeted moments gives us confidence in the
counterfactuals we highlight next.


6      The Stagnation of the Racial Wage Gap Post 1980
The prior section discusses our base model estimation and shows that the quantitative model
matches many non-targeted moments. We now perform various counterfactuals using the
estimated model to shed light on the stagnation of the racial wage gap post-1980.


6.1     Model Counterfactuals
Figure 6 shows the model implied kt 's for the various task measures. Panel A shows the
level of the  's for the different tasks over time while Panel B shows the time series trends
in the tasks prices relative to the task price of Contact tasks during a given time period,
kt /Contact,t . As seen in Panel B, we estimate that the task prices for Abstract tasks have
been rising relative to the task prices of other tasks, particularly after 1980.
    In theory, given relatively high and persistent barriers to Abstract tasks faced by Black
men, the relative increase in the return to Abstract tasks will disadvantage Black workers
and hence widen the racial wage gap because Black workers are underrepresented in jobs
that require these tasks. Panel A of Figure 7 quantifies the extent of this force. Specifically,
the black line (with squares) shows what would happen to the racial wage gap relative to the
baseline scenario if we hold fixed the task price for Abstract tasks (Abstract ) at 1980 levels.25
The counterfactual exercise shows that the racial wage gap in 2018 would have fallen by
roughly 10 log points relative to the baseline model (from 24 to 14 log points) if the return
  25
    We show the results in Figure 7 assuming employers observe worker skills without error ( = 0). As
we highlight below, our results in time series changes in the combined ( +  taste ) for the various tasks are
relatively similar across the different signal-to-noise assumptions, especially post-1980.


                                                     30
                           Figure 6: Task Premium Trends 1980 - 2018




                  Panel A: k 's                       Panel B: k 's relative to Contact

    Notes: Figure shows trends in model task prices, k 's; Panel A presents the trends in k 's as they
    are, while Panel B normalizes k for Contact to one and shows the trends in relative values of k 's.


       Figure 7: Counterfactual Racial Wage Gaps Relative to Baseline, 1980 - 2018




           Panel A: Holding Task                                  Panel B: Holding
            Returns ( 's) Fixed                                    's and  's Fixed

    Notes: Figure shows counterfactual racial wage gaps relative to the racial wage gaps in the base-
    line scenario assuming various kt 's and Ajt 's are held fixed at 1980 levels (Panel A) and various
      taste
    kt      + kt 's are held fixed at 1980 levels (Panel B). Both figures show the log differences be-
    tween the counterfactual and baseline wage gaps in 1990, 2000, 2012, and 2018 under the various
    counterfactuals.



to Abstract tasks were held at 1980 levels. In the red line (with circles) in this panel, we hold
the kt 's for all the tasks and the Ajt 's for all occupations at their 1980 levels, rather than
just fixing the kt for Abstract tasks. In this case, we find that that the Black-White wage
gap in 2018 would have narrowed by 7 percentage points relative to the baseline model.
    Panel B of the figure shows the flip side of our analysis. In this set of counterfactual


                                                    31
                                        taste
exercises, we hold the composite bkt          + bkt fixed at 1980 levels for various tasks. As seen
                      taste
from the figure, if bkt     + bkt for Contact tasks remained at 1980 levels, the racial wage gap in
2018 would have risen by 6 log points (from 24 log points to 30 log points). In other words,
                  taste
the decline in bkt      + bkt for Contact tasks reduced the racial wage gap by 6 percentage
points since 1980 with almost all of that decline occurring between 1980 and 1990. Likewise,
              taste
holding the bkt     + bkt for all tasks at 1980 levels would have increased the racial wage gap
in 2018 by 8 percentage points (from 24 to 32 log points).
    To summarize, the racial wage gap has remained relatively constant since 1980 because
of two offsetting effects. On the one hand, a combination of declining discrimination and a
narrowing of racial skill gaps reduced the racial wage gap between 1980 and 2018 by about 8
percentage points. On the other hand, changes in race neutral forces such as the increasing
return to Abstract tasks (perhaps due to forces such as skill biased technological change)
widened the gap by about 10 percentage points during the same period. Because Black
workers face discrimination in Abstract tasks and have a gap in skills associated with Abstract
tasks, Black workers were not able to capture as much of the gains from the increasing
returns in these activities. These two sets of forces have combined to keep the racial wage
gap relatively unchanged between 1980 and 2018.26


6.2     Additional Model Validation: Cross Region Wage Gaps
In this subsection, we show additional empirical evidence exploiting cross region variation
that supports the model counterfactuals. Our model suggests that during the 1980-2018
period, racial wage gaps should have risen in regions where there were small declines in
discrimination. In those regions, the primary effect on racial wage gaps should have been the
increasing returns to Abstract tasks which relatively favored White workers. As discussed in
Section 3, the literature has found that taste-based measures of discrimination were higher in
1980 and declined more between 1980 and 2018 in the South region relative to other regions.
Likewise, using our NLSY data, we find that racial gaps in AFQT scores were also larger in
the South region in the NLSY79 wave and converged more in the South region than in the
non-South region between the NLSY79 and NLSY97 waves. These results in combination
suggest that race-specific forces in the South region were large in 1980 and declined more
post-1980 than they did in other regions.
    Figure 8 shows the male racial wage gap in the South region (black line with squares) and
  26
    We have explored the robustness of Figure 7 to alternate values of  (the shape parameter from the
distribution from which task skills are drawn) or  (the shape parameter from the distribution from which
occupational preferences are drawn). To conserve space, we relegate the details of these robustness exercises
to the online appendix. The main takeaways are always qualitatively similar and often quantitatively similar
across the different values of  and  we explored.

                                                     32
                 Figure 8: Racial Wage Gaps by Region: Census/ACS Data




                                0
                                -.05 -.1
                        Racial Wage Gap
                       -.2     -.15
                                -.25
                                -.3




                                           1980   1990            2000               2012   2018

                                                         South           Non-South


    Notes: Figure shows racial wage gaps for men aged 25-54 over time (conditional on age and
    education) using individual level data from the Census/ACS separately for individuals in the
    South and non-South regions.



non-South region (red line with circles) using our main Census/ACS samples between 1980
and 2018. The regressions underlying the results in this panel are similar to those shown
Figure 1 and are conditioned on education and age controls. The results in in the figure
confirm our model's prediction. First, racial wage gaps in the non-South region increased
by about 7 log points between 1980 and 2018 (from -0.16 to -0.23). This is consistent with
the counterfactual findings in Figure 7 that increasing task returns post-1980 increased the
racial wage gap in the US as a whole by about 7 log points. In regions where the changes
in race-specific factors were small, the only effect on racial wage gaps would be the negative
effect stemming from rising task returns. Second, racial wage gaps in the South converged
toward the gaps in the non-South region. In 1980, the racial wage gap was about 10 log
points larger in the South region relative to the non-south region. By 2018, the racial wage
gap in the South was essentially the same as the racial wage gap in the non-South region.
Moreover, unlike the racial wage gap in the non-South regions, the racial wage gap in the
South region was relatively constant between 1980 and 2018.
    Collectively, these cross-region patterns are consistent with the model counterfactual
results suggesting that Black workers in the aggregate gained from declining discrimination
and narrowing racial skill gaps post-1980, but these gains were masked in aggregate data by
rising returns to Abstract tasks. If one focuses on regions where the change in race specific
factors were small, our model says that racial wage gaps should have increased post-1980;
this is exactly what we find in the non-South regions of the United States.



                                                             33
6.3    Model Implications for Reduced Form Wage Regressions
Additionally, our structural model provides a road map to empirical researchers looking
to uncover race-specific factors in micro data. In particular, the model suggests that one
must control not only for racial differences in skills but also for changes in the return to
different skills when analyzing the evolution of Black-White wage differences over time.
In this subsection, we exploit the panel structure of the NLSY data to illustrate this point.
Specifically, we use our pooled NLSY sample comprising multiple cohorts to run the following
regression:

                           1
                wit =  0 + t Dt Blacki +         2
                                                 kt     N LSY
                                                    Dt Ski    + Xit Dt + µi +     it            (9)
                                             k

                                                                                       N LSY
where wisjt is the log wage of individual i from the NLSY in period t and Ski                's (k =
cog, ncog, soc) are the pre-labor market measures of cognitive, non-cognitive, and social
                                                                          1
skills discussed above. Our parameters of interest are the estimated t      's, which measure the
Black-White wage gap relative to the benchmark time-period controlling for differences in
pre-labor market skills. Guided by our structural estimation, however, we estimate relative
Black progress in log wages after controlling for changing skill returns that can mask this
progress. Specifically, when we control for the individual skills, we allow the labor market
                                                                                N LSY
returns to the various NLSY skills ­ the regression coefficients on the Ski           's ­ to evolve
over time; note that the individual skills are interacted with time dummies. This conditions
out the effects of changing skill prices over time on the racial wage differences.
    In addition to controlling for changing skill returns, we control for omitted time-invariant
factors ­ such as unmeasured skills that are constant within an individual over time ­ by
including individual fixed effects (µi ). We hence identify the year-specific race dummies
        1
(the t    's) by exploiting within-individual changes over time. We also include demographic
controls (Xisjt ) consisting of age and education dummies again interacted with time dummies.
In terms of estimation, we segment the NLSY into four year periods: 1980-1989, 1990-1999,
2000-2009, and 2010-2018. We set the 1980-1989 period to be the benchmark year group so
all other differences in the racial wage gap over time are relative to the 1980-1989 period.
    The results from the regressions are shown in Table 4. To illuminate the effects of
including various controls, we start with specifications inclusive of just the basic controls.
Specifically, column 1 shows the evolution of racial wage gaps in the NLSY controlling only
for our standard demographics. As with the patterns in the Census/ACS data, the racial
wage gap in the NLSY has been roughly constant between the early 1980s and the late 2010s.
In column 2, we include individual fixed effects; we still find no trend in racial wage gaps


                                                 34
Table 4: The Evolution of Racial Wage Gaps Over Time in the NLSY: The Importance of
Controlling for Time-Varying Skill Returns
                                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)

 Racial Wage Gap: 1990s                                         0.002      0.020      0.040      0.042
                                                               (0.022)    (0.019)    (0.022)    (0.022)

 Racial Wage Gap: 2000s                                         0.051      0.034      0.093      0.094
                                                               (0.028)    (0.032)    (0.035)    (0.035)

 Racial Wage Gap: 2010s                                         0.029      0.026      0.100      0.099
                                                               (0.038)    (0.039)    (0.042)    (0.043)

 Demographic Controls * Year Dummies                             Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Individual Fixed Effects                                        No         Yes        Yes        Yes
 Cognitive Skills * Year Dummies                                 No         No         Yes        Yes
 Non-Cognitive and Social Skills * Year Dummies                  No         No         No         Yes

    Notes: Table shows the evolution of the racial log wage gap over time in the NLSY data with
    various sets of controls. Data uses the pooled sample of the NLSY 1979 and 1997 waves. Sample
    restricted to Black and White men between the ages of 25 and 54. Robust standard errors clustered
    at the individual level shown in parentheses.



between 1980 and 2018. Omitted time-invariant factors thus cannot explain the stagnation
in Blacks' relative wages over the last 40 years. Once we control for the rising return to
cognitive skills over time, however, we find a strong convergence in racial wage gaps post-
1980. Specifically, in column 3, we control for time-varying return to just cognitive skills. In
this column, we find a narrowing of the racial wage gap relative to the 1980s of about 4 log
points in the 1990s, about 9 log points in the 2000s, and about 10 log points in the 2010s.
The results are nearly identical when we additionally control for time-varying returns to non-
cognitive and social skills (column 4).27 As suggested by our model, conditioning out the
effects of time-varying skill returns ­ the rising return to cognitive skills in particular ­ unveils
the convergence in the racial wage gap due to changing race-specific factors. Strikingly, the
magnitude of the convergence we estimate in the NLSY between 1980 and 2018 once properly
controlling for the changing returns to skills (column 4 of Table 4) is close to the magnitude
we estimate from our structural model (Panel B of Figure 7).
    The above findings highlight why our estimated model yields quantitatively different
conclusions regarding the extent to which race-specific factors have improved in the United
  27
     Although not shown, we estimate that the return to cognitive skills increased by 8 log points between
the 1980s and the 2010s while the return to non-cognitive and social skills remained roughly constant.


                                                   35
States during the last forty years relative to a popular statistical decomposition method
developed by Juhn et al. (1991) (henceforth known as JMP). In the online appendix, we
perform the JMP decomposition on our data from the Census/ACS and show that the de-
composition dramatically understates the importance of both skill price changes in widening
the racial wage gap and declining race specific factors in narrowing the racial wage gap over
the 1980-2018 period relative to our model. This is because the JMP procedure assumes
that White workers with a given wage have a similar skill bundle and furthermore perform a
similar mixture of tasks as Black workers with the same wage. In our multi-task model with
selection, that assumption does not hold; a White worker with a given wage is more likely
to have a skill bundle tilted towards Abstract (cognitive) skills and also more likely to have
sorted into occupations with high Abstract task requirement than a Black worker with the
same wage. These appendix results highlight the quantitative importance of accounting for
selection on multiple skills when decomposing the effect of changing skill prices, declining
discrimination or narrowing racial skill gaps on racial wage gaps.


7     Mapping Empirical Measures of Individual Skills to
      Model Task Specific Skills
At the heart of our model is the idea that the productivity of individual skills varies across
tasks; cognitive, non-cognitive and social skills are not equally rewarded in different jobs.
While much research has focused on accounting for individual skills in explaining racial wage
gaps (e.g., Neal and Johnson (1996)), our framework emphasizes workers' task-specific skills.
   We now lay out our procedure mapping individual measures of skills from the NLSY into
model-based measures of task-specific skills. Our procedure has two steps. First, restricting
ourselves to the sample of White men, we map NLSY measures of cognitive, non-cognitive,
and social skills into task-specific skills in the model (up to a scalar) using the following
regression:

                                       N LSY               N LSY               N LSY
              swjkt = akt + bcog,kt S cog,wjt + bncog,kt S ncog,wjt + bsoc,kt S soc,wjt +   jkt ,   (10)

where the dependent variable swjkt is the occupational-average of observed task-specific skills
swjkt for White men generated by the model, and the regressors are the empirical measures
                         N LSY                      N LSY                           N LSY
of average cognitive (S cog,wjt ), non-cognitive (S ncog,wjt ) and social skills (S soc,wjt ) for White
men in the corresponding occupations from our sample of NLSY respondents. Intuitively,
the first stage produces a weighting (the b's) of NLSY individual skill measures for each
task-specific skill by exploiting cross-occupation variation for White men.

                                                    36
    In the second stage, we use the estimated weights for White men and the Black-White gap
in measured individual skills from the NLSY to impute the racial gaps in task-specific skills
in each occupation. Formally, using the coefficients from the first stage regression (^         bcog,kt ,
^
bncog,kt , and ^
               bsoc,kt ), we predict racial gaps in task-specific skills sgap
                                                                          jkt ­ whose predicted values
                      gap
we denote with sjkt ­ in each occupation based on the racial gaps in the NLSY skills:

                                          gap                 gap                 gap
                         sgap   ^                  ^                    ^
                          jkt = bcog,kt S cog,jt + bncog,kt S ncog,jt + bsoc,kt S soc,jt ,               (11)

          gap      gap             gap
where S cog,jt , S ncog,jt , and S scog,jt respectively are the racial gaps in NLSY measures of
cognitive, non-cognitive, and social skills in each occupation estimated conditional on edu-
cation (as in columns 3 and 7 of Table 2). Recall that we estimate all race-specific factors
  taste
(bkt    + bkt 's) controlling for education; we thus estimate the racial gaps in task-specific skills
analogously. Once we obtain the NLSY-based predictions, we infer the bkt 's that make the
model-generated sgap                                                          gap
                      jkt 's consistent with the NLSY-based predicted sjkt 's. The procedure just
ensures the model estimate of racial skill gaps matches the weighted average of the racial
gaps in NLSY skills separately for each task.
    Once the kt 's are estimated, the model structure can be used to infer the discrimination
parameters. As a reminder, in Section 5 we developed a procedure to identify the combined
          taste
term (bkt       + bkt ) using data on racial gaps in task contents, task prices, and aggregate
wages. Given our estimates of bkt 's using the above procedure and an assumed level of noise
                                                                                                   taste
in worker skills ( ), we can therefore infer the amount of taste-based discrimination (bkt               's)
faced by each worker in each occupation. In other words, we attribute the residual task-
                                                                            taste
specific barriers facing Black men to taste-based discrimination (bkt             's) after accounting for
                                                                                    stat 28
racial skill differences (bkt 's) and possible statistical discrimination (bkt          ).
    In terms of estimating our first stage regression, we pool together data from multiple years
to estimate the bcog,kt 's, bncog,kt 's, and bsoc,kt 's, assuming each of the bkt 's to be constant over
time; we do, however, allow the akt 's to differ across t's.29 With respect to implementation,
we map the model estimates from 1990 to the data for the NLSY-79 cohort; given our age
restrictions, 1990 is about the average year of data for the NLSY-79 cohort. Likewise, we
map the model estimates from 2012 to the data from the NLSY-97 cohort. When estimating
(10) for our first stage regression, we use cross occupational variation aggregating the data
to 66 unique broader occupations within each year.30
  28                                                                         taste
      In the actual implementation of our decomposition procedure, the bkt         's and bkt 's are estimated
jointly given that the second stage of the projection procedure depends on sorting of Black workers across
                                           taste
occupations, which in turn is affected by bkt    's.
   29
      In the online appendix, we show a robustness exercise computing all of our key decomposition results
when we allow the b's to differ by year.
   30
      We use the same broad occupation classification as in Hsieh et al. (2019), which uses the occupational


                                                       37
    Given the NLSY data with skill measures do not extend back to 1960, we need to make
assumptions about the projection in 1960 if we want to discuss long run trends in  taste .
To this end, we use the fact that the racial task gaps in the South Census region of the
U.S. in 1990 were similar to the racial task gaps in the entire U.S. in 1960. Specifically,
the demographically adjusted racial gap in Contact, Abstract, and Routine task content of
occupations for the U.S. as a whole in 1960 were, respectively, -0.040, -0.031, and -0.051 (see
Panel B of Figure 2). The corresponding values for individuals living in the South region in
1990 Census/ACS data were -0.041, -0.045, and -0.044 (see Panel A of Figure 3). Relative
to the observed time series trends over the 1960-2018 period, these values are relatively close
to the 1960 national levels. Given this, for our 1960 decomposition, we load the average
occupational efficiency units in 1960 on the average occupational skill levels of White men
in the South in 1990. We then use racial differences in skill levels in the South in 1990 as a
proxy for racial skill differences nationally in 1960. Given that the estimated b's are relatively
constant over time when we estimate equation (10) separately by year, the first part of our
assumption for the 1960 projection is not overly restrictive. The stronger assumption is
that the observed racial gap in skills in the NLSY in the South for the 1979 cohort is a
good proxy for the racial gap in skills for the country as a whole in 1960. There is some
existing empirical support for this assumption. Chay et al. (2009) using data from National
Assessment of Educational Progress finds a Black-White gap in standardized cognitive test
scores for a nationally representative sample of individuals born between 1953 and 1961 of
about -1.25 standard deviations. For male NLSY79 respondents in the South, we find an
unconditional AFQT racial gap of about -1.2 standard deviations. The fact that the Black-
White gaps in both cognitive test scores and occupational sorting for men in the NSLY79
cohort are roughly similar to the Black-White gaps in cognitive test scores and occupational
sorting for the U.S. as a whole in 1960 gives us some confidence in using our imputation
procedure to infer 1960 relationships.
    The first stage regressions are shown in Table 5. The table reports the first stage mapping
for Abstract (column 1), Contact (column 2) and Routine tasks (column 3). Each column
reflects the estimates of bcog,kt 's, bncog,kt 's, and bsoc,kt 's from separate regressions of equation
(11) for the various tasks. A few things are of note from Table 5. First, cognitive skills are
most predictive of the skills required for Abstract tasks. Occupations where NLSY workers
have high cognitive skills on average are also the same occupations that the model predicts
that workers have higher levels of Abstract task-specific skills. Second, social skills are
positively predictive only of the skills required for Contract tasks. Social skills, conditional
on cognitive and non-cognitive skills, are unrelated to the skills required for Abstract tasks
sub-heading groups provided in the 1990 Census.


                                                  38
Table 5: First Stage Regression of Average Model Task Skills on Average NLSY Individual
Skills, Cross-Occupation Variation
                                                 Abstract       Contact         Routine

                  Cognitive                        0.16            0.04           -0.02
                                                  (0.03)          (0.01)         (0.02)
                  Non-Cognitive                    0.05            0.02           0.01
                                                  (0.03)          (0.02)         (0.03)
                  Social                           -0.02           0.12           -0.10
                                                  (0.05)          (0.03)         (0.03)

                  Year Fixed Effects                Yes            Yes            Yes

                  Adj. R-Squared                   0.41            0.37           0.07
                  F-Stat                           20.9            10.1           4.6

    Notes: Table shows estimate coefficients from first stage regression equation (10) for White men.
    Each column is a separate regression exploiting cross-occupation variation. We use 66 broad
    occupation categories. For these regressions, we pool together observations from 1960, 1990, and
    2012 so that each regression will have 198 observations (3*66). See the text for additional details.



and are negatively related to the skills required for Routine tasks. Third, our first stage
procedure has large F-stats for both Abstract and Contact tasks. However, we have little
first stage power predicting Routine tasks. As a result, we have less confidence in the ability
                                                                 taste
to use our first stage procedure to decompose the kt from the kt       for Routine tasks. Given
this, we focus our main decomposition results on Abstract and Contact tasks. The patterns
in this table are consistent with the reduced form estimates shown in Table 1 which related
the NLSY skill measures to the actual task content of occupations for NLSY respondents.
Despite these skill measures coming from relatively narrow survey questions in the NLSY,
the skill measures are quite predictive of task specific occupational sorting for Abstract and
Contact tasks when viewed through the lens of the model. This predictive power gives us
confidence with respecting to performing the decomposition exercises for these tasks below.
    We end this section by discussing how any misspecification in decomposition equations
(11) and (10) can bias our estimates of the change in bkt over time. In particular, if there is
an omitted trait not measured in the NLSY that predicts an individual's task-based skills,
and if that omitted variable changes differentially between Black and White men over time,
our estimates of bkt between two periods will be biased. Both within the main paper and
in the appendix, we perform various exercises to assess whether such omitted skills could


                                                    39
be an issue. We highlight two such exercises here. First, in Table 4 above, we exploit the
panel structure of the NLSY and show that controlling for unmeasured traits by including
individual fixed effects hardly affects the estimated changes in the racial wage gap over time
(compare columns 1 and 2 of Table 4). This suggests that omitted skills play little role in
the evolution of the racial wage gap over the last forty years. Second, in the appendix, we
examine whether the labor market returns to skills differ between Black and White men in
the NLSY. We find that the labor market returns to social skills are similar between Black
and White men. This finding is consistent with there being no differential bias between Black
and White men with respect to predicting Contact task efficiency from measured traits. On
the other hand, consistent with the findings in Neal (2006), the wage return to cognitive
skills is higher for Black men than for White men with the same occupation and education.
This is suggestive of the possibility that missing traits associated with Abstract tasks differ
systematically between Black and White men.
    Overall, these results give us some confidence that changing racial gaps in omitted skills
                                                         taste
are not biasing our estimates of the bkt and bkt               for Contact tasks. This is crucial
because most of our key model findings in the next section hinge on our estimates of the
                taste
bkt and bkt           for Contact tasks being unbiased. It being a pivotal concern for our paper,
we will later revisit the possibility of a bias in predicting Contact task efficiency and provide
some additional reassurance by exploiting state-level survey-based measures of taste-based
discrimination. On the other hand, we are less certain about our ability to estimate the bkt
for Abstract tasks without a bias. We will acknowledge this concern when we decompose the
             total
change in bkt      + bkt for Abstract tasks.


8     Estimates of Task-Based Discrimination
Given the mapping procedure described above, we can use the observed racial gaps in skills
                                                                           total
from the NLSY to inform our decomposition of racial gaps in bkt + bkt            into its various
components. The results of our decomposition are shown in Table 6. As the decomposition
depends on the value of  ­ the variance of noise in skills observed by employers ­ we
perform the decomposition at three levels of strength of signal ratios: 1.0, 0.9, and 0.75.
These ratios correspond to values of  equal to 0.0, 0.17, and 0.30, respectively. We measure
the strength of the signal as the variance of the truth divided by the variance of the truth
plus the variance of the noise; thus a strength of signal ratio of 1 implies that the variance
                                                                                   total
of the noise is zero. In first set of rows, we explore the model predictions for kt      assuming
the various levels of  . Columns (1)-(3) show the estimates for Contact tasks in 1960, 1990,
and 2012 while columns (5)-(7) show the estimates for Abstract tasks. Columns (4) and (8)

                                               40
       Table 6: Task Decomposition of Racial Skill Gap and Task-Based Discrimination
                                        Contact                                     Abstract
                           1960     1990 2012 (12 - 60)                1960     1990 2012 (12 - 60)

  total ,  = 0             -0.20 -0.01 -0.02             0.18          -0.10 0.00       -0.03       0.07
  total ,  = 0.17          -0.22 -0.02 -0.03             0.18          -0.18 -0.06      -0.07       0.11
  total ,  = 0.30          -0.22 -0.03 -0.04             0.18          -0.20 -0.08      -0.09       0.12

  taste ,  = 0             -0.20    -0.01 -0.02          0.18          -0.10    0.00    -0.03       0.07
  taste ,  = 0.17          -0.19    0.00 -0.02           0.18          -0.08    0.02    -0.02       0.06
  taste ,  = 0.30          -0.18    0.00 -0.01           0.17          -0.05    0.04     0.00       0.05

  stat ,  = 0               --       --      --           --            --      --       --          --
  stat ,  = 0.17           -0.02    -0.02   -0.02        0.01          -0.10   -0.08    -0.05       0.05
  stat ,  = 0.30           -0.04    -0.03   -0.03        0.01          -0.15   -0.12    -0.08       0.07

 ,  = 0                    -0.09 -0.07 -0.06             0.03          -0.28 -0.23 -0.17            0.11
  ,  = 0.17                -0.09 -0.07 -0.06             0.03          -0.29 -0.24 -0.17            0.11
  ,  = 0.30                -0.10 -0.08 -0.07             0.03          -0.30 -0.25 -0.18            0.12

                                                                         total   taste   stat
      Notes: Table shows model decomposition of racial differences in bk       , bk    , bk   , and bk for
      Abstract and Contact task in 1960, 1990, and 2012. We do the decomposition across various
      assumptions with respect to which employers can accurately observe the skill levels of their em-
      ployees.  = 0, 0.17, and 0.30 corresponds to implied strength of signal ratios of worker skills by
      employers of 1, 0.9, and 0.75, respectively.



                                       total
show the changes in the respective kt        's between 1960 and 2012. The next two sets of rows
                                                  taste     stat
of Table 6 show the results separately for kt           and kt   . The final set of rows shows the
                                    taste
results for kt . Notice, the sum (        +  ) is stable across different values of  assumed for
each task. This is because ( taste +  )'s determine for each task the size of task-specific racial
barriers unconditional on sorting, which we discipline with the targeted moments.


8.1      Decomposing Racial Gaps in Contact Tasks
A few key results are notable for the decomposition for Contact tasks. First, for Contact
tasks, almost all of the  total can be attributed to  taste in each of the years regardless of the
amount of noise we assume. This result stems directly from Proposition 1, which states that
when racial gaps in skills associated with a task are close to zero, statistical discrimination
in that task must be close to zero. Specifically, we find only small racial gaps in social skills
in the NLSY data, where Contact task skills in the model are predominantly associated
with social skills (Table 5). The fact that there are only very small racial gaps in the


                                                      41
skills associated with Contact tasks implies that statistical discrimination cannot be that
important for Contact tasks, as seen in the  stat rows of Table 6. Second, to the extent that
there are small changes in our level estimates of  taste ,  stat , and  for Contact tasks in any
one year as we change the level of  , the estimated change in the discrimination and racial
skill gap parameters for Contact tasks are essentially invariant to our assumption about how
well employers observe a worker's skills. When we decompose the time series trends in the
racial gaps in Contact tasks, we explain essentially all of the trends with declining  taste .
Hence, the large inferred decline in taste-based discrimination associated with Contact tasks
between 1960 and 2012 ­ with essentially all of these gains occurring prior to 1990 ­ closely
mirrors the trend in racial gaps in Contact tasks. We thus conclude that changes in the racial
gaps in Contact tasks over time are a good proxy for changes in taste-based discrimination
measures over time. Again, this stems from the fact that racial gaps in social skills in the
NLSY are small and social skills predict Contact task efficiency.
    To further validate our conclusion that racial gaps in Contact tasks is a good proxy for
taste-based discrimination, we compare racial gaps in Contact tasks to survey based measures
of taste-based discrimination created by Charles and Guryan (2008), exploiting cross-state
variation in these measures. Charles and Guryan (2008) (henceforth CG) use confidential
location data from the General Social Survey (GSS) conducted during the 1970s through the
early 1990s. The GSS asked a nationally representative sample dozens of questions eliciting
potential prejudice against Blacks.31 Focusing on a sample of White individuals, CG create
measures of state level prejudice against Blacks.32 Their measure is standardized with higher
values indicating larger levels of taste-based discrimination among Whites within the state.
    Panel A of Figure 9 correlates measures of racial gaps in the Contact tasks for each state
with the CG state-level taste-based discrimination measures. Specifically, for each state we
measure the conditional race gap in Contact tasks using the specification in equation (1).
Given the GSS was conducted in the mid-1970s through the early 1990s, we map the CG
measures to our 1980 data. As seen from the figure, there is a strong correlation between
the state-level racial gaps in the Contact task content of jobs in 1980 and the CG measure
of state-level taste-based discrimination; a simple regression line through the scatter plot
yields a slope coefficient of -0.11 (standard error = 0.02) and a R-squared of 0.52. That is,
states with high survey-based measures of taste-based discrimination are systematically the
  31
     For example, respondents were asked how they would feel if a close relative was planning to marry
someone who was Black, whether they would ever vote for a Black president, or whether they were in favor
of laws restricting interracial marriage.
  32
     Charles and Guryan (2008) produce measures of the average level of discrimination in the state as well as
the discriminatory preferences of the marginal individual. We use their average measure in our work below,
but the results are very similar using their marginal measure.



                                                     42
Figure 9: Racial Gaps in Contact and Abstract Tasks vs Survey Measures of Taste-Based
Discrimination, State Level Variation
                              .04




                                                                                                                                      .04
                                                .02




                                                                                                                                                        .02
                Racial Gap in Contact Task 1980




                                                                                                                        Racial Gap in Contact Task 1980
      -.14 -.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0




                                                                                                              -.14 -.12 -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02 0
                                                      -.2    0                .2              .4    .6                                                        -.2   0                .2              .4    .6
                                                                 CG - Mean Discrimination Measure                                                                       CG - Mean Discrimination Measure



                                                        Panel A: Contact Tasks                                                                                 Panel B: Abstract Tasks

      Notes: Figure shows state-level conditional racial gaps in the Contact task content of jobs (Panel
      A) and the Abstract task content of jobs (Panel B) against the Charles-Guryan mean measures of
      state level prejudice. Racial gaps in the task content of jobs measured using the 1980 U.S. Census.
      Gaps are conditioned on age and education as in equation (1). Each observation is a U.S. state
      with the size of circle measuring the number of Black individuals in the state in the 1980 Census.



states with a larger racial gap in Contact task content of jobs.
    Panel B, on the other hand, illustrates the relationship between the CG measures of
taste-based discrimination and state-level gaps in Abstract tasks. As seen from this figure,
the relationship between survey-based measures of taste-based discrimination and the racial
gap in Abstract tasks is much weaker than the relationship with the racial gap in Contact
tasks. In particular, the simple regression line has a slope coefficient of -0.04 (standard error
= 0.01) and a R-squared of 0.25. Consistent with our model findings, racial gaps in Contact
tasks are much more predictive of taste-based measures of discrimination than are Abstract
tasks. Collectively, these results provide some support for our finding that changes in the
racial gaps in Contact tasks are informative measures of changing taste-based discrimination.


8.2                                                   Decomposing Racial Gaps in Abstract Tasks
We now turn to discussing the decomposition of the racial barriers to Abstract tasks shown
in Table 6. First, relative to Contact tasks, racial skill gaps are much more important in
explaining the differential sorting of Black men into occupations requiring Abstract tasks.
For all measures of noise and in all years, kt for Abstract tasks is at least three times as
         taste
large as kt    . Second, consistent with the results from the NLSY discussed above, the racial
gap in skills associated with Abstract tasks narrowed from 1990 to 2012. However, racial


                                                                                                         43
            Figure 10: Counterfactual Racial Gap in Abstract Tasks 1980 - 2018




           Panel A: Holding Task                                   Panel B: Holding
            Returns ( 's) Fixed                                     's and  's Fixed

    Notes: Figure shows counterfactual racial task gaps assuming various kt 's and Ajt 's are held fixed
                                           taste
    at 1980 levels (Panel A) and various kt      + kt 's are held fixed at 1980 levels (Panel B). Both
    figures show the percentage point change in the racial task gaps in 1990, 2000, 2012, and 2018 ­
    relative to 1980 ­ from the various counterfactuals. See the text for additional details.



skill gaps still remain large as of 2012. These results are also robust to the level of noise
assumed. Finally, as a result of the large racial skill gaps, even a little bit of noise on the
part of employers measuring skills results in a sizeable amount of statistical discrimination.
For example, when we assume the strength of the signal is only 0.9 ( = 0.17), the majority
of  total for Abstract tasks in all years can be attributed to  stat . Given that skills are
almost certainly measured with some error by employers, these results suggest that statistical
discrimination against Black men in Abstract tasks is still a prominent feature of the U.S.
labor market.
    Figure 10 uses the model to isolate how the racial gap in Abstract tasks would have
evolved if task returns were held fixed (Panel A) and if various  's and  's were held fixed
(Panel B). This figure assumes employers observe worker skills without error. Like the
wage gaps, the relatively constant racial gap in Abstract tasks over time is the result of two
offsetting effects. First, the increase Abstract task returns since 1980 favored Whites who
had a comparative advantage in Abstract tasks. By holding task returns fixed, the racial
gap in Contact tasks would have narrowed by about 1 percentage points between 1980 and
2018. This is due to the fact that, as discussed above, racial skill gaps narrowed during this
period. Conversely, if taste-based discrimination and racial skill gaps were held fixed, the
racial gap in Abstract tasks would have increased. As the relative return to Abstract skills
increased, it drew relatively more White men into occupations requiring Abstract tasks given
that White men have comparative advantage in these tasks. This latter effect resulted in the

                                                    44
overall racial gap in Abstract tasks being relatively constant over the last forty years despite
a narrowing of the racial gap in Abstract skills (Abstract,t ) during this period.


8.3    Further Decomposing Trends in Racial Wage Gaps
In Table 7, we use the model to assess how much of the change in the racial wage gap
between two periods can be attributed to changes in various model driving forces. Panel A
performs our counterfactuals assuming no noise in the extent to which skills are measured
by employers ( = 0). Panel B performs our counterfactuals assuming a strength of signal
of 0.75 ( = 0.30). The counterfactuals are performed as follows. Consider the first entry in
row 1 of Panel A. For this entry, we first compute the counterfactual wage gap trend over the
1960-1990 period fixing  taste for Abstract and Contact tasks at the mean of the 1960 and
1990 levels. We then take the difference between the counterfactual and actual change in the
racial wage gap over the period. Taking the difference between the counterfactual and actual
changes in the racial wage gap gives us a measure of the change in the racial wage gap that
can be attributed to those factor that were held fixed. For the second entry in the same row,
we compute the counterfactual wage gap change similarly for the 1990-2012 period, sum the
estimated counterfactual changes over the 1960-1990 and 1990-2012 periods, and subtract
the actual change over the 1960-2012 periods. Other rows are calculated analogously while
fixing different sets of parameters.
    According to our fully estimated model, nearly 60 percent of the decline in the racial
wage gap between 1960 and 1990 can be attributed to declining taste-based discrimination
associated with Abstract and Contact tasks. The fraction attributed to declining taste-based
discrimination for these two tasks during the 1960-1990 period is relatively unchanged with
higher levels of  . Over the longer 1960-2012 period, declining taste-based discrimination
for Contact and Abstract tasks contribute to about 40 percent of the decline in the racial
wage gap. Declining taste-based discrimination contributed to a smaller extent during the
longer 1960-2012 period because a narrowing of racial skill gaps in Contact and Abstract
tasks explained more of the decline in the racial wage gap during the 1990-2012 period. As
seen from Table 6, all of the decline in  occurred within Abstract tasks. The narrowing of
racial gaps in skills associated with Abstract tasks can explain nearly 45% of the declining
racial wage gap over the 1960-2012 period. The narrowing of racial skills help to offset the
widening of the racial wage gap post-1980 resulting from rising returns to Abstract tasks.
    The table also highlights counterfactuals inclusive of the changing  's and  's for Routine
tasks. As seen from Table 5, our first stage regression needed for the decomposition of Routine
tasks lacks power. That is a reason we do not focus on the Routine decomposition in Table 6.


                                              45
       Table 7: Contribution of Various Forces to Changing Racial Wage Gaps Over Time
                                                                   1960-1990        1960-2012

                                               Panel A:  = 0

               taste for Abstract and Contact tasks
               bkt                                                    57%              48%
               bkt for Abstract and Contact tasks                     11%              33%

               taste for all tasks
               bkt                                                    98%              85%
               bkt for all tasks                                      13%              36%

               Ajt 's and kt                                          -2%              -12%

                                             Panel B:  = 0.30

               taste for Abstract and Contact tasks
               bkt                                                    56%              43%
               bkt for Abstract and Contact tasks                     13%              38%

               taste for all tasks
               bkt                                                    98%              79%
               bkt for all tasks                                      15%              41%

               Ajt 's and kt                                          -2%              -11%

 Note: Table shows how much of the change in the racial wage gap between 1960 and 1990 (column 1) and
 between 1960 and 2012 (column 2) can be can be attributed to changes in in taste-based discrimination
   taste
 (bkt    ), the narrowing of racial skill gaps (bkt ), or a combination of changing race-neutral occupation-
 specific and task-specific returns (the Ajt 's and kt 's) during the period. To perform these counterfactuals,
 we set the designated variables fixed at their average level over the period and allow all other variables
 to change over the time period. We do this calculation separately for the 1960 to 1990 period and again
 during the 1990 to 2012 period. We then compare the actual change in the wage gap during the period
 to the counterfactual model predicted change in the wage gap during the period to estimate how much
 of the change in the wage gap can be attributed to each factor. Column 2 sums together the results from
 the 1960 to 1990 period and the separate results from the 1990 to 2012 period. Panel A performs the
 counterfactual assuming skills are observed without error ( = 0) while Panel B assumes  = 0.30.



The decomposition from that first stage regression implies that essentially all of the decline
in the estimated gap in  taste +  for Routine tasks can be attributed to declining  taste
for Routine tasks. While there is almost certainly noise in this decomposition, attributing
all of the declining task gap for Routine tasks to declining  taste allows us to provide an
upper-bound on the importance of declining overall taste-based discrimination for all tasks
in contributing to the declining racial wage gaps during the period.33
  33
    Note, the sum of rows 3-5 in each panel sum to over 100%. This is because there are non-trivial
co-variances between the various model driving forces.




                                                      46
9    Conclusion
In this paper, we present new facts about differences in the extent to which Black and
White men sort into occupations that require different tasks and how those differences have
evolved over time. We then develop a unified framework of occupational sorting that jointly
incorporates notions of taste-based and statistical discrimination alongside group differences
in skills and changing returns to labor market tasks in order to explain the evolution of wage
gaps across groups. Using detailed micro data on racial differences in occupational sorting,
we calibrate and estimate the model so as to explain changes in racial wage gaps between
prime age Black and White men in the United States since 1960.
    There are two important results highlighted in the paper. First, our paper provides an
explanation for both why the Black-White wage gap narrowed between the 1960s and 1970s
and why the racial wage gap has remained constant thereafter. We find that the constant
wage gap between Black and White men post-1980 is due to two offsetting effects. Both
the racial skill gap narrowed and taste-based discrimination fell post-1980 resulting in the
wages of Black men converging to those of White men, all else equal. However, during the
same period, the return to Abstract skills rose disadvantaging Blacks relative to Whites.
This latter effect resulted in increasing racial wage gaps during the 1980-2018 period. The
magnitude of these two effects were roughly similar resulting in a relatively constant racial
wage gap post-1980. On the other hand, we show that the relative wage gains of Black
men relative to White men during the 1960 to 1980 period stemmed solely from declining
discrimination and a narrowing of racial skill gaps; changing task prices did not undermine
any of these gains during this earlier period. We also provide a road map to empirical
researchers looking to uncover changing race specific factors in micro data.
    Second, our paper establishes that the declining racial gap in Contact tasks between
1960 and 2018 is a good proxy for declining taste-based discrimination during this period.
We motivated the introduction of this novel task measure by conjecturing ex-ante that
occupations which require many interactions with others are more likely to be susceptible
to taste-based discrimination; our model and data work confirm this conjecture ex-post.
Specifically, the fact that there are very small racial gaps in social skills ­ combined with
the fact that measures of pre-labor market social skills in the NLSY are highly predictive
of subsequent entry into occupations that require Contact tasks ­ implies that racial gaps
in Contact tasks must stem almost entirely from taste-based discrimination and very little
from racial skill differences or statistical discrimination. Our model thus implies that the
changes in racial gaps in Contact tasks over time is a good proxy for changes in taste-
based discrimination. To further provide evidence for this conclusion, we document that


                                             47
state-level racial gaps in Contact tasks correlate strongly with state-level survey measures
of taste-based discrimination, while state-level racial gaps in Abstract tasks correlate with
them only weakly.
    Related, a growing body of influential research uses an individual's name to proxy for
their group affiliation when estimating labor market discrimination in experimental and
observational data (Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004); Rubinstein and Brenner (2014)).
Going forward, this literature can leverage the insights in our paper to further separate
between taste-based and statistical discrimination through examining heterogeneous effects
by the Contact and Abstract task intensity of the positions.
    As pointed out by Spriggs (2020), for too long, economists attribute too much of the
racial disparities in labor market outcomes to racial differences in skills and to the poten-
tial statistical discrimination that can result when skills are noisily observed by employers.
While racial differences in parental background, school quality, and neighborhood sorting
have had a notable impact on racial gaps in people's ability to earn, Spriggs (2020) argues
that any racial gap in earnings stemming from such differences are the result of man-made
discrimination. Our paper uses a task-based sorting framework to try to directly identify
the existence of taste-based discrimination. In doing so, we highlight the importance of
taste-based discrimination in explaining why Black workers have earned less than White
workers in the United States during the last sixty years. Our estimated model finds that
modelling taste-based discrimination is important also for understanding the evolution of the
racial wage gap over the last half century. Quantitatively, we find that declining taste-based
discrimination explains at least half of the declining racial wage gap between 1960 and 2018.
    While there was a narrowing in racial skill gaps over time, we estimate that large racial
skill gaps remain. We want to stress that these racial gaps in skills are themselves endogenous
and subject to discrimination. Current or past levels of taste-based discrimination are almost
certainly responsible for Black-White differences in measures of cognitive test scores. Such
caveats should be kept in mind when trying to segment current racial wage gaps into parts
due to taste-based discrimination and parts due to differences in market skills. To the extent
that we identify taste-based discrimination as being an important barrier to labor market
equality between Black and White workers, these estimates should be viewed as a lower
bound given that the racial skill gaps themselves stem from past racial prejudice. However,
we also wish to stress that regardless of the reason for the racial skill gaps associated with a
given task, the existence of such gaps imply that changes in task returns can have meaningful
effects on the evolution of racial wage gaps. Our paper highlights that it is becoming even
more important today to equalize opportunities in early childhood to close the racial Abstract
skill gap given that the return to Abstract skills has been rising over time.


                                              48
References
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor, "Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
 Employment and Earnings," in "Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4. Amsterdam:
 Elsevier-North" 2011, pp. 1043­1171.

Aigner, Dennis J. and Glen G. Cain, "Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor
 Markets," ILR Review, 1977, 30 (2), 175­187.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie, Human Capital Development Before Age Five,
 Vol. 4B of Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier, 2011.

Altonji, Joseph G. and Rebecca M. Blank, "Chapter 48 Race and gender in the labor
 market," in "in," Vol. 3 of Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier, 1999, pp. 3143 ­ 3259.

  , Prashant Bharadwaj, and Fabian Lange, "Changes in the Characteristics of Amer-
  ican Youth: Implications for Adult Outcomes," Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (4),
  783­828.

Arrow, Kenneth, The Theory of Discrimination, Princeton University Press, 1973.

Autor, David and David Dorn, "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Po-
 larization of the US Labor Market," American Economic Review, August 2013, 103 (5),
 1553­97.

   and Michael Handel, "Putting Tasks to the Test: Human Capital, Job Tasks, and
  Wages," Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (S1), S59 ­ S96.

  , Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane, "The Skill Content of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118,
  1279­1333.

Bayer, Patrick and Kerwin Kofi Charles, "Divergent Paths: A New Perspective on
 Earnings Differences Between Black and White Men Since 1940," The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 01 2018, 133 (3), 1459­1501.

Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago Press, 1957.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Are Emily and Greg More Employ-
 able Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,"
 American Economic Review, September 2004, 94 (4), 991­1013.

Bobo, Lawrence D., Camille Z. Charles, Maria Krysan, and Alicia D. Simmons,
 "The Real Record on Racial Attitudes," in Peter V. Marsden, ed., Peter V. Marsden, ed.,
 Vol. 1 of Social Trends in American Life: Findings from the General Social Survey Since
 1972, Princeton University Press, 2012, pp. 38­83.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, "School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
 A Direct Assessment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (1), 151­200.

                                           49
Chandra, Amitabh, "Labor-Market Dropouts and the Racial Wage Gap: 1940-1990,"
 American Economic Review, May 2000, 90 (2), 333­338.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan, "Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical
 Assessment of Becker's The Economics of Discrimination," Journal of Political Economy,
 2008, 116 (5), 773­809.
Chay, Kenneth Y, Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder, "Birth Cohort and
 the Black-White Achievement Gap: The Roles of Access and Health Soon After Birth,"
 Working Paper 15078, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2009.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Dayanand Manoli, and Andrea Weber, "Does Indivisi-
 ble Labor Explain the Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis
 of Extensive Margin Elasticities," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2013, 27 (1), 1 ­ 56.
  , John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
  Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan, " How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Af-
  fect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star *," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  11 2011, 126 (4), 1593­1660.
Coate, Stephen and Glenn C. Loury, "Will Affirmative-Action Policies Eliminate Neg-
 ative Stereotypes?," The American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (5), 1220­1240.
Deming, David J., "The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market," Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1593­1640.
Dickens, William and James Flynn, "Black Americans Reduce the Racial IQ Gap
 Evidence From Standardization Samples," Psychological science, 11 2006, 17, 913­20.
Donohue, John J. and James Heckman, "Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The
 Impact of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks," Journal of Economic
 Literature, 1991, 29 (4), 1603­1643.
Dorn, David, "Essays on Inequality, Spaital Interaction, and the Demand for Skill," Dis-
 sertation, University of St. Gallen Dissertation 2009.
E., J. Heckman J. Cameron Knudsen and J. Shonkoff, "Economic, Neurobiological,
  and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America's Future Workforce," Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 2006, 103, 10155­10162.
Freeman, Richard B., "Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans, 1948-72,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1973, 20, 67­120.
Heckman, James J., "Schools, Skills and Synapses," Economic Inquiry, 2008, 46, 289­324.
  and Tim Kautz, "Hard Evidence on Soft Skills," Labour Economics, 2012, 19, 451­464.
  , Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua, "The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities
  on labor market outcomes and social behavior," Journal of Labor economics, 2006, 24 (3),
  411­482.

                                           50
  , Thomas M. Lyons, and Petra E. Todd, "Understanding Black-White Wage Differ-
  entials, 1960-1990," American Economic Review, May 2000, 90 (2), 344­349.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles Jones, and Peter Klenow, "The Allocation
 of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (5), 1439­1474.

Juhn, Chinhui, K. Murphy, and B. Pierce, "Accounting for the Slowdown in Black-
  White Wage Convergence," in Marvin Kosters, ed., Workers and Their Wages: Changing
  Patterns in the United States, American Enterprise Institute, 1991.

Krysan, Maria and Sarah Moberg, "Trends in Racial Attitudes," Working Paper, Uni-
 versity of Illinois Institute of Government and Public Affairs August 2016.

Lang, Kevin and Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann, "Racial Discrimination in the Labor Market:
  Theory and Empirics," Journal of Economic Literature, December 2012, 50 (4), 959­1006.

Levine, Ross and Yona Rubinstein, "Smart and illicit: who becomes an entrepreneur
  and do they earn more?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 963­1018.

Murray, Charles, "The magnitude and components of change in the Black­White IQ
 difference from 1920 to 1991: a birth cohort analysis of the Woodcock­Johnson standard-
 izations," Intelligence, 07 2007, 35, 305­318.

Neal, Derek, "Chapter 9 Why Has Black­White Skill Convergence Stopped?," in
 E. Hanushek and F. Welch, eds., E. Hanushek and F. Welch, eds., Vol. 1 of Handbook
 of the Economics of Education, Elsevier, 2006, pp. 511­576.

   and William Johnson, "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage Differ-
  ences," Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104 (5), 869­895.

Phelps, Edmund S., "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism," The American
 Economic Review, 1972, 62 (4), 659­661.

Roy, A. D., "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford Economic Papers,
 06 1951, 3 (2), 135­146.

Rubinstein, Yona and Dror Brenner, "Pride and Prejudice: Using Ethnic-Sounding
 Names and Inter-Ethnic Marriages to Identify Labour Market Discrimination," The Review
 of Economic Studies, 1 2014, 81 (1), 389­425.

Ruggles, Steve, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erik Meyer, Jose
 Pacas, and Matthew Sobek, "IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [dataset]," 2021. https:
 //doi.org/10.18128/D010.V10.0.

Smith, James P. and Finis R. Welch, "Black Economic Progress After Myrdal," Journal
 of Economic Literature, 1989, 27 (2), 519­564.

Spriggs, William, "Is Now a Teachable Moment for Economists?," An Open Letter to the
  Economics Profession, 2020.

                                          51
