                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     YOU CAN'T HANDLE THE TRUTH:
 THE EFFECTS OF THE POST-9/11 GI BILL ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND EARNINGS

                                          Andrew Barr
                                         Laura Kawano
                                        Bruce Sacerdote
                                      William Skimmyhorn
                                       Michael Stevens

                                      Working Paper 29024
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29024


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021

We are grateful for assistance from the U.S. Army Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis,
especially Luke Gallagher. We thank participants at the 2021 AEA Annual Meetings, NBER
Summer Institute 2019 (Labor Studies), 2018 National Tax Association Annual Meetings, CESifo
Area Conference on the Economics of Education, Office of Tax Analysis (Treasury), University
of Michigan, University of Wisconsin-Madison, George Washington University, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Boston College, and Harvard for helpful comments. Sacerdote thanks the National
Science Foundation and Smith Richardson Foundation for generous support. Barr acknowledges
funding from a National Academy of Education / Spencer Post-doctoral Fellowship and the
Upjohn Institute. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent
the official views of the United States Military Academy, the Department of the Army, the
Department of Defense, or the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Corresponding author: Bruce
Sacerdote, Dartmouth College, 6106 Rockefeller Hall, Hanover NH, 03755. Phone: 603 646
2121. Email: bruce.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andrew Barr, Laura Kawano, Bruce Sacerdote, William Skimmyhorn, and Michael
Stevens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
You Can't Handle The Truth: The Effects Of The Post-9/11 Gi Bill On Higher Education
And Earnings
Andrew Barr, Laura Kawano, Bruce Sacerdote, William Skimmyhorn, and Michael Stevens
NBER Working Paper No. 29024
July 2021
JEL No. I26,J0,J01,J24,J38

                                           ABSTRACT

The Post 9/11 GI Bill (PGIB) is among the largest and most generous college subsidies enacted
thus far in the U.S. We examine the impact of the PGIB on veterans' college-going, degree
completion, federal education tax benefit utilization, and long run earnings. Among veterans
potentially induced to enroll, the introduction of the PGIB raised college enrollment by 0.17 years
and B.A. completion by 1.2 percentage points (on a base of 9 percent). But, the PGIB reduced
average annual earnings nine years after separation from the Army by $900 (on a base of
$32,000). Years enrolled effects are larger and earnings effects more negative for veterans with
lower AFQT scores and those who were less occupationally skilled. Under a variety of
conservative assumptions, veterans are unlikely to recoup these reduced earnings during their
working careers. All veterans who were already enrolled in college at the time of bill passage
increase their months of schooling, but only for those in public institutions did this translate into
increases in bachelor's degree attainment and longer-run earnings. For specific groups of
students, large subsidies can modestly help degree completion but harm long run earnings due to
lost labor market experience.

Andrew Barr                                       William Skimmyhorn
Department of Economics                           Mason School of Business
Texas A&M University                              The College of William & Mary
4228 TAMU                                         101 Ukrop Way
College Station, TX 77843-4228                    Williamsburg, VA 23187
abarr@tamu.edu                                    bill.skimmyhorn@mason.wm.edu

Laura Kawano                                      Michael Stevens
University of Michigan                            Department of Treasury
laurakawano@gmail.com                             Michael.Stevens@treasury.gov

Bruce Sacerdote
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29024
I. Introduction


        Policymakers and social scientists have lauded the original GI Bill (the 1944 Serviceman's

Readjustment Act) and the 1984 Montgomery GI Bill (MGIB) as examples of thoughtful policy

and engines of social mobility (Burrell 1967, Greenberg 1997, Humes 2006). Among World War

II veterans, the GI Bill raised college completion rates by 5 to 6 percentage points and years of

schooling by roughly 0.28 years (Bound and Turner 2002). Vietnam-era veterans who took up

educational benefits saw schooling increases of 1.4 years (Angrist 1993), which worked to offset

the negative earnings effects of lost labor market experience due to consignment (Angrist and Chen

2011). The GI Bill also encourages veterans to attend more selective institutions that they may not

have otherwise considered.


        In 2008, the GI Bill was significantly revamped and expanded by the Post-9/11 GI Bill

(PGIB), constituting one of the largest policy shocks in college subsidies in U.S. history. 1 Rather

than replacing the MGIB, the PGIB offers eligible veterans an attractive alternative that increases

benefit levels and pays a larger fraction of tuition and living expenses. Under the MGIB, enrolled

veterans are directly paid a flat monthly amount to be used towards tuition, books, and living

expenses. The PGIB expanded benefits through two channels. Benefits for tuition and fees are

based on the highest in-state tuition of public institutions in the state. 2 Those enrolled at least half-

time also receive a generous monthly housing allowance (called the Basic Allowance for Housing

or BAH), which varies by the zip code of the institution that the veteran attends. As a result, the

PGIB roughly doubled the average maximum benefit amount available to eligible veterans, with



1
  Formally, the law is the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2008, Title V of the Supplemental
Appropriations Act, 2008 (P.L. 110-252).
2
  Over a thousand U.S. institutions participate in the U.S. military's Yellow Ribbon program (a matching program)
which helps cover any gap between the PGIB maximum payment and tuition and fees that the veteran would incur.

                                                        1
significant geographic variation in the expansion of benefits. For the 2009-10 academic year,

veterans using the PGIB could have received as much as $48,000 in tuition and fees benefits per

term by attending a college in Colorado or Oregon but only up to $5,000 or $6,000 in Wyoming

or Arkansas, 3 and the monthly BAH ranged from $630 in parts of Oklahoma and Louisiana to

$2,512 in the San Francisco/Bay area. Total PGIB benefits could exceed $60,000 per term if a

veteran attended a high-tuition school in an expensive area, but the maximum MGIB benefit was

$1,321 per month. 4 An examination of the long-term effects of these generous subsidies seems

particularly relevant in an era in which there is widespread and increasing discussion of plans to

expand the Pell and separately make community college and potentially other institutions free. 5


         We exploit the intertemporal and cross-sectional variation in veterans' education benefits

generated by the PGIB to evaluate the impact of subsidies on education and earnings. We utilize

several sources of identification within a difference-in-differences framework. First, we use

variation in the level of benefits available to eligible veterans based on when they separated from

the Army. Only veterans who are honorably discharged are eligible for either the MGIB or the

PGIB, and eligible veterans who separated many years prior to the PGIB expansion are past the

natural window of use. 6 We use this variation to compare outcomes for eligible and ineligible

veterans who separated before and after the policy. We additionally take advantage of the

significant cross-sectional variation in the generosity of the PGIB relative to the MGIB by

comparing outcomes for eligible veterans from areas with large expansions in expected benefits


3
  See https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/resources/benefits_resources/rates/ch33/tuition_and_fees_2008.asp and
www.defensetravel.dod.mil/site/bahCalc.cfm. The Yellow Ribbon Program could further add to this total if the
veteran is a student at a participating private school with tuition and fees that exceed the PGIB maximum.
4
  Amounts depend on whether a veteran is enrolled half-time, three-quarters time, or full time.
5
  See https://www.nasfaa.org/uploads/documents/Free_College_Matrix.pdf for an overview of current "free
college" proposals.
6
  Roughly half of Army veterans begin using their benefits within 2 years of separation, which is over 80 percent of
individuals that ever use education benefits.

                                                          2
with those from areas with small expansions before and after the policy. 7 Using these two sources

of variation, we ask whether access to additional financial aid impacts college-going and degree

attainment, college choice, and subsequent earnings.


         Next, we focus on students who had already enrolled in college prior to the benefit

expansion to understand whether the availability of additional funding has measurable impacts on

degree attainment and earnings. Eligible veterans who enrolled several years before the PGIB

expansion are likely to be less able to utilize the PGIB than those who enrolled just before the

additional benefits were announced. We compare eligible and ineligible students enrolled at the

same college, but who had initially enrolled in different years. We also combine this variation in

the likelihood of benefit access over time with variation in benefit size across colleges.


         Our sample comprises U.S. Army veterans who separated between 2002 and 2010. We

merge Army personnel records with three administrative data sources. First, the Veterans'

Administration (VA) provides information on GI Bill benefit utilization. Second, our measures of

degree completion come from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC). Lastly, we construct

several outcomes from administrative tax return data. Our primary college-going measures come

from the information return that colleges submit to the IRS (Form 1098-T), which, unlike the NSC,

offers complete coverage of for-profit institutions. Tax data also contain information on

components of income, the utilization of federal tax benefits, and a limited set of demographic

characteristics, and have the advantage of tracking veteran earnings regardless of geographic




7
  Barr (2015) finds positive affects to the PGIB on enrollment and degree attainment using a similar strategy with
state-level variation in a smaller data set.


                                                          3
mobility. Because these tax records are available through 2018, we track tax-based outcomes for

up to nine years after separation from the Army and initial enrollment in college.


        For Army veterans separating during this period, we find modest positive impacts on

educational attainment (a 0.17 year increase in time enrolled, and a 1.2 and 0.4 percentage point

increase in bachelor's and associate's degree receipt, respectively), but a 2 to 3 percent reduction

in earnings 7 to 9 years after separation. We explore several potential explanations for this negative

return on educational investments. A Oaxaca-style decomposition reveals that lost labor market

experience combined with low-return marginal investments explains much of the negative

earnings effect. In addition, heterogeneity analyses show that less advantaged veterans ­ those in

"lower-skilled" military occupations 8 and those with lower AFQT scores ­ are more likely to enroll

in college overall, but this is largely driven by increased enrollments in for-profit institutions.

These veterans also experience larger negative earnings effects.


        While there is considerable heterogeneity in the benefit expansion across geographies, we

find only modest increases in educational attainment for veterans from areas experiencing larger

benefit increases relative to those from areas experiencing smaller benefit increases. The effects

on earnings are negative across all areas, with some evidence of smaller earnings losses for

veterans from areas experiencing larger benefit increases. These differences in the extent to which

veterans experience negative returns to education may be driven by somewhat higher quality

investments of veterans from high benefit areas, with relative shifts out of for-profit schools and

into four-year public and private institutions.




8
 We define occupation skill by building a correspondence between military occupations and Census occupational
codes and follow Autor and Dorn (2013) to define high-, middle- and low-skill occupations.

                                                       4
         Veterans who were already enrolled when the new policy arrives see modest degree

attainment gains, but the overall effect masks larger increases for those initially enrolled in four-

year public and community colleges. The corresponding effects on earnings nine years after initial

enrollment mirror the effects on degree attainment, with positive effects for those enrolled in four-

year public and community colleges, and negative effects for those enrolled in for-profit

institutions. In combination, these results suggest that the subsidies are generous enough to draw

veterans into additional education and out of the labor market. The longer-term labor market

returns depend on the extent to which the resulting periods spent enrolled represent high-quality

investments.


         Our study contributes to the large literature that examines whether higher education

subsidies positively impact college enrollment, degree completion, and earnings. Within the set

of education subsidies, the PGIB is a very large program: at over $13 billion a year, it exceeds the

amount of grants and scholarships provided by all states combined, is roughly two-thirds of tax

expenditures on benefits for higher education, and equates to half of all Pell grant expenditures.

Unlike the vast literature that focuses on traditional students, our population of Army veterans

comprise an older, non-traditional student group that may respond differently to education

subsidies. 9 Further, the provision of benefits at the point of transition out of the military may

provide some insight into the effects of proposed efforts to subsidize retraining for those with

limited opportunities in the civilian sector, such as those affected by trade exposure or during the

recent pandemic.




9
  Seftor and Turner (2002), which estimates the effect of Pell eligibility changes on the enrollment of older students,
is a notable exception.

                                                           5
        We also shed light on the interaction between the utilization of GI Bill benefits and federal

tax benefits also meant to incentivize investments in higher education. There are two relevant

changes in these policies that occurred. First, the Hope Tax Credit was replaced by the more

generous American Opportunity Tax Credit in 2009. Second, the structure of veterans' benefits

changed from a pure conditional cash transfer under the MGIB to an in-kind benefit system. Under

the PGIB, tuition and fee benefits are paid directly to institutions, with a commensurate reduction

in qualified educational expenses used for the purposes of calculating federal education tax

benefits. We find that the net result of these policy changes is a sharp shift away from utilizing

tuition and fee deductions towards claiming federal education tax credits. These results suggest

that the delivery mechanism for providing aid may be important for tax compliance, although we

are unable to disentangle this channel from changes due to the increased generosity of education

tax credits.


        Overall, our results suggest caution in providing education subsidies of this generosity, at

least to non-traditional students. Like Castleman and Long (2016), we observe increases in degree

attainment and positive labor market returns for students who were enrolled at four-year public

institutions prior to the provision of additional aid. Those initially enrolled at community colleges,

many of whom subsequently transferred to four-year public institutions, also benefited in the labor

market. However, our results show that the quality of one's investment can matter a great deal for

earnings. Policymakers have long been concerned that for-profit institutions engage in aggressive

or deceptive recruiting tactics to encourage the use of GI Bill benefits (Martorell and Bergman

2013; Harkin 2014). Those who made their enrollment decisions after the expansion of benefits

appear to have made less productive investments, with a greater probability of for-profit

enrollment and a lower likelihood of degree attainment conditional on additional enrollment.


                                                  6
While educational attainment increased modestly as a result of the benefit expansion, subsequent

earnings fell, especially for the least advantaged groups. Our analyses suggest that it is unlikely

that earnings will grow enough to recover the earnings lost during the first nine years following

separation. These results may inform recent and widespread discussions to provide free college

or subsidize retraining for broad swaths of the population. Without additional guidance or

guardrails to help inform student choices, it is not clear that these policies will generate the returns

that policymakers might expect.


II. Background and Institutional Features


    A. A Brief History of the GI Bill


    The original GI Bill, the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, offered numerous provisions

for World War II veterans, including payments to colleges for tuition, unemployment and housing

benefits, and zero-down-payment, low-interest loans for home mortgages. There were at least

three major motivations for the GI Bill. First, Congress wanted to reward returning veterans.

Second, Congress wanted to redeem itself after the debacle of the 1932 World War I veterans

march on Washington, in which veterans demanded payment of their veteran's bonus. Finally,

there was a belief that reintegrating veterans into the civilian labor force would be a costly

adjustment; sending many to college would both smooth out this process and create greater

economic opportunities for veterans. The policy contributed to a near-doubling of college

enrollment in less than a decade. Historian Sidney Burrell argued that the original GI Bill brought

about "what may have been the most important educational and social transformation in American

history" (Burrell 1967).




                                                   7
    Numerous updates to the GI Bill followed as Congress attempted to keep up with rising real

costs of higher education. The 1984 Montgomery GI Bill (MGIB) increased education benefit

amounts, but also required military personnel to "pay-in" $100 per month during twelve months

of their active-duty service. 10 The MGIB education benefit is a capped monthly payment for

eligible veterans who are full-time enrollees at a qualified education or training program, with

benefits scaled down for part-time enrollees. 11 The MGIB also includes a provision known as the

"kicker" or "Buy-Up" option, which offers an additional $8-for-$1 matching program. If a

servicemember makes an additional monthly contribution (totaling $600 over all months) while

on active duty, they can then receive an additional $150 per month for 36 months. The benefit is

paid directly to the student veteran, is non-taxable, and is intended to be used towards tuition, fees,

and living expenses.


    B. Key Provisions of the Post 9/11 GI Bill


    Noting that military service has been particularly arduous during the wars in Iraq and

Afghanistan, Congress wanted to repay, reward, and recognize veterans for their service (Dortch

2018). In addition, the continued rising real cost of higher education required a benefit expansion

in order to provide better opportunities for transitioning veterans. The result was a large expansion

of benefits under the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2008 (Post-9/11 GI Bill or

PGIB), which was passed in June 2008 and took effect August 2009. Along with the new




10
   Servicemembers must elect whether to pay in to the benefit during their first year of enlistment. Choosing not to
pay in to the benefit is framed as opting out, likely explaining why 85% of Army veterans choose the default option
of paying in.
11
   For details on MGIB benefits, see
https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/resources/benefits_resources/rates/ch30/ch30rates080108.asp

                                                         8
transferability of benefits to dependents, the benefit expansion was also intended to aid in military

recruitment and retention. 12


     Financially, the most significant provisions of the PGIB are the tuition and fees payments and

the Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH). Between 2009 and 2011, the PGIB tuition and fees

payments were capped at the maximum in-state public tuition in the state where the veteran attends

college. 13 The PGIB covers any tuition and fees charged up to these limits, remitted directly to the

institution, but does not refund the difference between the maximum and the charges to the veteran.

In 2011, this state-by-state maximum changed to a nationwide maximum of $700 per credit or

$17,500. 14 Eligible veterans enrolled at least half-time also receive directly a monthly BAH

determined by the basic housing allowance for a servicemember at the E-5 rank with dependents

in the military service area ­ similar in size to an MSA ­ in which the student attends school. 15 In

total, the PGIB roughly doubled the average maximum benefit amount relative to the MGIB.


     Importantly, the changes in benefit generosity generated by the PGIB vary significantly by

geography. Unlike the MGIB, which pays a flat amount regardless of the location of the veteran

or the level of tuition and fees of the college attended, the PGIB incorporated variation along both

dimensions. Figure 1 shows the degree of geographic variation in predicted average annual benefit

levels under the PGIB. To calculate predicted benefits, we focus on eligible veterans who initially


12
   In practice, the transferability provision is largely irrelevant for our sample given very low rates of use and the
need to reenlist for four or more years to take advantage of the provision. See Castleman et al. (forthcoming) for an
analysis of GI Bill transfer decisions.
13
   The Veteran's Administration also offers a Yellow Ribbon program which provides additional assistance to
veterans whose tuition and fees exceed the maximum. This is a one-for-one matching program in which the VA
matches contributions from the school to cover tuition and fees above the maximum benefit. Schools participate
voluntarily and can designate a maximum number of vets for whom they can offer Yellow Ribbon. In practice, well
over 1,000 institutions offer Yellow Ribbon.
14
   This maximum grew to $19,198 by 2016/2017 and $23,672 by 2018/2019. Veterans who were already enrolled in
states with higher maximums were grandfathered.
15
   This rate is determined for the purposes of covering off-base housing in the area. See the current tables here:
https://militarybenefits.info/bah-rates-state/.

                                                          9
enrolled in college between 2004 and 2008, before the PGIB was available. For each zip code, we

calculate implied benefits under the PGIB as the average benefit for which veterans from that home

of record, measured at enlistment, would have been eligible had their enrollments occurred when

the PGIB was available. We set the tuition and fee benefit amount at an institution to the minimum

of (1) the institution's actual in-state institution and fees, and (2) the state maximum tuition and

fee level under the PGIB for the 2009-2010 academic year. 16 The BAH was set according to the

zip code of the institution enrolled.


                                              [Figure 1 about here]


     Both the MGIB and PGIB require that a veteran received an honorable discharge to be eligible.

For the PGIB, veterans must have also served on active duty for at least 90 days after September

10, 2001, but unlike the MGIB, they are not required to elect into the program upon enlistment or

forego some monthly salary during active-duty service. Veterans can receive up to 36 months of

benefits for up to 15 years after separation from the military, with maximum annual amounts and

months of benefits adjusted for both length of service and enrollment intensity (Barr 2015, Dortch

2018). 17


     GI Bill benefits can be used at a wide variety of educational institutions, including traditional

undergraduate and graduate programs, vocational and technical training, flight school, courses

designed for certification in a particular profession, and courses designed for standardized test

preparation (e.g., the SAT, GMAT). In Appendix Tables A1 and A2, we provide the 100 most


16
  We also impose a $20,000 maximum because benefits were capped at $20,000 at private schools in 2011.
17
  Veterans must serve at least 90 days on active duty after September 11, 2001 to receive some PGIB benefits. This
entitles a veteran to 40 percent of benefits. There are incremental increases at 6,12, 18, 24, and 30 months of
service. At 36 months of active duty service, a veteran is entitled to 100% of PGIB benefits. An exception is that
veterans who are discharged with a service-connected disability are eligible for 100% of benefits if they have 30
days or more of active service.

                                                       10
common schools attended by veterans based on enrollment data from the National Student

Clearinghouse (NSC). 18


III. Empirical Strategy and Identification


       A. Overall Impacts of the PGIB


       We first investigate the overall impact of the PGIB on college enrollment, degree completion,

and earnings for eligible veterans. Building on Barr (2015, 2019), we use two difference-in-

differences strategies that compare cohorts that separated earlier, and thus had limited potential to

use the higher level of benefits that became available in 2009, with those who separated just prior

to the benefit expansion.


       i)       Eligible versus ineligible


       We begin with a standard difference-in-differences framework, comparing veterans who are

eligible and ineligible for GI Bill benefits before and after the PGIB expansion. Specifically, we

run regressions of the following form:


            (1)  =  + 1  ×  + 2  + 3  +  +  + 



where  is an outcome of interest,  is an indicator variable for being eligible for GI Bill

benefits and the indicator variable  equals one for servicemembers whose year of separation

from the Army is 2008 or later. The vector Xi represents veteran pre-treatment characteristics, and

Zi represents a set of 3-digit home-of-record fixed effects. We control for gender, race, education

level and marital status upon entry into the Army, and age and military rank upon exit. When


18
     We are unable to release information at the school-level using the 1098-T data.

                                                           11
considering labor market outcomes, we additionally include Primary Military Occupation

Specialty (PMOS) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit home-of-record zip

code.


        The key parameter of interest is 1, which captures the effect of the additional funds

provided under the PGIB. The majority of veterans during our period (74%) have an honorable

discharge and are thus eligible for GI Bill benefits. This characterization of service is bestowed

"when the quality of the Soldier's service generally has met the standards of acceptable conduct

and performance of duty for Army personnel or is otherwise so meritorious that any other

characterization would be clearly inappropriate." (U.S. Army, 2016). The identifying assumption

is that the change in outcomes that would have occurred for eligible veterans in the absence of the

program is captured by the change in outcomes for ineligible veterans; any difference is assumed

to be a causal effect of the PGIB. We form this counterfactual using veterans who received a

general discharge under honorable conditions, which account for roughly 14% of veterans. This

characterization of service is "issued to a Soldier whose military record is satisfactory but not

sufficiently meritorious to warrant an honorable discharge." These types of discharges often result

from a pattern of minor misconduct (e.g., reporting late), a single incident of more serious

misconduct (e.g., going absent without leave), illegal drug use, or physical fitness issues. These

veterans are eligible for all military and VA benefits with the exception of the GI Bill. We exclude

from our comparison group veterans with an other than honorable discharge, bad conduct

discharge, dishonorable discharge, or entry-level or medical separations.


        To align with the academic calendar, we adjust the Army separation year forward one year

for separations that occur between August 15 and December 31. In our main tables, we limit the

sample to cohorts separating in 2003, 2004, 2008, or 2009. The first two cohorts separate from

                                                12
the Army early enough that their educational decisions are less likely to be impacted by the policy

change. The second two cohorts separate between August 15, 2007 and August 14, 2009, so their

educational investments are potentially heavily impacted, but their separation decision occurs

before the policy is enacted. In other words, we wish to minimize the possibility that the separation

decision itself is an endogenous response to the availability of benefits. We omit the 2005--2007

cohorts as being partially treated and partially untreated.


         We broaden this strategy to use all separation cohorts between 2002 and 2010 in an event

study framework. Instead of relying on a single delineation of pre- versus post-expansion year

cohorts, we interact year of separation with eligibility status for each year 2003-2010; the 2002

cohort is the excluded group. This strategy is implemented as follows:


         (2)  = 0 + 1  + 2010
                         =2003  [  ×  ] +  +  +  + 



where  represents cohort fixed effects that are identified by the ineligible veterans in the sample.

This event study framework, which we use across all of our identification strategies, allows us to

evaluate whether our estimates can be interpreted causally. A primary threat to validity in any

difference-in-difference strategy is that there are underlying differential trends between the

treatment and the control group that are not attributed to the GI Bill expansion. We directly assess

the extent to which these two groups were on parallel trends prior to the expansion of benefits

using coefficients  for early separation cohorts, although we note that the delayed availability of

benefits for some cohorts may result in partial treatment effects that grow larger the closer the year

of separation is to the availability of expanded benefits.


   ii)      High versus low-benefit areas under the PGIB




                                                 13
   Our second identification strategy relies on cross-sectional variation in the generosity of the

BAH and tuition benefits, which generates variation in benefits within localities over time.

Because the actual benefits that a veteran receives are determined by his endogenous school

choice, we rely instead on the exogenous variation that stems from interacting the timing of the

PGIB with the benefit generosity variation associated with the veteran's home of record. This

strategy compares changes in outcomes over time for eligible veterans from areas with large

predicted increases in education benefits to changes for those from areas with low predicted

increases.


   Specifically, we predict expected available benefits for each veteran using the choices of

college-going veterans from his 3-digit home of record zip code who initially enrolled between

2004 and 2008: predicted benefits are calculated as the average hypothetical maximum BAH and

tuition benefit that these enrollees would receive under the PGIB in 2009. We then interact the

predicted benefit amount, which is constant within 3-digit zip code, with an indicator for separating

in the post-PGIB period. Prior to the PGIB, veterans received the same education benefit

regardless of the cost of living or education in their area; as a result, the policy change constitutes

a much bigger increase in generosity for example, for veterans who attend school in New York

City relative to those enrolled in Grand Forks, North Dakota.


   The estimating equation becomes:

   (3)  =  + 1  ×   + 2  + 3   +  +  +  ,

where   is the predicted level of benefits assigned to each 3-digit home of record zip

code. We scale expected benefits in thousands of dollars per year. The key identifying assumption

is that conditional on the set of observables, unobserved factors that affect enrollment, educational

attainment, or earnings are unrelated to the size of the benefit expansion in one's home of record.

                                                  14
To test the validity of this assumption, we run placebo analyses by estimating equation (3) for

ineligible veterans used in our previous difference-in-differences analysis. In results not shown

(available upon request), we generally find that the effects on benefits, educational attainment, and

earnings are economically small and statistically insignificant. As a robustness check, we

additionally estimate triple-difference regressions where we include ineligible veterans to control

for underlying changes within localities over time (results shown in Appendix Tables A5 ­ A7).


   B. Within-College Estimates of PGIB Effects for Veterans Already Enrolled


   For eligible veterans who were just beginning their college careers when the PGIB was

announced, the policy constitutes a large, unexpected jump in subsidies, conditional on continued

enrollment. Those veterans who had enrolled many years earlier may not be able to utilize the

additional funds ­ they may have already earned a BA or used several months of MGIB benefits.

We use this variation to investigate the impact of the PGIB on college persistence, degree

completion, and earnings for the set of veterans who had already made their college enrollment

choices prior to the announcement of the benefit expansion.

       In this quasi-experiment, we compare the outcomes of eligible and ineligible veterans who

initially enrolled just before the additional funds became available relative to those who enrolled

at that same college well before the PGIB expansion. Specifically, we run the following regression:

        (4)  =  + 1  ×  + 2  + 3  +  +  +  .

Here,  is an outcome of interest, measured relative to the year of initial college enrollment, and

the vector  contains the same controls as in equation (1). We limit the sample to veterans who

were already enrolled prior to 2009, and define the indicator variable,  , to equal one for

veterans who initially enrolled in college in 2007 or later. We include institution-specific fixed

effects,  , so identification here comes from within- college variation in benefits.

                                                 15
         The identifying assumption is that the inclusion of the ineligible veterans removes any

differential trend in within-institution outcomes that would have occurred in the absence of the

program. In other words, outcomes for the eligible veterans at a given institution would have

evolved in a similar way to the ineligible veterans so any differential change can be attributed to

the causal effect of the PGIB. Because we rely on within-institution variation, we form this

counterfactual using all ineligible veterans to maximize power, but our main conclusions are

similar when restricting the ineligible group to veterans with a general discharge. 19


         We estimate equation (4) using four enrollment cohorts: 2003, 2004, 2007, and 2008.

Similar to our previous strategies, these limitations are intended to create a comparison between

cohorts that likely completed their schooling or largely exhausted their benefits through the

MGIB prior to the arrival of the generous PGIB (2003 and 2004) and cohorts that made initial

separation and enrollment decisions prior to the PGIB but spent much of their college careers

under the influence of the PGIB (2007 and 2008). We also implement the event study

counterpart to this strategy using all enrollment cohorts between 2002 and 2008.


         Finally, we again use the geographic variation in benefit generosity to identify the

impacts of financial aid amounts on persistence, graduation, and earnings. In this within-school

framework, we have a tight estimate of expected BAH and tuition benefits because we know the

benefits associated with the particular college of each enrolled veteran. 20 Identification comes




19
   As an alternative comparison group for outcomes derived from tax data, we draw a random sample of civilian
men who initially enrolled in college between ages 17 and 20 and match the distribution of institution-based enrolled
patterns as the eligible veteran population. However, we found that even conditional on initial institution fixed
effects, the pre-trends and subsequent years of schooling and earnings levels of this group of traditional students is a
poor match for those of eligible veterans.
20
   Of course, a veteran may transfer to a new college or area. Our estimates should thus be thought of as an intent to
treat effect.

                                                          16
from interacting benefit generosity with an indicator for initially enrolling in the post-treatment

period. We run the following regression using eligible veteran students:


       (5)  =  + 1  ×  + 2  + 3   +  +  +  .


In this equation,  ,  , and  are as defined in equation (4). The coefficient 1 indicates the causal

effect of an additional thousand dollars in benefits per year. The key identifying assumption is that

conditional on the set of observables, unobserved factors that affect persistence in school or labor

market outcomes are unrelated to the size of the benefit expansion within a college, which was

determined by the PGIB.


IV. Data Description


        We begin with administrative Army personnel data for the 1.2 million veterans who

separated from the Army between 1994 and 2017. 21 These data include demographic

characteristics, such as birth date and race, as well as home of record zip code, marital status,

number of dependents, and educational attainment at the point of enlistment and separation from

the Army. The data also include details of a veteran's military experience, including PMOS

codes 22, scores on the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT), military rank, assignment and

location at each year, dates of entry and separation, and type of discharge, known as the

characterization of service.


        We merge these military service records with three administrative data sources: the

Veteran's Administration (VA), the NSC, and administrative tax returns. Data from the VA


21
   The data were compiled by the U.S. Army of Economic and Manpower Analysis at West Point, to whom we are
grateful for their assistance.
22
   https://usarmybasic.com/army-jobs/army-mos-list and
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_United_States_Army_careers

                                                    17
contain information on GI Bill benefit take-up, months of benefits used, and cumulative benefit

amounts used. We define total benefits received as the cumulative sum of all MGIB and PGIB

benefits paid to the veteran, measured in thousands of dollars. 23


           To measure degree completion, we rely on individual-level NSC data, which provides dates

of enrollment and degrees obtained for any institution attended. Although the NSC data cover

between 90 to 97 percent of all college enrollments during our period, one concern is that the

coverage rate for for-profit institutions is low. For this reason, our primary measures of college

enrollment are based off of the information return that colleges submit to the IRS to report qualified

educational expenses in a calendar year, Form 1098-T. These data do not suffer from measurement

error due to differential coverage across institutions. We match both the NSC and 1098-T data to

the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) to incorporate additional

information about each institution that a student attends. These data allow us to partition

institutions into four distinct categories: four-year public, four-year private, community college,

and for-profit institutions. We also collect information on whether the institution is primarily an

online college, and the bachelor's degree graduation rate.


           Our key enrollment measures are indicator variables for enrollment (overall and by

particular institution type) that occurs within two years of separation from the Army, although we

collect all 1098-T-based enrollments between 1999 and 2018. In Appendix Table A3, we

document the benefits of using tax data to measure college enrollments. The tax data indicate that

55 percent of veterans enroll within two years of their Army separation, whereas the NSC yields a

10 percentage point smaller rate that can be largely explained by missing enrollments in the for-



23
     The VA did not begin capturing annual amounts used until the last few years.

                                                          18
profit sector. Other differences between the two data sources are likely due to differences in timing

and the FERPA blocking in the NSC. 24


         For each veteran, we construct a panel of tax return data spanning 1999 through 2018 to

measure tax benefit utilization and labor income measures over time. We collect information on

the take-up and amounts claimed for the several federal benefits for higher education that are

available through the tax code over this time period. The Hope Tax Credit (HTC) and Lifetime

Learning Tax Credit (LLTC) allow for a dollar-for-dollar reduction in taxes for qualified education

expenditures, capped at the household's overall tax liability amount (i.e., the credits are

nonrefundable). Whereas the HTC is available only for the first two years of college, the LLTC

can be used for virtually any postsecondary coursework. In 2009, the HTC was temporarily

replaced by the more generous American Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC) ­ now permanent as of

2015 ­ which provides benefits that are partially refundable and can be claimed for the first four

years of college enrollment. An alternative to the tax credits is the above-the-line deduction for

tuition and fees (DTF) from gross income, up to a cap. The DTF was created under the Economic

Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001, and is available to students who have modified

adjusted gross incomes below a specified amount. An individual must choose between the DTF

and one of the other education tax credits.


         Individual-level measures of labor income are computed as the sum of wage and salary

income reported on Form W-2, the information return that employers submit to the IRS to report

wage and salary income, and self-employment income reported on Schedule SE, which contains


24
   For NSC data, the sector of enrollment is measured based on the first enrollment measured in the calendar year.
For the tax data, we are unable to see when each enrollment occurs if there are multiple 1098-Ts issued in the same
year. As a result, we rank institutions based on their sector in the following order: four-year public, four-year
private, two-year, and for-profit institutions. If after this rank ordering, a veteran still receives a 1098-T from more
than one institution, we randomly select one.

                                                           19
net income from partnerships, S corporations, and sole-proprietorships. W-2 income is available

even when a veteran does not file a tax return; in this case, Form 1099-MISC, the information

return that businesses submit to the IRS to report gross non-employee compensation, provides

information on some sources of self-employment income.


       To account for the unedited nature of the administrative tax return data, we winsorize all

income amounts at the 99th percentile of the distribution of positive values; in the case of variables

that can also take on negative values (i.e., self-employment income and AGI), we winsorize at the

1st and 99th percentiles of the distribution of non-zero values. All income measures are adjusted to

2016 dollars using the CPI research series.


       We impose several sample restrictions. We limit our analysis sample to the cohorts that

separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. The lower limit is driven by the fact that the

fields we use for exact date of separation and characterization of service are only observed in our

data starting in 2002. We impose the upper limit so that we have meaningful earnings data on the

veterans nine years after separation, when most are in their 30s. We exclude all Army veterans

who already had a bachelor's degree upon enlisting. To focus our analysis on younger veterans

who are most likely to make significant human capital investment and exclude career military

veterans, we limit the sample to veterans who served between 1 and 6 years and who were age 39

or younger upon separation.


       Summary statistics for our three main estimation samples are shown in Table 1, restricted

to the four cohorts that comprise the pre-treatment and post-treatment groups in our baseline

difference-in-differences strategies. Columns (1)--(2) contain eligible and ineligible veterans who

separated in 2003, 2004, 2008, or 2009, and columns (3)--(4) contain only eligible veterans from



                                                 20
those same separation cohorts. In Column (5)--(6), we present summary statistics for our

enrollment year analysis: these include eligible and ineligible veterans who initially enrolled in

college in 2003, 2004, 2007, or 2008. Because the intertemporal variation that we use depends on

either when a veteran separated from the Army or when a veteran initially enrolled in college, the

outcomes are measured differently across columns. In columns (1)--(4), the enrollment outcomes

are measured within two years of separation, bachelor's degree completion is measured within six

years of separation, associate's degree completion is measured within three years of separation,

and the longer-run outcomes are measured nine years after separation. In columns (5)--(6),

enrollment is measured at the time of initial enrollment, degree completion is measured as of 2019,

and longer-run outcomes are measured nine years after initial college enrollment.


                                             [Table 1 about here]


        Across all estimation samples, 75--80 percent of the veterans are male, 16--19 percent

are black, and 11--12 percent are Hispanic. The average age of separation is 24. At the time of

enlistment, the highest level of education for the vast majority of the sample was a high school

degree, while 5 percent had some college. Turning to our key outcome variables, 55 percent of

veterans enrolled in college within two years of their Army separation, with two-year public

institutions being the most common type of college chosen. Approximately 9 percent of veterans

completed a bachelor's degree within six years of separating from the Army, and their average

wage and salary earnings nine years after separation is $32,000 in 2016 dollars. Among those who

had already enrolled prior to the PGIB expansion, almost half of veterans enrolled in a two-year

public college and slightly over a quarter had chosen a four-year public institution. Nearly 32

percent of these veterans earn a bachelor's degree, and their wage and salary income nine years

after their initial enrollment is $36,200.

                                                  21
V. Results


     A. Validating the Empirical Approaches


     We begin by confirming that the PGIB has a "first-stage" effect on total GI Bill benefits

received in each of our identification strategies. First, Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows estimates of the

overall impact of GI Bill eligibility on total benefits and on PGIB benefits alone by separation

year. Eligible veterans who separated in 2009 received an additional $22,240 in PGIB benefits

relative to those who separated in 2002. These veterans received $11,900 more in total benefits

after accounting for MGIB payments. Notice that the earlier cohorts of 2003-2006 also see some

increases in benefits received. These earlier cohorts are eligible for PGIB benefits even though

these benefits only exist as of 2009, though many veterans may have exhausted their MGIB

educational benefits before the PGIB arrives. However, there is a modest treatment effect on the

earlier cohorts and, as such, our difference-in-differences estimates may understate the total effects

of the PGIB. 25 Column (1) of Panel A in Table 2 presents corresponding difference-in-difference

results from equation (1) for total benefits: the PGIB increases total benefits received by $7,100

for eligible veterans separating in 2008/09, relative to those separating in 2003/04.


                                                [Figure 2 about here]


                                                 [Table 2 about here]


     Next, we illustrate the relationship between our estimate of the generosity of PGIB benefits in

a home of record and the total benefits actually received by veterans with corresponding homes of




25
  To the extent that earlier cohorts of eligible veterans are using the higher benefits to enroll after 2009, this may
result in a slight upward bias in estimated earnings effects as the wages of these pre-period veterans may be slightly
depressed 7 to 9 years after separation.

                                                          22
record (Panel (b) of Figure 2). We group homes of record into $1,000 bins based on the average

PGIB maximum benefit that would have been received if veteran pre-period enrollment had

instead occurred in the post-period. We then plot the average difference in total benefits received

between the pre- and post-periods within these bins, overlaid with a linear and fractional

polynomial fit. This figure suggests a strong positive relationship between predicted and actual

benefits received. The slope of 2.0 indicates that each $1,000 increase in predicted annual total

benefits available is associated with an increase in total benefits received of $2,000.


   The remainder of column (1) in Table 2 uses equation (3) to estimate how benefits received

responds to geographic variation in expected benefits among eligible veterans separating in the

post- versus pre-period. We regress total benefits received on annual measures of expected

maximum benefits; this stock versus flow difference explains why our coefficients can exceed 1.

A $1,000 increase in annual total benefits available raises cumulative benefits received by $1,700

(Panel D). Total benefits received responds strongly to maximum expected housing benefits. If

veterans from prior cohorts and from the same home zip code attended schools that would receive

(in 2009) a $1,000 higher BAH per year, total dollars received rises by $2,300 (Panel B).


   One potential concern is that these relationships are driven by changes in the composition of

soldiers choosing to return to areas with high benefit levels under the PGIB. Recall that the

assignment of benefit generosity is based on a soldier's home of record at enlistment, not where

they choose to go after separation. To the extent that soldiers move to take advantage of higher

PGIB benefits in an area, this would attenuate the effect of our benefit generosity measure on total

benefits received. Another possibility is that soldiers who are interested in or are on the margin of

benefit use will be more likely to separate if they are from high benefit areas. This type of

endogenous separation is unlikely in our difference-in-differences sample because the choice to

                                                 23
separate generally occurred well before the availability of the expanded benefits. Furthermore, this

type of endogenous separation does not appear to be the case empirically. In Appendix Table A4,

we explore whether the variation in predicted benefit generosity is related to the underlying

demographic characteristics of veterans. Specifically, we estimate equation (3) but omit the

demographic characteristics and instead use them as dependent variables. We see economically

small and mostly statistically insignificant relationships between the benefits available and the

change in the composition of soldiers returning there. Although the variation in benefits is

positively associated with educational attainment, the coefficient sizes are modest: for example,

an additional $1,000 in annual benefits is associated with a 0.3 percentage point increase in the

likelihood of having a high school degree.


   The magnitudes of the estimated impacts of the PGIB on benefit dollars received are generally

consistent between our strategy that relies on variation across veteran eligibility (Panel A of Table

2) and those that rely on variation in generosity across geography (Panels B--D). The average

amount of maximum annual PGIB benefits is roughly $8,000 greater than the maximum annual

amount available under the MGIB. When we multiply the coefficient in Panel D (1.71) by eight,

we obtain 13.7, which is higher than but consistent with the basic difference-in-differences

estimate in Panel A.


   Lastly, we examine the impacts of the introduction of the PGIB on those who were already

enrolled in college at the time of the expansion. Panel (c) of Figure 2 shows that the PGIB has a

large impact on benefit amounts received for the eligible veterans who had recently enrolled.

Corresponding estimates from equation (4), presented in Panel A of column (2) in Table 2, reveal

that eligible veterans who enrolled in 2007 or 2008 received an additional $11,800 in cumulative

benefits relative to those who enrolled in 2003 or 2004. In columns (3)--(6), we provide estimates

                                                 24
of the impact of the PGIB on benefit utilization by the type of institution in which a veteran is

enrolled. Unsurprisingly, veterans initially enrolled in four-year public and four-year private

nonprofit institutions see the largest increases in benefit receipt, with total benefit increases of

$15,000 and $16,000, respectively, but there are significant increases across all four college

sectors.


     The bottom three panels of columns (2)--(6) use geographic variation to estimate the impacts

of the generosity on benefits received. For eligible veteran students, an additional $1,000 of BAH

raises total benefits received by $970, with similar effects across sectors. Overall and across

sectors, housing benefit generosity is more strongly associated with cumulative benefits received

than is tuition benefit generosity. This pattern may reflect several possibilities, including that the

BAH depends only on the zip code of enrollment and not the specific institution enrolled (which

we may incorrectly assign if a veteran transfers), some interaction between the tuition and fee

benefit and other available financial aid (which might reduce the actual tuition and fee benefits

paid), or differential effects of the benefit types on the months of benefits used (which would

influence the cumulative benefits received). 26


     B. Effects on Education Choices for Eligible Veterans


     To examine the impact of the PGIB expansion on college enrollment for the overall eligible

veteran population, we define a series of indicator variables that equal 1 if a veteran is enrolled

within x years of separation from the Army and zero otherwise, where x = 1, ..., 6. Figure 3

presents estimates of  from equation (2) for each of these enrollment outcomes. For the 2009


26
  The modest overall effect of tuition and fee variation can be reconciled with the larger within sector effects by an
inverse relationship between average tuition and fees in a sector and the duration and intensity of PGIB receipt for
students in that sector. For example, students enrolled in for-profit institutions have high potential tuition and fee
benefits, but tend to enroll for shorter periods of time.

                                                          25
separation cohort, we find that that PGIB raised the enrollment of eligible veterans by 5 percentage

points within three years relative to the 2002 cohort (panel (c)), and this enrollment boost remains

fairly constant when looking across longer windows post-separation up to 6 years after separation.

For the 2010 cohort, the enrollment impacts are more immediate, with a 5.6 percentage point rise

in enrollment within a year of separation that increases to a 7.9 percentage point gain within six

years. 27


                                             [Figure 3 about here]


     Importantly, these figures provide compelling evidence for our overall difference-in-difference

identification strategy. The vertical line in each panel indicates the first cohort whose enrollment

could have been affected by the higher benefit levels. The trends in college enrollment propensities

between eligible and ineligible veterans are quite similar prior to these critical threshold dates, and

only begin to increase after the PGIB benefits could have an impact on outcomes. These patterns

suggest that our estimates can be attributed to a causal effect of the PGIB, rather than to differential

trends across eligible and ineligible veterans. This figure also provides further support for defining

the pre-treatment period as comprising cohorts who separated from the Army prior to 2008. As

the period over which we define our enrollment measure increases between panels (a) and (f), we

consistently find no discernable effect on the decision to enroll for these earlier cohorts even when

they could have utilized PGIB benefits.


     Table 3 presents estimates for the probability of enrollment occurring within two years of

separation, overall (column 1) and by sector (columns 2-5). The first row presents the difference-



27
  In Appendix Figure A1, we use an alternative enrollment measure based on whether a veteran ever enrolls in
college according to enrollment data from the NSC. Although these enrollment effects are larger than those
obtained using our longest timeframe considered using the tax data, the overall patterns are similar.

                                                      26
in-differences estimates from equation (1). Consistent with the event study graph shown in panel

(b) of Figure 3, the impact of the PGIB on overall enrollment within two years of separation is

small, at 0.25 percentage points, and statistically insignificant. There are, however, appreciable

shifts in the types of institutions in which eligible veterans are enrolled: for-profit college

enrollment rises by 1.5 percentage points, while four-year public institution enrollment falls by a

nearly corresponding 1.6 percentage points. Enrollments in four-year private colleges and

community colleges are largely unaffected. In results not shown, we find that the PGIB caused a

1.8 percentage point increase in enrollments within three years of Army separation, and 2.8

percentage point increase within six.


                                                [Table 3 about here]


     These modest increases in enrollment for the eligible veteran population are accompanied by

increased college persistence, measured by the cumulative months of GI benefits used and the

number of years enrolled in college (i.e., the number of years with a Form 1098-T). Panel (a) of

Appendix Figure A2 shows that while there is a small increase in relative benefits used between

2002 and 2004, perhaps as a result of an increase in MGIB generosity in 2003, the difference in

months used rises sharply between 2006 and 2009. 28 The corresponding increase in months of

benefits used between 2003/04 and 2008/09 is 1.4 months, or 0.17 academic years of additional

enrollment (Table 4, Panel A, column 1). Panel (b) of Appendix Figure A1 reveals that following

a period where eligible and ineligible veterans' college enrollments are on parallel trends, there is

0.1 year increase in years enrolled in 2008 that continues to rise for subsequent separating cohorts.




28
  This figure is somewhat difficult to interpret because ineligible veterans who remained ineligible would
automatically be observed using zero months of benefits.

                                                         27
This impact is a 0.2 year increase in college persistence between the 2003/04 and 2008/09

separating cohorts (Table 4, Panel A, column 2).


                                          [Table 4 about here]


   Using the geographic variation in the change in benefit generosity, we find that within the

eligible population, increased benefits do not elicit additional enrollments, but instead drive longer

enrollments. Figure 4 presents estimates analogous to Figure 3, now using geographic variation in

total predicted PGIB benefit levels within a soldier's home of record as our source of identification.

There appears to be, at most, modest effects of additional benefits on enrollment. Within one to

two years of Army separation (panels a and b), the point estimate for the effect of total benefit

generosity on enrollment for the 2008 cohort is negative. The point estimate for the 2009 cohort

suggests that $10,000 in additional benefits raises enrollment within one to two years by a

statistically insignificant 1 percentage point. Although statistically insignificant, the upward trend

in benefit utilization again only appears to occur after eligible veterans are able to use the expanded

PGIB benefits, providing additional support for the validity of this identification strategy.


                                          [Figure 4 about here]


   The bottom three panels of Table 3 present corresponding regression estimates. These

estimates indicate at most modest enrollment responses to the geographic variation in the size of

the benefit expansion, with suggestive evidence of a relative shift out of for-profit institutions and

into two- and four-year public institutions and four-year private institutions. Only the effect on

four-year private enrollment is significant at conventional levels; an increase in annual benefits of

$8,000 corresponds to an increase in four-year private enrollment of 1.7 percentage points (or 34

percent of the mean).


                                                  28
   Instead, we find a strong relationship between predicted PGIB benefit levels and both the

months of benefits used and years of college enrollment as the PGIB benefits became available.

Figure 5 suggests a modest increase in college persistence measures across separating cohorts

between 2004 and 2007 that reflects the partially treated nature of these cohorts. This relative

increase in persistence accelerates for the 2008 and subsequent separating cohorts. In Panel D of

column (1) and (2) of Table 4, we find that each $1,000 in predicted total benefits raises months

of benefits used by 0.3 months (0.033 academic years) and years enrolled by 0.039.


                                        [Figure 5 about here]


   These observed increases in enrollment and college persistence for the overall eligible veteran

population translate into modest increases in degree attainment. Columns (3) and (4) in Panel A

of Table 4 reveal that for eligible veterans who separate in 2008/09, bachelor's degree attainment

rises by 1.2 percentage points, and associate's degree attainments rise by 0.4 percentage points

relative to those separating in 2003/04. The evolution of degree attainment by separation year is

shown in Figure 6, which suggests larger bachelor's degree attainment impacts for the 2010 cohort

(which include potentially endogenous separation in response to the PGIB), at 3 percentage points.

The trends in educational attainment show that this increase in degree completion coincides exactly

with those cohorts for whom we observe the PGIB expansion affecting the decision to enroll in

college.


                                        [Figure 6 about here]


   Among veterans from areas with relatively high implied PGIB benefits, the observed increases

in college persistence translate into statistically significant increases in bachelor's degree

attainment. An additional $10,000 in annual total benefits raises bachelor's degree receipt by 3.5


                                                29
percentage points (Table 4, column 3, Panel D). Given the overall average increase in benefit

generosity as the new benefits became available (of around $8,000), these estimates are generally

consistent with (though larger than) the difference-in-differences estimates in Panel A. 29


     The pattern of larger effects stemming from the geographic variation in the expansion of

benefit generosity versus the overall availability of the expanded benefits is consistent across

measures of educational attainment, with larger implied effects on months of benefits used, years

enrolled, and bachelor's and associate's degree receipt. One possibility is that this disparity stems

from a difference in the salience of the benefit. While veterans and institutions were quite aware

that the PGIB massively increased the generosity of the education benefits available to veterans,

there was considerably less awareness of how the geographic variation in benefit generosity

worked in practice. This may have resulted in an average increase in low-intensity or low-quality

enrollments at the national level that resulted from veterans who were not particularly interested

in enrolling responding to the incredibly generous benefit expansion, or institutions proactively

recruiting these types of veterans. This story is consistent with the nationwide average increase in

for-profit enrollment among eligible veterans, and the modest corresponding increase in degree

attainment relative to the increase in years enrolled. The less obvious changes in relative benefit

generosity occurring across areas were more likely to benefit those who had already planned to

enroll, with greater benefits accruing to those enrolled in more expensive, perhaps higher quality,

four-year institutions. The relative increase in productive (i.e., degree-producing) enrollments




29
  Appendix Figure A5 and A6 show the geographic variation event study results for bachelor's degree and
associate's degree attainment, respectively.

                                                      30
observed in high- versus low-benefit areas (Panel D of Table 4) is consistent with this

interpretation. 30


    C. Effects on Education Tax Benefit Utilization for Eligible Veterans


    Along with shifting enrollments, the PGIB may also impact how veterans pay for college. Of

particular interest is the extent to which GI Bill benefits interact with the federal tax benefits that

also aim to promote investments in higher education. There are two important changes that

occurred. First, in 2009, the Hope Tax Credit was replaced by the more generous American

Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC). The AOTC increased the maximum credit amounts, extended

the income range for eligibility, expanded the set of qualified expenses, and made the credit

partially refundable. Second, the delivery mechanism for providing veteran financial aid changed

under the PGIB expansion. While veterans are required to enroll in an approved program, MGIB

aid is paid directly to veterans and is not restricted to be used for tuition and fees. As such, these

amounts need not be deducted from qualified educational expenses for the calculation of education

tax credits or the DTF if, for example, they were used for living expenses. In contrast, the VA

remits PGIB tuition and fee benefits directly to the institution in which a veteran is enrolled, and

qualified educational expenditures are reduced commensurately. Housing benefits are still paid

directly to veterans and are nontaxable.


    Along with the increased veteran benefits, the change in payment method for GI benefits

should result in a reduction in the utilization of all federal education tax benefits conditional on



30
   Another possibility is the presence of some minor confounders correlated with the geographic variation in the size
of the benefit expansion. Indeed, while precision is reduced significantly, including ineligible veterans as an
additional control group attenuates the resulting estimates somewhat (Table A4-A5). However, this might also be
explained by the small share of ineligible veterans who petition for access to PGIB benefits, resulting in modest
treatment effects on the educational attainment margin in this group as well.

                                                         31
enrolling. At the same time, if the PGIB induces veterans into colleges that are more expensive

than the maximum PGIB benefit amounts, then there could also be a corresponding increase in the

utilization of education tax benefits. The increased generosity of available credits under the AOTC

generally makes education tax credits more attractive than the DTF, and the expansion of AOTC

eligibility for both low-income and higher-income families may increase the utilization of the tax

credit. Put together, these changes suggest that DTF utilization conditional on enrollment should

fall, but there is an ambiguous effect on education tax credit utilization. 31


     We examine the take-up rates and amount of benefits claimed for both the DTF and education

tax credits, measured cumulatively over the first two years after Army separation. As expected,

the top panel of Figure 7 shows a marked drop in the utilization of the DTF and the average amount

of deductions taken following the introduction of the PGIB. The difference-in-difference estimates

in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 reveal that DTF take-up rates fell by 5.8 percentage points, with

a corresponding $240 reduction in deductions taken. Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 7 show that the

net effect of the PGIB and AOTC expansions on eligible veterans is an increase in education tax

credit take-up and average amounts claimed. The difference-in-difference estimates in Table 5

point to a two percentage point rise in take-up of education tax credits, with the average dollar

amount of education tax credits taken rising by about $200. 32


                                                 [Figure 7 about here]


                                                  [Table 5 about here]




31
   A related possibility is that the PGIB eliminates the possibility of taking the Tuition and Fees Deduction for
student vets (because tuition benefits are paid directly to institutions) and hence student vets find a way to claim the
education tax credit for non-tuition qualifying expenses.
32
   This includes zeroes for veterans who did not take a take credit.

                                                           32
     Importantly, the introduction of the AOTC impacted both eligible and ineligible veterans. To

the extent that ineligible veterans responded to the AOTC expansion, which was relatively more

generous for them net of the PGIB, this suggests that our earlier enrollment effects are a lower

bound for the impact of the PGIB. Appendix Figure A7 and the bottom three rows of Table 5

explore whether there were changes in education tax benefits between eligible veterans with

higher- versus lower- predicted benefit expansions. While there is no differential response in the

claiming of education tax credits, there is an increase in the amount of education tax credits

claimed for those with higher predicted benefits, consistent with these higher benefits being

associated with increased enrollments in four-year private institutions (Table 3).


     D. Effects on Labor Market Outcomes for Eligible Veterans


     Next, we examine whether the gains in enrollments or degree completions caused by the PGIB

expansion improved subsequent labor market outcomes for veterans. Figure 8 illustrates a

reduction in labor income nine years after separation of about $900 for cohorts separating in 2008

and 2009, relative to 2003 and 2004 (Panel (a)), and an even larger fall when labor income is

measured as average earnings in years 7-9 after separation (Panel (b)). 33 In Table 6, we show the

evolution of the effect on labor income between 6 and 9 years since separating and on the average

of earnings across years 7-9. Using the difference-in-differences specification (Panel A), the PGIB

has consistently negative impacts on wages and labor income for veterans. Six years after

separating, eligible veterans earn $3,000 less than ineligible veterans, and this gap reduces to a




33
  These reported effects are conservative relative to the estimated impacts of the PGIB relative to the 2002
separating cohort.

                                                         33
$900 deficit nine years after separating; averaging over years 7 through 9 yields a roughly $1,400

earnings reduction, or about 4.4 percent of mean earnings. 34


                                              [Figure 8 about here]


                                              [Table 6 about here]


       When we instead examine the log of earnings, we find a similar pattern in the coefficients,

although the patterns of statistical significance differ slightly (Table 7, Panel A). The PGIB has a

consistently negative estimated effect, though the estimates are only statistically significant 6 years

after separation. Overall, rather than improving labor market outcomes, the PGIB caused a drop

in earnings, though the magnitude of this reduction is shrinking over time.


                                              [Table 7 about here]


       One alternative explanation for the negative earnings effect is that the Great Recession may

have had differential labor market impacts on eligible and ineligible veterans. In particular, for

veterans in our pre-treatment period (2003/04), labor market earnings six years later coincide with

the financial crisis (2009/10). We might expect that the recession depressed the wages of ineligible

veterans more than those of eligible veterans given the more detrimental effects of recessions on

those with lower skills (Heathcote, Perri, and Violante 2020, Yagan 2019). That said, it is possible

that ineligible veterans were disproportionately drawn from less affected labor markets or affected

differently than expected. Earlier work finds limited evidence of state-level labor market

conditions on veteran benefit usage or educational attainment (Barr 2019, Borgschulte and

Martorell 2016). In results not shown, we additionally include measures of labor market conditions



34
     We add mean wage and salary income and mean self-employment income shown in Table 1.

                                                      34
in our analyses. Specifically, we compute the following measures of labor market conditions for

each year based on a veteran's home of record: median household income for men between 27 and

37 years of age with at least a high school degree or GED but less than a bachelor's degree, median

household income when we also include those with a bachelor's degree, and the unemployment

rate. 35 We use these labor market measures as controls at the home of record-by-year of

observation level, also allowing them to interact with veteran eligibility. In these specifications,

the estimates on the impact of the PGIB expansion are virtually unchanged, implying that the

earnings reductions we find are not due to ineligible veterans being differentially affected by the

recession. We explore other possible explanations for this negative return on human capital

investments in detail in Section IV.


    The estimates in the bottom panels of Tables 6 and 7, which rely on the geographic variation

in the extent of benefit changes within the eligible veteran population, tell a more nuanced story.

While higher total benefits have no statistically significant impact on earnings 6 and 7 years after

separation, there are statistically significant relative earnings increases within eight years.

Averaging over years 7 through 9 after separation, veterans from areas with $1,000 more in total

benefits earned $242 more per year (Panel D of Table 6). The corresponding event study figures

are presented in Appendix Figure A8. Visually, these figures are somewhat less compelling than

the earlier event studies as the increase in earnings 9 years after separation appears to show up

between 2004 and 2005, well before the separating cohorts that appear most affected by the benefit

expansion. While there is a similar pattern in the years enrolled and degree attainment event studies



35
   Median income is computed as the PUMA by year average of the residualized (controlling for age and education)
income for men aged 27 through 37 from the American Community Survey, weighted by ACS person-weights. We
map these PUMA-based averages to zip codes. Unemployment rates are based off of the Bureau of Labor Statistics
local area unemployment statistics and Census small area income and poverty statistics by county and year, mapped
to zip codes.

                                                       35
(Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 5 and Figure A5), it is unclear whether the observed drop in the

relative educational attainment and wages of veterans separating in 2003 and 2004 should

contribute to the estimated effect as they are part of the pre-period and at most modestly affected

by the policy change. Relative to the 2002 separating cohort, the change in wages of those from

high- versus low-benefit areas is essentially zero. As such, we interpret the resulting modest

positive effects on earnings with caution.


     As above, one potential explanation for these effects is that the Great Recession differentially

affected veterans from areas with high versus low predicted benefits. For example, if veterans

from high-benefit areas were hit harder by the recession, this would reduce the relative wages of

eligible veterans separating from high-benefit areas in the pre-period, upwardly biasing our

resulting estimates if higher benefit areas rebounded after the recession. In results not reported,

we explore this possibility with data from the American Community Survey. Using our measures

of civilian labor market conditions, there is a small positive relationship between benefit generosity

and the change in some measures of household income and wages between 2012-13 and 2017-18

of around $100 to $150, or 0.2-0.25 percent, roughly half the estimated effect in the eligible veteran

sample. 36 However, this relationship disappears when we focus on individuals with at least a high

school degree or GED but less than a bachelor's degree, which corresponds to the educational

attainment of 90 percent of veterans. Including any of these civilian labor market conditions as

controls leaves the estimates unchanged. However, as a result of the modest relative improvement

in labor market conditions among civilians and the event study evidence, we view the relative

increase in earnings across areas with greater PGIB benefit generosity as suggestive and an upper



36
  2012-13 and 2017-18 correspond to the years of earnings observation 9 years post-separation for the pre- and
post-period veterans respectively.

                                                        36
bound for the true effects. Indeed, Panels C-D of Table 7 contain the analogous estimates for the

log of earnings. Here, there is no significant effect of total benefit generosity on average earnings

7 to 9 years post-separation, although the estimates at 8 and 9 years post-separation are positive.


   A natural question is how to reconcile the suggestive evidence of a positive relative earnings

effect of increased benefit generosity with the consistent evidence of a negative effect of the overall

benefit expansion. First, it is important to keep in mind that the geographic variation estimates

reflect the relative change in earnings among eligible veterans who come from areas with higher

and lower predicted PGIB benefit generosity. While eligible veterans from high benefit areas may

have done relatively better than those from low benefit areas, it may still be the case that they all

earned less as a result of the benefit expansion. Appendix Table A7, which includes the ineligible

veterans as a control group, indicates that this was likely the case. The first row of each panel

indicates the difference-in-difference estimate at the mean PGIB level, while the subsequent rows

allow this estimate to vary across areas with different benefit generosities. While the smaller

sample size of the ineligible group limits our precision, the resulting estimates are consistent with

our earlier findings. There is a significant reduction in earnings that persists 9 years out in areas

with average benefit levels. The coefficient on the interaction with total benefits (TB) is small and

not significantly different from zero, indicating at most modestly better relative earnings effects in

high-benefit areas. However, even in areas with total PGIB benefits in the 99th percentile (i.e.,

$23,000 per year), the implied total effect of the PGIB is negative 9 years subsequent to separation.


   The patterns of enrollments, persistence, and educational attainment effects observed across

the two strategies also provides a natural explanation for the findings. Overall, the benefit

expansion generated modest increases in low-return human capital investments, but these marginal

investments were larger and of higher quality in areas with higher benefits. While there was an

                                                  37
overall shift away from four-year public and towards for-profit enrollment, the relative shift in

higher benefit areas was the reverse, with the most significant increases occurring at four-year

public and private institutions. Similarly, while the overall gains in educational attainment were

modest, they were larger and more likely to translate into degree attainment in high benefit areas.

In combination, the pattern of effects suggests that the overall benefit expansion resulted in

veterans making low-quality investments that resulted in lower earnings, but that veterans in high

benefit areas made modestly better investments that resulted in smaller earnings reductions. In

Section IV, we return to a discussion of why the negative effects on earnings transpired, and

whether veterans might be able to recover the lost earnings in the future.


     E. Impacts for Veterans Already Enrolled


     For veterans who had already enrolled in college by the fall of 2008, the PGIB generated a

large and unexpected change in available benefits, and importantly, the extent of these changes is

based on their pre-policy choices. The change provides a unique opportunity to evaluate the effect

of providing generous subsidies to individuals enrolled in different types of institutions without

concern for how the subsidies might have affected veterans' choices to enroll in different types of

schools. We first examine whether these additional subsidies encouraged already enrolled veterans

to remain in college for longer or produced higher degree completion rates. Panel A of Table 8

presents our difference-in-difference estimates, with corresponding event study analyses in

Figures 9 and 10. Relative to veterans who had enrolled several years earlier, the benefit expansion

caused eligible veterans who had just enrolled in college to remain enrolled for 0.2 years longer.37




37
  Eligible veterans also use 4 additional months of GI Bill benefits, although the control group for these estimates is
imperfect given the limited eligibility for benefit use among ineligible veterans.

                                                          38
This increased persistence is accompanied by a 3.1 and 2.7 percentage point increase in the

likelihood of earnings a bachelor's or associate's degree, respectively.


                                         [Table 8 about here]


                                         [Figure 9 about here]


                                        [Figure 10 about here]


   We examine whether the gains in persistence and attainment differ by the sector of initial

enrollment in Panels B through E. Across all four sectors, the PGIB expansion increased years

enrolled in college (column 1) and months of benefits used (column 2). However, not all of these

persistence improvements lead to increased degree attainment. The impact on bachelor's degree

attainment is strongest, by far, for veterans who begin in four-year institutions; these veterans see

a 7 percentage point rise in bachelor's degree completion, while those enrolled in community

college appear to transfer at higher rates and are ultimately 3 percentage points more likely to earn

a bachelor's degree. Estimates for veterans in four-year private institutions are quite imprecise,

reflecting the small number of veterans enrolled in these institutions. Those enrolled in for-profit

institutions do not see increased bachelor's degree attainment, although they do improve their

likelihood of earnings an associate's degree by 6.8 percentage points.


   Finally, we ask whether these elevated investments in education improved earnings outcomes.

Event study results for our difference-in-difference strategy are presented in Figure 11, with

corresponding estimates in Panel A of Table 9. While negative six years after initial enrollment,

the average effect of the PGIB on those already enrolled turns positive three years later. The

average effects conceal considerable heterogeneity across school types (Panels B--E), with large

positive effects for those initially enrolled at two-year and four-year public schools, where we also

                                                 39
observe the largest effects on bachelor's degree attainment. The earnings estimates are negative

and insignificant for those initially enrolled in for-profit schools. 38 As before, the effects for those

enrolled in four-year private institutions are extremely imprecise, although the point estimate is

negative.


                                                  [Figure 11 about here]


                                                    [Table 9 about here]


     Estimates using school-level variation in benefit generosity, presented in Appendix Tables A8

and A9, are less informative. Although individuals who were initially enrolled in schools with

higher benefits under the PGIB received larger amounts of aid (Panel D of Table 2), there is no

clear evidence of an effect on educational attainment. Overall, we can reject effects on bachelor's

degree receipt larger than 0.3 percentage points per $1,000 of aid, with limited evidence of

heterogeneity in responses across sectors. The corresponding earnings effects are generally near

zero, but are imprecise.


VI. Interpreting the Negative Earnings Effects on Eligible Veterans


     To properly evaluate the GI Bill expansion requires understanding why the gains in educational

outcomes failed to materialize into improved earnings for the overall veteran population, at least

within the timeframe that we are able to analyze. We interpret and decompose the negative

earnings impacts of the PGIB expansion by estimating treatment heterogeneity, conducting a

Oaxaca-style decomposition, and projecting the potential earnings paths in the very long run.




38
  This negative effect is larger (-$2,800) and statistically significant for those initially enrolled at a for-profit
institution when restricting the comparison group to veterans with a general discharge.

                                                             40
   A. Heterogeneity of Impacts


   The PGIB is likely to increase the human capital and earnings for some veterans and be harmful

for others. We are particularly interested in understanding the effects on subgroups of individuals

that might be expected to experience greater challenges in transitioning into the civilian workforce.

For brevity, we focus on two: above or below median AFQT score, and military job classifications

based on PMOS. To create categories for job types, we match PMOS codes to Census occupations

and use Autor and Dorn (2013) to classify occupations into high-, middle- and low-skill jobs. The

mapping of 2-digit PMOS codes to occupation classifications are presented in Appendix Table

A10. Low-skill (PMOS category=0) includes military occupations that do not map to a civilian

occupation (e.g., infantryman) or map to a low skill occupation (e.g., food service). Effects on

these types of individuals might inform our understanding of the effects of retraining for civilians

in lower wage occupations or with skills that have become obsolete.            Middle-skill (PMOS

category=1) largely includes skilled trades that map to a civilian job, and traditionally do not

require post-secondary schooling (e.g., plumber, electrician, police officer).            High-skill

occupations (PMOS category=2) often correspond to jobs that require some college education in

the civilian sector (e.g., computer programmer, intelligence analyst, supply chain manager).


   Table 10 shows that the pattern of eligible veterans shifting from four-year public to for-profit

institutions is largely driven by those with below-median AFQT scores (second row of Panel A)

or those who held low-skill military jobs (first row of Panel B). Lower AFQT veterans have a 2.2

percentage point increase in for-profit enrollments, and low occupational skill veterans have a 2.6

percentage point increase, both of which are large responses relative to the overall sample mean

of 16 percentage points. In Table 11, we find that although these shifts are accompanied by

increases in college persistence, months of benefits used, and the probability of earnings a

                                                 41
bachelor's degree (columns 1--4), these least skilled veterans also earn $1,600 to $1,700 less 9

years after their separation from the Army (column 5). 39


                                                [Table 10 about here]


                                                [Table 11 about here]


     The impacts for high AFQT and high job skill veterans are quite different. For high AFQT

veterans, there are shifts away from four-year public institutions, with increases in both four-year

private and for-profit institutions, but these are not associated with significant longer-run effects

on earnings. Interestingly, for the veterans who held high-skill jobs in the military, the PGIB

expansion did not change their choices over whether to enroll in college, years of enrollment, or

whether they ultimately earned a degree. Unlike the other subgroups, these veterans earn nearly

$1,300 more nine years after separation, although this result is statistically insignificant. Put

together, these results suggest that the PGIB is driving unproductive college enrollments for the

least skilled or lower AFQT veterans.


     We examine these two dimensions of heterogeneity for veterans who were already enrolled at

the time of the PGIB expansion in Table 12. For students with above median AFQT scores, the

additional aid from the PGIB induced them to remain enrolled for 0.24 years longer and increased

their probability of earning a bachelor's degree. The overall increases in longer-run earnings are

also concentrated among these veterans. In contrast, students with below median AFQT scores

also remained in school for longer and saw increases in associate's degree completion, but without

a corresponding gain in longer-run earnings. There is also suggestive evidence that the bachelor's



39
  Given that the marginal enrollment among the lower-skilled veterans is in the for-profit sector, the lack of a
positive return to the additional degree attainment may be explained by the quality of the institutions awarding them.

                                                         42
degree competition and longer-run earnings increases is concentrated among those veterans who

held medium- and high-skilled military jobs, although these are generally statistically insignificant.


                                         [Table 12 about here]


   B. Decomposing the Negative Earnings Effects into Effects Via Enrollment, Institutional

       Choice, Work Experience


   There are several possible routes through which the PGIB might lower earnings for eligible

veterans. In particular, the PGIB might shift veterans into colleges with lower labor market returns,

reduce their years of work experience while in college, or shift them into lower-paying

occupations. We are able to explore the first and second channels within our data; unfortunately,

we do not have data on post-Army occupations.


   In Table 13, we show results from a Oaxaca-style decomposition of the negative earnings

effect. The "intermediate" or "mediating" outcomes that might explain the impact on earnings that

we consider are: years of enrollment, years of work experience (level and squared terms),

enrollment in the four college sectors, enrollment in an online institution, and enrollment in an

institution with a bachelor's degree graduation rate of less than 30 percent. The first row repeats

the impact of the PGIB on earnings nine years after separation that we are trying to explain (Panel

A of Table 6). The remainder of column (1) presents estimates of 1 from estimating equation (1)

using one of our mediating variables as the dependent variable. To obtain an estimate of the portion

of the negative earnings effect that each mediating variable explains, we multiply the estimate in

column (1) by the estimated effect of that variable on earnings for eligible veterans in the pre-

treatment period (column 2); the resulting earnings change explained by each mediating variable

is presented in column (3).


                                                 43
                                                  [Table 13 about here]


     The results send a clear message: the negative impacts on work experience drive most of the

PGIB's negative impact on earnings. In fact, we over-explain the negative $907 effect using a

quadratic function of work experience alone, likely because our OLS regression on work

experience and work experience squared has a small positive coefficient on experience squared

rather than the small negative coefficient one would expect. Importantly, though, the PGIB-

induced drop in four-year public enrollments also explains a portion of the lost earnings. 40


     C. Will the Schooling Investment Pay Off Given Enough Time?


     Given that lost work experience appears to largely explain the negative earnings effects related

to the PGIB, we next consider whether the higher degree completion rates might ultimately result

in veterans making up these lost earnings. The gap in earnings that we find in Table 6 shrinks

between 6 and 9 years after Army separation; perhaps if we were able to look over a longer time

horizon, veterans would reap earnings gains in future years. To better understand the evolution of

earnings patterns for eligible veterans, we first estimate equation (1) using outcomes measured x

years after separation as our dependent variables, where x = 1, ..., 9. Figure 12 plots the estimated

difference in outcomes between eligible and ineligible veterans at each year after separation for

the pre-PGIB period (grey diamonds) and post-PGIB period (red triangles) separately.


                                                 [Figure 12 about here]


     Panel (a) shows that after the PGIB, eligible veterans increase their enrollment advantage over

ineligible veterans up through year 5, but this increased enrollment response disappears by year 6


40
  The effect on work experience for those already enrolled at the time of the benefit expansion was much smaller,
resulting in a net positive effect on earnings for those initially enrolled in two-year and four-year public institutions.

                                                            44
and then even turns slightly negative. 41 The earnings effects, shown in Panels (b) and (c), have the

opposite pattern. During the first five years of higher enrollment, the PGIB reduces earnings by

$1,000 to $2,000. However, this negative effect remains for several years after the increased

enrollment has subsided. By nine years after separation, the negative effects on earnings appear to

have moderated, but it is unclear whether these trajectories will eventually cross.


    To better understand the potential longer-run earnings effects of the PGIB, we extrapolate

earnings trajectories using various assumptions for returns to months of enrollment and bachelor's

degree completion. This exercise allows us to examine whether plausible returns to education

would predict that the PGIB will cause earnings for more recent PBIG-eligible cohorts to surpass

the counterfactual earnings of earlier cohorts. We take actual earnings for years 1 through 7 since

separation, and simulate growth in earnings for years 8 through 30 under various scenarios. We

then calculate the net present value (NPV) of these different implied earnings paths using a 3

percent discount rate.


    As our baseline, we impute earnings trajectories that incorporate returns to additional work

experience. 42 We validate the efficacy of this approach by using the first seven years of post-

separation earnings to forecast future earnings, which we can compare with actual post-separation

earnings in years eight through thirteen for veterans separating in the pre-period. Appendix Figure

A11 shows that this approach does a reasonable job in predicting the path of average earnings. We

then use two scenarios that generously add returns to years of schooling: a 9 percent return to



41
   This pattern is consistent with eligible veterans exhausting their benefits or completing their education more
quickly after the PGIB is available.
42
   We parameterize these returns using estimates of log earnings on work experience in the American Community
Survey (ACS) for veterans age 25-55 (7.3 percent per year of experience). Because we estimate minimal effect of
work experience squared among veterans in the ACS, we set the coefficient equal to the civilian equivalent (-0.23
percent).

                                                        45
additional years of schooling, slightly higher than the conventional assumption of 7 percent, and

an enormous 25 percent return. These boosts in educational returns are included on top of the

returns to additional education that are already captured in the first nine years of earnings since

Army separation. Finally, rather than returns to additional years of schooling, we add a 20 percent

return to bachelor's completion. The results from these simulations are summarized in Table 14

and presented graphically in Figure A12.


                                         [Table 14 about here]


   Given the modest increases in bachelor's degree completion and months of education that

veterans obtain under the PGIB, we do not find that later cohorts could plausibly surpass the earlier

cohorts via returns to education. . The top row of Table 14 shows that the NPV of baseline earnings

losses under the PGIB is $38,800. In rows 2-4, we find that the NPV of earnings losses universally

continue to be negative under the assumptions over the returns to education, with losses between

$17,500 under the most generous scenario to $37,500. These NPVs represent the average post-

separation working career earnings losses per veteran, and do not include the costs of the very

generous program. Indeed, the average discounted earnings loss is larger than the average increase

in benefits received, suggesting that the average veteran was worse off monetarily even after

incorporating the transfer.


VII. Discussion and Concluding Remarks


       The PGIB constitutes one of the largest expansions to college subsidies in United States

history, impacting one of its most generous post-secondary aid programs. Despite its large increase

in benefit amounts, the PGIB delivers substantially smaller educational gains than earlier GI Bills.

Whereas Angrist (1993) finds that Vietnam veterans' benefits on average raised schooling by


                                                 46
between one and two years, we find average increases of one to two months. Our estimated impact

of the PGIB on degree attainment of 1.2 percentage points is also much smaller than the 5

percentage point gain in bachelor's degree completion for Vietnam and Korean War veterans in

Angrist and Chen (2011). These differences may be driven by the changing composition of Army

enlistees. The Korea and Vietnam eras involved conscription, which likely included large groups

of young men who were well-suited to college-going and further education. In contrast, the PGIB

was implemented for an all-volunteer Army, and so is offered to a group of young women and

men who chose the military over college after leaving high school. Furthermore, the PGIB

expanded upon a veteran education benefit that was already quite generous, likely drawing

veterans with the lowest returns into additional schooling.


          Given the modest increases in bachelor's degree attainment in response to the large

increase in GI benefits, the implied cost per additional degree is high. With the average increase

in benefits for PGIB-eligible veterans is $7,100 and a corresponding 1.2 percentage point increase

in bachelor's degree completion, the implied average cost per degree exceeds $590,000. Using the

geographical variation in benefits among eligible veterans, the average cost is somewhat lower,

roughly $486,000 per bachelor's degree. 43 Regardless, these estimates are both at the high end of

the range of estimates summarized by Dynarski (2003) and Dynarksi, Hyman, and Schazenbach

(2013).


          Our more remarkable findings are the negative impacts on labor income for the sample of

veterans exposed to the program. Averaging across seven to nine years after their separation from

the Army, the PGIB lowered annual wages by about $1,400, or 3 percent of the mean. There are


43
  This estimate is produced by dividing the impact of a $1,000 increase in annual benefits offered on total benefits
used by the impact on bachelor's degree attainment ($1,700/.0035).

                                                        47
numerous potential explanations for this finding. One possibility is that this estimate constitutes a

medium-term effect, caused by the reduced labor market experience reflective of the schooling

gains that we find. This is not our preferred explanation because the negative impacts survive when

we control for years of experience, and the additional months of schooling are small relative to the

average reduction in earnings. Earlier cohorts of GI Bill-eligible veterans see temporary drops in

earnings upon school enrollment that last only 2 to 3 years, and these college-educated veterans

then quickly surpass their non-college-going peers in earnings. The same is not true for the PGIB

compliers, who continue to have lower earnings up to 9 years after separation.


       Instead, our hypothesis is that the negative earnings returns stem from two sources: the low

value-added of many of the schools chosen by veterans under the PGIB, and the generosity of the

policy, particularly the BAH, that induces veterans to forego valuable labor market experience in

favor of marginal human capital investments. It is particularly telling that the largest negative

effects of the program accrue to the least skilled veterans ­ measured by their military job

experience and AFQT scores ­ and that these are the groups to see the largest overall enrollment

increase, with much of that increase concentrated in for-profit institutions at the expense of

enrollments in four-year public institutions. By pursuing schooling of marginal value, veterans

may be missing out on opportunities to build occupation- or firm-specific human capital, or to

immediately put their Army-refined skills to work in the labor force.


       This interpretation is further supported by the effects of the PGIB for veterans who had

already elected to enroll in college by the time the additional subsidies became available. Rather

than being induced into college-going, the policy expansion keeps these veterans enrolled in

college for longer. Only at two-year and four-year public institutions, where the additional time

enrolled resulted in additional high-quality degrees, do veterans appear to benefit in terms of

                                                 48
increased earnings. Our findings motivate ongoing work such as Barr et al. (2019) that is providing

additional information about the average outcomes and net costs of various frequently-attended

colleges for separating veterans.


        Ours is the first study of the longer-run impacts of this large and prominent educational

subsidy program. Overall, we hope that our study contributes to a deeper understanding of how

impacts of college subsidies and college-going can vary a great deal across individuals: returns

can actually be negative on average for a large subset of those eligible for additional benefits.

These results might be informative as academics and policymakers consider broad-based policies

to make college free or subsidize retraining. Without additional targeting of policies or guidance

for potential students, it is not clear that these policies will generate positive returns.




                                                   49
                                           References

Angrist, Joshua D. "Lifetime earnings and the Vietnam era draft lottery: evidence from social
security administrative records." The American Economic Review (1990): 313-336.

Angrist, J. (1993): "The Effect of Veterans Benefits on Education and Earnings," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 10, 637­652.

Angrist, J., and S. Chen (2011): "Schooling and the Vietnam-Era GI Bill: Evidence
from the Draft Lottery," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2), 96­118.

Barr, A. (2015): "From the Battlefield to the Schoolyard: The Short-term Impact of the Post-9/11
GI Bill," Journal of Human Resources, 3, 580-613.

Barr, A. (2016): "Enroll or Enlist: Credit Constraints, College Aid, and the Military Enlistment
Margin," Economics of Education Review, 51, 61-78.

Barr, A. (2019): Fighting for education: Financial aid and degree attainment. Journal of Labor
Economics, 37(2), pp.509-544.

Barr, A., K. Bird, B. Castleman, and W. Skimmyhorn (2019a): A comparison of postsecondary
outcomes for Army service members, Veterans, and civilians. EdWorking Paper, (19-50).

Barr, A., K. Bird, B. Castleman, and W. Skimmyhorn (2019b): Soldier for Life, Student For Life
Pilot Program. Working Paper.

Borgschulte, M., & Martorell, P. (2018): "Paying to avoid recession: Using reenlistment to
estimate the cost of unemployment," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(3),
101-27.

Bound, J., and S. Turner (2002): "Going to war and going to college: Did World War
II and the GI Bill increase educational attainment for returning veterans?," Journal of
Labor Economics, 20(4), 784­815.

Castleman, Benjamin L., and Bridget Terry Long. "Looking beyond enrollment: The causal effect
of need-based grants on college access, persistence, and graduation." Journal of Labor
Economics 34, no. 4 (2016): 1023-1073.

Castleman, B. L., Murphy, F. X., & Skimmyhorn, W. L. (2019). "Marching Across Generations?
An Analysis of the Benefits Transfer Provision of the Post-9/11 GI Bill." Forthcoming, Journal
of Human Capital.

                                                50
Cellini, S. and N. Turner (2018): "Gainfully Employed? Assessing the Employment and Earnings
of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data," Journal of Human Resources, 53(3).


Dortch, Cassandria. "The Post-9/11 GI Bill: A Primer." Congressional Research Service Report
R42775, August 2018.

Dynarski, S. (2003): "Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on college
attendance and completion," American Economic Review, pp. 279­288.

Dynarski, S., J. Hyman, and D.W. Schanzenbach, D.W. (2013): "Experimental evidence on the
effect of childhood investments on postsecondary attainment and degree completion." Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 32(4), 692-717.

Fitzpatrick, M., and D. Jones (2012): "Higher Education, Merit-Based Scholarships and Post-
Baccalaureate Migration," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Greenberg, Milton. The GI bill: The law that changed America. Lickle Pub., 1997.

Harkin, T. (2014): "Is the New G.I. Bill Working?: For-Profit Colleges Increasing Veteran
Enrollment and Federal Funds," Discussion paper, Health, Education, Labor and Pension
Committee of the United States Senate.

Hout, M. (2012): "Social and economic returns to college education in the United States," Annual
Review of Sociology, 38, 379­400.

Keys, B. J., D. G. Pope, and J. C. Pope (2014): "Failure to Refinance," Discussion paper, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Lemieux, T., and D. Card (2001): "Education, earnings, and the Canadian GI Bill," Canadian
Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'´economique, 34(2), 313­344.

Lleras-Muney, A. (2005): "The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United
States," The Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), 189­221.

Lochner, L., and A. Monge-Naranjo (2011): "Credit Constraints in Education," Discussion paper,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Martorell, P., & Bergman, P. (2013). "Understanding the cost and quality of military-related
education benefit programs," RAND NATIONAL DEFENSE RESEARCH INST SANTA
MONICA CA.

                                               51
Mettler, Suzanne. Soldiers to citizens: The GI Bill and the making of the greatest generation.
Oxford University Press on Demand, 2005.

Oreopoulos, P., and U. Petronijevic (2013): "Making college worth it: A review of the returns to
higher education," The Future of Children, 23(1), 41­65.

Scott-Clayton, J. (2011): "On Money and Motivation A Quasi-Experimental Analysis of Financial
Incentives for College Achievement," Journal of Human Resources, 46(3), 614­646.

Seftor, N., and S. Turner (2002): "Back to school: Federal student aid policy and adult college
enrollment," Journal of Human Resources, pp. 336­352.

Simon, C., S. Negrusa, and J. Warner (2010): "Educational Benefits and Military Service: An
Analysis of Enlistment, Reenlistment, and Veterans' Benefit Usage 1991-2005," Economic
Inquiry, 48(4), 1008­1031.

Stanley, M. (2003): "College education and the midcentury GI Bills," The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(2), 671­708.

Steele, Jennifer L., Nicholas Salcedo, and James Coley. Service members in school: Military
veterans' experiences using the Post-9/11 GI Bill and pursuing postsecondary education. RAND
CORP SANTA MONICA CA, 2010.

Stinebrickner, T., and R. Stinebrickner (2012): "Learning about Academic Ability and the College
Dropout Decision," Journal of Labor Economics, 30(4), 707­748.

Turner, Sarah, and John Bound. "Closing the gap or widening the divide: The effects of the GI Bill
and World War II on the educational outcomes of black Americans." The Journal of Economic
History 63.1 (2003): 145-177.

U.S. Department of the Army. (2016). Personnel Separations: Active Duty Enlisted
Administrative Separations: Army Regulation 635-20.
https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/AR635-
200_Web_FINAL_18JAN2017.pdf

Yagan, Danny (2019). "Employment Hysteresis and the Great Recession." Journal of Political
Economy, 127(5).




                                               52
                 Figure 1: Post 9/11 Predicted Annual Average Benefit Level




Notes: The map illustrates predicted benefits in each home-of-record zip code. Predicted benefits are
computed as the sum of 9 times the average basic housing allowance and average tuition and fee benefits for
eligible veterans who initially enrolled in college between 2004­2008.




                                                    1
                                       Figure 2: Event Study for the Impact on Benefits Received under PGIB




                                                                                                                                       25
                           25
                           20
  Benefit Amount ($000s)




                                                                                                                                  Post - Pre
                           15




                                                                                                                                     20
                           10
                           5




                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                               15                  16              17                  18    19
                                                                                                                                                                     Under Post-9/11 GI Bill (10th-90th)
                           0




                                2002   2003   2004    2005    2006                           2007   2008    2009      2010                                                                          FP Fit
                                                        Separation Year                                                                                                       Linear Fit
                                                                                                                                               Slope = 2.038225727760515 - SE = .0010024304318694
                                              PGIB Benefits           MGIB + PGIB Benefits

                                                                                                                              (b) Relationship between Benefits Received and Pre-
                                 (a) Overall Impact on Eligible Veterans                                                      dicted Total Benefit Levels
                                                                                        20
                                                               Benefit Amount ($000s)
                                                                                        15
                                                                                        10
                                                                                        5
                                                                                        0




                                                                                             2002    2003          2004          2005               2006        2007         2008
                                                                                                                          Separation Year
                                                                                                            PGIB Benefits           MGIB + PGIB Benefits



                                                                                             (c) Impact on Veterans Already Enrolled
Notes: Panel (a) presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression that includes eligible and
ineligible veterans who separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code
level. Panel (b) presents the relationship between actual benefits received and predicted benefit levels. Circles indicate the
difference in average benefits received (including zeros) between the post (2008/09) and pre (2003/04) periods in $1,000 bins
of predicted PGIB benefits based on 3-digit home of record. The figure is restricted to homes of record between the 10th and
90th percentiles of predicted benefit levels. Panel (c) estimated coefficients from difference-in-difference event study regressions
from regressions that include eligible and ineligible veterans who first enrolled in college between 2002 and 2012. Enrollment
is defined as the first 1098-T observed within two years of Army separation. Benefits used are defined as total GI Bill benefits
used as of September 2019.




                                                                                                                             2
                                    Figure 3: Event Study for Enrollment

       .15




                                                                .15
       .1




                                                                .1
       .05




                                                                .05
       0




                                                                0
       -.05




                                                                -.05
              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                            Separation Year                                          Separation Year


                      (a) Within 1 Year                                       (b) Within 2 Years
       .15




                                                                .15
       .1




                                                                .1
       .05




                                                                .05
       0




                                                                0
       -.05




                                                                -.05




              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                            Separation Year                                          Separation Year


                      (c) Within 3 Years                                      (d) Within 4 Years
       .15




                                                                .15
       .1




                                                                .1
       .05




                                                                .05
       0




                                                                0
       -.05




                                                                -.05




              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                            Separation Year                                          Separation Year


                      (e) Within 5 Years                                       (f) Within 6 Years
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression that
includes eligible and ineligible veterans who separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. Regressions
include the following controls defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment,
marital status, and 3-digit home-of-record zip code. Regressions additionally include military grade at
separation. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.


                                                            3
                      Figure 4: Event Study Using Geographic Variation for Enrollment

       .01




                                                                    .01
       .005




                                                                    .005
       0




                                                                    0
       -.005




                                                                    -.005
       -.01




                                                                    -.01
               2002      2004        2006         2008   2010               2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                                Separation Year                                           Separation Year


                          (a) Within 1 Year                                        (b) Within 2 Years



                                                                    .01
       .01




                                                                    .005
       .005




                                                                    0
       0




                                                                    -.005
       -.005
       -.01




                                                                    -.01




               2002      2004        2006         2008   2010               2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                                Separation Year                                           Separation Year


                          (c) Within 3 Years                                       (d) Within 4 Years
       .01




                                                                    .01
       .005




                                                                    .005
       0




                                                                    0
       -.005




                                                                    -.005
       -.01




                                                                    -.01




               2002      2004        2006         2008   2010               2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                                Separation Year                                           Separation Year


                          (e) Within 5 Years                                        (f) Within 6 Years
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression that
includes eligible and ineligible veterans who separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. Regressions
include the following controls defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment,
marital status, and 3-digit home-of-record zip code. Regressions additionally include military grade at
separation. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.


                                                                4
                   Figure 5: Geographic Variation Event Study for College Persistence
  .6




                                                                 .8
                                                                 .6
  .4




                                                                 .4
  .2




                                                                 .2
  0




                                                                 0
  -.2




                                                                 -.2
         2002        2004        2006         2008    2010              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                            Separation Year                                           Separation Year


            (a) Benefit Months Used, Total Benefits          (b) Benefit Months Used, Basic Allowance for Housing
  .06




                                                                 .06
  .04




                                                                 .04
                                                                 .02
  .02




                                                                 0
  0




                                                                 -.02
  -.02




                                                                 -.04
  -.04




         2002        2004        2006         2008    2010              2002   2004        2006         2008   2010
                            Separation Year                                           Separation Year


                (c) Years Enrolled, Total Benefits               (d) Years Enrolled, Basic Allowance for Housing
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients on indicator variables for each year of separation interacted
with the generosity of a veteran's home or record predicted total benefits under the PGIB. Benefits are
defined as total GI Bill benefits used as of September 2019. The regression includes eligible veterans who
separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. Regressions include the following controls defined at the
time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, and 3-digit home-of-record zip
code. Regressions additionally include military grade at separation. Standard errors are clustered at the
3-digit zip code level.




                                                             5
                               Figure 6: Event Study for Degree Attainment
  .04




                                                              .015
  .03




                                                              .01
  .02




                                                              .005
  .01




                                                              0
  0




                                                              -.005
  -.01




         2002      2004        2006         2008   2010               2002      2004        2006         2008   2010
                          Separation Year                                              Separation Year


                (a) BA Degree Within 6 Years                                 (b) AA Degree within 3 Years
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression that
includes eligible and ineligible veterans who separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. Regressions
include the following controls defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment,
marital status, and 3-digit home-of-record zip code. Regressions additionally include military grade at
separation. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                          6
                     Figure 7: Event Study for Federal Tax Benefits for Higher Education




                                                                     200
       .02
       0




                                                                     100
       -.02




                                                                     0
       -.04




                                                                     -100
       -.06




                                                                     -200
       -.08




              2002        2004        2006         2008   2010              2002         2004        2006         2008   2010
                                 Separation Year                                                Separation Year


                (a) Takes Tuition and Fee Deduction                         (b) Tuition and Fee Deduction Amount
                                                                     300
       .04




                                                                     200
       .02




                                                                     100
       0
       -.02




                                                                     0
                                                                     -100
       -.04




              2002        2004        2006         2008   2010              2002         2004        2006         2008   2010
                                 Separation Year                                                Separation Year


                     (c) Takes Education Tax Credit                                (d) Education Tax Credit Amount
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression that
includes eligible and ineligible veterans who separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. Regressions
include the following controls defined at the time of enlistment: for gender, race, age, educational attainment,
marital status, 3-digit home-of-record zip code, and AFQT score interacted with enlistment year. Regressions
additionally include military grade at separation, separation month, and military specialization (PMOS)
interacted with enlistment year. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                                 7
                                       Figure 8: Event Study for Labor Income
       1000




                                                                     0
                                                                     -1000
       0
       -1000




                                                                     -2000
       -2000




                                                                     -3000
       -3000




                                                                     -4000
       -4000




                                                                     -5000




               2002       2004        2006         2008   2010               2002     2004        2006         2008   2010
                                 Separation Year                                             Separation Year


                      (a) 9 Years After Separation                           (b) Average 7­9 Years After Separation
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients on each year of separation year interacted with the gen-
erosity of a veteran's home of record predicted total benefits under the PGIB (see text for details). The
regression includes eligible veterans who separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. The 2002 inter-
action is omitted. Regressions include the following controls defined at the time of enlistment: for gender,
race, age, educational attainment, marital status, 3-digit home-of-record zip code, and AFQT score inter-
acted with enlistment year. Regressions additionally include military grade at separation, separation month,
and military specialization (PMOS) interacted with enlistment year. Standard errors are clustered at the
3-digit zip code level.




                                                                 8
         Figure 9: Impact of the PGIB Expansion on College Persistence (Already Enrolled)




                                                                        .3
  6




                                                                        .2
  4




                                                                        .1
  2




                                                                        0
                                                                        -.1
  0




                                                                        -.2
  -2




         2002   2003    2004       2005        2006   2007   2008              2002   2003     2004      2005        2006   2007   2008
                         Year of Initial Enrollment                                            Year of Initial Enrollment


                   (a) Benefit Months Used                                                   (b) Years Enrolled
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression. Panel
(a) includes eligible and ineligible veterans who enrolled in college (within 2 years of Army separation)
between 2002 and 2010. Panel (b) replaces the ineligible veteran control group with a civilian control group
enrolled at the same institutions between 2002 and 2010. Regressions include the following controls defined
at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, and institution fixed
effects. Regressions additionally include military grade at separation. Standard errors are clustered at the
3-digit zip code level.



     Figure 10: Impact of the PGIB Expansion on Degree Attainment (Already Enrolled)
  .06




                                                                        .06
  .04




                                                                        .04
  .02




                                                                        .02
  0




                                                                        0
  -.02




                                                                        -.02
  -.04




         2002   2003    2004       2005        2006   2007   2008              2002   2003     2004      2005        2006   2007   2008
                         Year of Initial Enrollment                                            Year of Initial Enrollment


                       (a) BA Attainment                                                     (b) AA Attainment
Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression that
includes eligible veterans and a civilian control group who enrolled in college between 2002 and 2010. Re-
gressions include the following controls defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational
attainment, marital status, and institution fixed effects. Regressions additionally include military grade at
separation. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.



                                                                    9
         Figure 11: Impact of the PGIB Expansion on Earnings (Already Enrolled)
            2000




                                                                               2000
            0




                                                                               0
            -2000




                                                                               -2000
            -4000




                                                                               -4000

                    2002   2003   2004      2005        2006   2007   2008             2002   2003   2004      2005        2006   2007   2008
                                  Year of Initial Enrollment                                         Year of Initial Enrollment


                    (a) 7 Years After Initial Enrollment                               (b) 8 Years After Initial Enrollment
                                                                               2000
            4000




                                                                               1000
            2000




                                                                               0
                                                                               -1000
            0




                                                                               -2000
            -2000




                                                                               -3000
            -4000




                                                                                       2002   2003   2004      2005        2006   2007   2008
                    2002   2003   2004      2005        2006   2007   2008                           Year of Initial Enrollment
                                  Year of Initial Enrollment
                                                                             (d) Average 7­9 Years After Initial Enroll-
                    (c) 9 Years After Initial Enrollment                     ment

Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients from a difference-in-difference event study regression that
includes eligible and ineligible veterans who enrolled in college (within 2 years of Army separation) between
2002 and 2010. Regressions include the following controls defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race,
age, educational attainment, marital status, and institution fixed effects. Regressions additionally include
military grade at separation. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                                         10
                                                                     Figure 12: Effect of GI Bill on Earnings and Enrollment Paths




                                                                                            8000




                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                  .2




                                                                                            6000




                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                  .15




                                                                                                                                                            log_earnings
                                                                                            4000
                                                                                 earnings
       enrolled




                                                                                                                                                                           .1
                  .1




                                                                                            2000




                                                                                                                                                                           0
                  .05




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                           -.1
                                                                                            -2000
11



                  0




                        1   2   3         4     5        6           7   8   9                      1   2   3        4     5        6           7   8   9                        1   2   3        4     5        6           7   8   9
                                      Years since separation                                                     Years since separation                                                       Years since separation
                                     Eligible   Eligible post-PGIB                                              Eligible   Eligible post-PGIB                                                Eligible   Eligible post-PGIB



                                    (a) Enrollment                                                              (b) Earnings                                                             (c) Log Earnings
     Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients on each year of separation year interacted with eligibility for the PGIB (see text for details). The
     regression includes veterans who separated from the Army between 2002 and 2010. Regressions include the following controls defined at the time of
     enlistment: for gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, 3-digit home-of-record zip code. Regressions additionally include military
     grade at separation and separation month. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
                                                Figure 13: Effect of GI Bill on Earnings and Enrollment Paths (Already Enrolled)




                                                                                                                                                                           .3




                  .15
                                                                                            6000
                                                                                                                                                                           .2




                                                                                            4000




                  .1
                                                                                                                                                                           .1




                                                                                            2000




       enrolled
                                                                                 earnings
                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                            0




                  .05
                                                                                                                                                            log_earnings
                                                                                                                                                                           -.1




                                                                                            -2000




                  0




12
                                                                                                                                                                           -.2




                                                                                            -4000
                        1   2   3         4     5        6           7   8   9                      1   2   3        4     5        6           7   8   9                        1   2   3        4     5        6           7   8   9
                                      Years since enrollment                                                     Years since enrollment                                                       Years since enrollment
                                     Eligible   Eligible post-PGIB                                              Eligible   Eligible post-PGIB                                                Eligible   Eligible post-PGIB



                                    (a) Enrollment                                                              (b) Earnings                                                             (c) Log Earnings
     Notes: The figure presents estimated coefficients on each year of separation year interacted with eligibility for the PGIB (see text for details). The
     regression includes eligible veterans who separated from the Army and first enrolled in college between 2002 and 2008. Regressions include the
     following controls defined at the time of enlistment: for gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status. Regressions additionally include
     military grade at separation and separation month, and institution fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                         Separation Year Analysis
                                                  Diff-in-Diff       Geographic Variation         Enrollment Year Analysis
                                                Mean       SD          Mean          SD            Mean            SD
   Demographics, at Enlistment from Army
      Age                                       24.36     3.34         24.57        3.33           24.12          3.06
      Male                                       0.80     0.40          0.78        0.41            0.76          0.43
      Black                                      0.18     0.38          0.16        0.37            0.19          0.39
      Hispanic                                  0.11      0.32         0.12         0.32           0.11           0.32
      Married at separation                      0.37     0.48         0.38         0.49            0.32          0.47
      Entry AFQT (percentile)                   58.32     18.57        59.02        18.73          61.78          18.56
      GED                                       0.15      0.35         0.12         0.33            0.09          0.29
      High-school dropout                        0.01     0.10         0.01         0.10           0.01           0.10
      High-school degree                        0.78      0.41         0.80         0.40           0.83           0.38
      Some college                              0.05      0.22         0.05         0.22           0.05           0.22
   GI Bill Utilization
      Eligible                                   0.83      0.37         1.00         0.00          0.84            0.37
      Uses GI Bill                              0.64      0.48         0.75          0.43          0.82            0.38
      PGIB/MGIB benefits used (000s)            24.86     31.42        29.12        32.30          32.47          32.66
      PGIB housing benefits used (000s)         7.61      13.22        8.90         13.93          6.58           11.69
      PGIB tuition benefits used (000s)         6.24      11.69         7.28        12.34          5.63           10.71
      Months of PGIB/MGIB Used                  14.65     14.07        17.12        13.79          19.24          13.43
   Enrollment Outcomes
      Enroll Four-Year Public                    0.17      0.38        0.19          0.39          0.27           0.44
      Enroll Four-Year Private                   0.05      0.21        0.05          0.22          0.06           0.23
      Enroll Two-Year Public                     0.27      0.44        0.29          0.46          0.50           0.50
      Enroll For-Profit                          0.15      0.36        0.16          0.37          0.17           0.37
      Enrolls                                    0.55      0.50        0.60          0.49          1.00           0.00
      Earns Bachelor within 6 Years              0.09      0.29        0.11          0.31          0.32           0.47
      Earns Associates within 3 Years            0.04      0.19        0.04          0.21          0.25           0.44
      Education Tax Credits                      554      1,172        621          1,233          266            541
      Tuition and Fee Deduction                  267      1,047        301          1,112          294            950
      Takes Education Tax Credits                0.31     0.46         0.34         0.48           0.28           0.45
      Takes Tuition and Fee Deduction            0.10      0.30        0.11          0.31          0.12           0.33
   Longer-Run Outcomes
      Wage and Salary Income                   42,503 40,733          46,497        41,512        35,555         30,801
      Total Income                             42,503 40,733          46,497        41,512        50,252         42,884
      Adjusted Gross Income                    42,131 40,446          46,086        41,228        49,689         42,561
      Married                                   0.40     0.49          0.44          0.50          0.44           0.50
      Number of Kids                            0.91     1.18          0.97          1.20          0.95           1.18
   Observations                                    121,323                     101,277                      59,208


 Notes: The table includes summary statistics for the three estimation samples used in our analysis. Columns (1)­(4) present
summary statistics for the estimation samples used in the separation year analysis. The first two columns include all veterans
who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). The second two columns include only
eligible veterans who separated from the Army in the pre- and post-periods. Column (5)­(6) present summary statistics for
the estimation samples used in the enrollment year analysis who initially enrolled in college in 2003/04 (pre-period) or 2007/08
(post-period).




                                                              13
                            Table 2: Impact of the PGIB on Benefits Received

                                   (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                                      Impact on Veterans Already Enrolled
                            Overall Impact             All      Four-Yr Public      Four-Yr Private      CC         For-Profit


                                                 Panel A: Eligible vs. Ineligible

   Post * Eligible             7.1021***           11.827***        14.680***         15.824***       11.860***     8.296***
                                (0.3018)            (0.653)          (1.100)           (2.418)         (0.750)       (1.306)
   R-squared                     0.1783              0.190            0.270             0.307           0.166         0.154
   Observations                 121,323              59,208          16,002             3,332           29,802        9,982

                                              Panel B: Geographic Variation, BAH

   Post * BAH                  2.3018***            0.969***        0.678***           1.240***        1.022***     1.420***
                                (0.1500)             (0.140)         (0.221)            (0.421)         (0.223)      (0.485)
   R-squared                     0.1051               0.118           0.189              0.259           0.101        0.080

                                         Panel C: Geographic Variation, Tuition and Fees

   Post * TF                   0.6678***             0.154*         0.635***           0.670***         0.574*      0.795***
                                (0.2122)             (0.087)         (0.199)            (0.188)         (0.347)      (0.241)
   R-squared                     0.1019               0.116           0.189              0.255           0.100        0.079

                                          Panel C: Geographic Variation, Total Benefits

   Post * Total Benefits       1.7062***            0.372***        0.711***           0.635***        0.967***     0.779***
                                (0.1159)             (0.067)         (0.173)            (0.147)         (0.142)      (0.186)
   R-squared                     0.1046               0.117           0.190              0.259           0.102        0.080
   Observations                 101,273              49,472          13,883              2,840          24,650        8,050


 Notes: The table presents the estimated impact of the GI Bill expansion for eligible veterans from separate regressions. Column
(1) includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period): the top row presents
the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment period, and the bottom three rows
present estimates from regressions that include only eligible veterans. Columns (2)­(6) include veterans who initially enrolled in
college after their Army separation in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2007/2008 (post-period): the top row presents the estimated
coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment period, and the bottom three rows present
estimates from regressions that include only eligible veterans. Enrollment is defined as the first 1098-T observed within two
years of Army separation. All regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age,
educational attainment, and marital status. Regressions in column (1) also include home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects,
and standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level. Regressions in columns (2)­(6) also include institution fixed
effects, and standard errors are clustered at the institution level.




                                                               14
                                 Table 3: Impact of the PGIB on Enrollment

                                           (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)          (5)
                                         Enrolled     4-Yr. Public       4-Yr. Private         CC        For-Profit


                                              Panel A: Eligible vs. Ineligible

            Post * Eligible               0.0025        -0.0163***           0.0020          0.0072      0.0150***
                                         (0.0072)        (0.0044)           (0.0022)        (0.0058)      (0.0048)
            Observations                 121,323          121,323           121,323         121,323       121,323
            R-squared                     0.1062          0.0889             0.0316          0.0823        0.0403

                                          Panel B: Geographic Variation, BAH

            Post * BAH                    0.0015          0.0010            0.0021**         0.0015        -0.0001
                                         (0.0020)        (0.0015)           (0.0009)        (0.0021)      (0.0014)
            Observations                 101,273         101,273             101,273        101,273       101,273
            R-squared                     0.0673          0.0791             0.0302          0.0751         0.0402

                                   Panel C: Geographic Variation, Tuition and Fees

            Post * TF                    0.0046**         0.0018             0.0011          0.0020        -0.0016
                                         (0.0022)        (0.0017)           (0.0010)        (0.0021)      (0.0015)
            Observations                  101,273        101,273            101,273         101,273       101,273
            R-squared                     0.0674          0.0791             0.0301          0.0751        0.0402

                                    Panel D: Geographic Variation, Total Benefits

            Post * Total Benefits        0.0029*          0.0018            0.0017**         0.0017        -0.0011
                                         (0.0016)        (0.0013)           (0.0007)        (0.0016)      (0.0012)
            Observations                 101,273         101,273             101,273        101,273       101,273
            R-squared                     0.0674          0.0791             0.0302          0.0751        0.0402

 Notes: The top panel presents the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment
period. The regression includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period).
The bottom three rows present estimates from regressions that include only eligible veterans who separated from the Army
in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). All regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of
enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, and home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                               15
             Table 4: Impact of PGIB on College Persistence and Degree Attainment

                                                (1)                  (2)               (3)              (4)
                                            Months Used        Years Enrolled       BA Degree        AA Degree


                                              Panel A: Eligible vs. Ineligible

               Post * Eligible                1.4365***           0.1749***          0.0120***        0.0040**
                                               (0.1340)            (0.0246)           (0.0028)        (0.0018)
               Observations                    121,323             121,323            121,323         121,323
               R-squared                        0.2390              0.1344             0.0700          0.0265

                                          Panel B: Geographic Variation, BAH

               Post * BAH                     0.5042***           0.0556***          0.0047***         0.0011
                                               (0.0505)            (0.0083)           (0.0013)        (0.0008)
               Observations                    101,273             101,273            101,273         101,273
               R-squared                        0.1096              0.0923             0.0613          0.0242

                                   Panel C: Geographic Variation, Tuition and Fees

               Post * TF                        -0.0191              0.0149            0.0011          0.0005
                                               (0.0572)             (0.0091)          (0.0014)        (0.0008)
               Observations                    101,273              101,273           101,273         101,273
               R-squared                        0.1087               0.0917            0.0612          0.0241

                                    Panel D: Geographic Variation, Total Benefits

               Post * Total Benefits          0.2894***           0.0391***          0.0035***         0.0010
                                               (0.0410)            (0.0062)           (0.0010)        (0.0006)
               Observations                    101,273             101,273            101,273         101,273
               R-squared                        0.1092              0.0921             0.0613          0.0242

 Notes: The top panel presents the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment
period. The regression includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period).
The bottom three rows present estimates from regressions that include only eligible veterans who separated from the Army
in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). All regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of
enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, and home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                               16
                        Table 5: Impact of the PGIB on Education Tax Benefits

                                             (1)                    (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                      Takes Tuition and         Tuition and         Takes Education        Education
                                       Fee Deduction           Fee Deduction          Tax Credit           Tax Credit


                                              Panel A: Eligible vs. Ineligible

         Post * Eligible                   -0.058***             -241.340***            0.020***           199.716***
                                            (0.003)                (11.202)              (0.006)            (12.413)
         Observations                       121,323                121,323               121,323             121,323
         R-squared                           0.038                   0.040                0.079               0.081

                                          Panel B: Geographic Variation, BAH

         Post * BAH                          0.002                  9.930**               0.000               7.366
                                            (0.001)                 (4.250)              (0.002)             (5.168)
         Observations                       101,273                 101,273              101,273             101,273
         R-squared                           0.033                   0.037                0.059               0.070

                                   Panel C: Geographic Variation, Tuition and Fees

         Post * TF                           -0.000               -11.796**               0.001              9.063*
                                            (0.001)                (4.849)               (0.002)             (5.349)
         Observations                       101,273                101,273               101,273             101,273
         R-squared                            0.033                 0.037                 0.059               0.070

                                    Panel D: Geographic Variation, Total Benefits

         Post * Total Benefits               0.001                   0.365                0.000              8.942**
                                            (0.001)                 (3.492)              (0.002)             (4.308)
         Observations                       101,273                 101,273              101,273             101,273
         R-squared                           0.033                   0.037                0.059               0.070

 Notes: The top panel presents the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment
period. The regression includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period).
The bottom three rows present estimates from regressions that include only eligible veterans who separated from the Army
in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). All regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of
enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, and home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                               17
                          Table 6: Impact of the PGIB on Longer-Run Earnings

                                         (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)            (5)
   Years Since Separation                 6                  7                   8                 9          Mean(7,8,9)


                                               Panel A: Eligible vs. Ineligible

   Post * Eligible                -3,012.860***       -1,950.566***      -1,365.496***       -907.923**       -1,407.995***
                                    (345.580)           (350.778)          (362.072)          (383.691)         (345.555)
   Observations                      121,323             121,323            121,323            121,323           121,323
   R-squared                          0.133               0.132              0.135              0.136             0.149

                                          Panel B: Geographic Variation, BAH

   Post * BAH                      -363.816***           -20.418            207.069*         308.023***          164.891
                                    (102.997)           (113.387)           (111.735)         (116.085)         (107.393)
   Observations                      101,273             101,273             101,273           101,273           101,273
   R-squared                          0.114               0.113               0.116             0.118             0.128

                                   Panel C: Geographic Variation, Tuition and Fees

   Post * TF                         203.721*           219.229*            279.875**         261.533**         253.546**
                                     (115.346)          (116.440)           (114.613)         (116.265)         (108.364)
   Observations                       101,273            101,273             101,273           101,273           101,273
   R-squared                           0.114              0.113               0.116             0.118             0.128

                                    Panel D: Geographic Variation, Total Benefits

   Post * Total Benefits              -92.182            118.814           279.503***        328.545***        242.287***
                                     (91.223)            (95.130)           (91.991)          (96.183)          (89.418)
   Observations                      101,273             101,273             101,273          101,273            101,273
   R-squared                           0.114               0.113              0.116             0.118             0.128

 Notes: The top panel presents the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment
period. The regression includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period).
The bottom three rows present estimates from regressions that include only eligible veterans who separated from the Army
in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). All regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of
enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, and home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                               18
                               Table 7: Impact of the PGIB on Log(Earnings)

                                                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
               Years Since Separation              6             7            8            9        Mean(7,8,9)


                                              Panel A: Eligible vs. Ineligible

               Post * Eligible                 -0.042*        -0.024        -0.002       -0.025         -0.028
                                               (0.024)       (0.023)       (0.023)      (0.024)        (0.024)
               Observations                    98,938        98,106        97,585       97,271         106,806
               R-squared                        0.103         0.103         0.108        0.108           0.108

                                          Panel B: Geographic Variation, BAH

               Post * BAH                     -0.014***     -0.012**        -0.001       0.000          -0.003
                                               (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.004)        (0.005)
               Observations                     81,887       81,148        80,727       80,601         87,796
               R-squared                        0.099         0.095          0.100       0.102           0.102

                                   Panel C: Geographic Variation, Tuition and Fees

               Post * TF                        0.009        0.009*       0.014***     0.011**          0.006
                                               (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.006)
               Observations                    81,887        81,148        80,727       80,601         87,796
               R-squared                        0.099         0.095         0.100       0.102           0.102

                                    Panel D: Geographic Variation, Total Benefits

               Post * Total Benefits            -0.003        -0.002       0.007*        0.006          0.002
                                               (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)
               Observations                    81,887        81,148        80,727       80,601         87,796
               R-squared                        0.099         0.095         0.100        0.102          0.102

 Notes: The top panel presents the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment
period. The regression includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period).
The bottom three rows present estimates from regressions that include only eligible veterans who separated from the Army
in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). All regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of
enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital status, and home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                               19
            Table 8: Impact of the PGIB on Education Outcomes (Already Enrolled)

                                              (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)
                                        Years Enrolled       Months Used        BA Degree        AA Degree


                                                    Panel A: All Sectors

                   Eligible * Post          0.195***            3.796***          0.031***        0.027***
                                             (0.038)             (0.282)           (0.009)         (0.010)
                   Observations              59,208              59,208            59,208          59,208
                   R-squared                  0.123               0.269             0.157           0.103

                                                Panel B: Four-Year Public

                   Eligible * Post            0.094             4.424***          0.070***          0.010
                                             (0.092)             (0.555)           (0.022)         (0.022)
                   Observations              16,002              16,002            16,002          16,002
                   R-squared                  0.095               0.258             0.141           0.106

                                                Panel C: Four-Year Private

                   Eligible * Post            0.142             5.066***            -0.011          0.014
                                             (0.158)             (0.987)           (0.040)         (0.035)
                   Observations               3,332               3,332              3,332          3,332
                   R-squared                  0.182               0.316             0.225           0.175

                                               Panel D: Community College

                   Eligible * Post          0.244***            4.134***          0.031***         0.024*
                                             (0.055)             (0.306)           (0.012)         (0.013)
                   Observations              29,802              29,802            29,802          29,802
                   R-squared                  0.116               0.263             0.083           0.081

                                                     Panel E: For-Profit

                   Eligible * Post          0.220***            2.206***            0.004         0.068***
                                             (0.080)             (0.649)           (0.012)         (0.021)
                   Observations               9,982               9,982             9,982           9,982
                   R-squared                  0.150               0.282             0.131           0.122

Notes: The table presents estimates from difference-in-difference regressions that include eligible and ineligible veterans who
first enrolled in college in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). The sample is restricted to veterans who enrolled
within two years of their Army separation. All regressions include institution fixed effects along with the following controls,
defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, and marital status. Standard errors are clustered
at the institution level.




                                                               20
     Table 9: Impact of the PGIB Expansion on Earnings Outcomes (Already Enrolled)

                                            (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)
      Years Since Enrollment                 6                 7               8                 9           Mean(7,8,9)


                                                     Panel A: All Sectors

      Post * Eligible                    -675.961          502.342        1,030.538*       1,235.120**         922.667*
                                        (510.221)         (549.525)       (541.571)         (597.682)          (521.102)
      Observations                        59,208            59,208          59,208            59,208             59,208
      R-squared                            0.129            0.131            0.136            0.139              0.149

                                                  Panel B: Four-Year Public

      Post * Eligible                   -146.072          1,959.420        1,230.128         843.090          1,344.213
                                       (1,215.941)       (1,224.443)      (1,266.498)      (1,460.635)       (1,216.018)
      Observations                        16,002            16,002           16,002           16,002            16,002
      R-squared                           0.116             0.125            0.129            0.136             0.144

                                                  Panel C: Four-Year Private

      Post * Eligible                   -349.195           568.209         -2,759.824       -3,284.430        -1,825.349
                                       (3,146.163)       (3,391.169)      (3,510.453)      (3,121.059)       (3,130.020)
      Observations                        3,332             3,332             3,332            3,332             3,332
      R-squared                           0.214             0.208             0.218            0.206             0.225

                                               Panel D: Community College

      Post * Eligible                    -795.044          195.308         1,181.707      2,236.907***        1,204.641*
                                        (685.284)         (710.429)        (791.168)        (831.092)         (727.945)
      Observations                        29,802            29,802           29,802           29,802            29,802
      R-squared                            0.113            0.113            0.120            0.121              0.129

                                                     Panel E: For-Profit

      Post * Eligible                -2,738.933***        -936.534          244.831         -1,091.870          -594.524
                                       (978.063)         (1,213.524)       (833.663)        (825.606)          (865.724)
      Observations                       9,982              9,982            9,982             9,982              9,982
      R-squared                          0.163              0.153            0.149             0.148              0.164

Notes: The table presents estimates from difference-in-difference regressions that include eligible and ineligible veterans who
first enrolled in college in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). The sample is restricted to veterans who enrolled
within two years of their Army separation. All regressions include institution fixed effects along with the following controls,
defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, and marital status. Standard errors are clustered
at the institution level.




                                                               21
                      Table 10: Heterogeneity in Impacts of PGIB on Enrollment

                                (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)                      (5)
                              Enrolled     4-Yr. Public      4-Yr. Private      Community College          For-Profit


                                       Panel A: Above AFQT vs. Below AFQT

         High AFQT             -0.0019      -0.0270***          0.0093**                0.0061              0.0152**
                              (0.0111)       (0.0076)           (0.0036)               (0.0092)             (0.0072)
         Observations           59,829        59,829             59,829                 59,829               59,829
         R-squared              0.1071        0.1024             0.0390                 0.0935               0.0353

         Low AFQT              0.0063        -0.0109**           -0.0043                0.0043             0.0222***
                              (0.0094)        (0.0049)          (0.0027)               (0.0070)             (0.0068)
         Observations          60,903          60,903            60,903                 60,903               60,903
         R-squared             0.1159          0.0795             0.0393                0.0858               0.0556

                             Panel B: High-, Medium-, and Low- Skilled Military Jobs

         PMOS Type 0           0.0052       -0.0274***           0.0045                 0.0093             0.0261***
                              (0.0102)       (0.0062)           (0.0031)               (0.0086)             (0.0073)
         Observations          53,520         53,520             53,520                 53,520               53,520
         R-squared             0.1244         0.1040             0.0390                 0.1002               0.0586

         PMOS Type 1          -0.0428*       -0.0309**           -0.0039                -0.0114              -0.0093
                              (0.0237)        (0.0140)          (0.0068)               (0.0174)             (0.0170)
         Observations          17,147          17,147            17,147                  17,147               17,147
         R-squared             0.1218          0.1226             0.0741                 0.1143               0.0716

         PMOS Type 2           -0.0102         0.0013            -0.0092                0.0218               -0.0113
                              (0.0257)        (0.0160)          (0.0082)               (0.0219)             (0.0164)
         Observations           17,433         17,433            17,433                 17,433                17,433
         R-squared             0.1269          0.1269             0.0761                0.0990                0.0700

 Notes: The table presents the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment period.
The regression includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). All
regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital
status, and home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                              22
            Table 11: Heterogeneity in Impacts of PGIB on Attainment and Earnings

                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)                (5)                 (6)
                         Years         Months        Bachelor's      Associate's         Earnings            Earnings
                        Enrolled        Used          Degree          Degree              Year 9          Mean(Years 7-9)


                                       Panel A: Above AFQT vs. Below AFQT

  High AFQT            0.1294***      1.4631***       0.0098**         0.0053            -301.2578            -891.4890*
                        (0.0393)       (0.2041)       (0.0049)        (0.0033)          (597.0762)            (537.1265)
  Observations           59,829         59,829         59,829          59,829              59,829               59,829
  R-squared              0.1280         0.2487         0.0827          0.0341              0.1335               0.1450

  Low AFQT             0.2071***      1.3592***      0.0121***         0.0026        -1,573.2520***        -1,961.9019***
                        (0.0307)       (0.1935)       (0.0027)        (0.0019)         (475.8830)            (428.9670)
  Observations           60,903         60,903         60,903          60,903            60,903                60,903
  R-squared              0.1614         0.2463         0.0532          0.0316            0.1343                0.1491

                             Panel B: High-, Medium-, and Low- Skilled Military Jobs

  PMOS Type 0          0.1924***      1.4573***      0.0108***        0.0044*        -1,657.6737***        -2,028.8645***
                        (0.0345)       (0.1880)       (0.0038)        (0.0024)         (551.9426)            (488.3639)
  Observations           53,520         53,520         53,520          53,520            53,520                53,520
  R-squared              0.1472         0.2608         0.0768          0.0374            0.1379                0.1496

  PMOS Type 1            0.0632         0.5889         -0.0012         -0.0028         -845.9022              -1,753.5993
                        (0.0781)       (0.4040)       (0.0080)        (0.0054)        (1,307.4936)           (1,160.2719)
  Observations           17,147         17,147          17,147         17,147            17,147                  17,147
  R-squared              0.1495         0.2465          0.0994          0.0687           0.1859                  0.2020

  PMOS Type 2            0.0186        1.1634**        0.0157          0.0100          1,259.0071              530.6571
                        (0.0897)       (0.4841)       (0.0105)        (0.0080)        (1,305.4273)           (1,169.3605)
  Observations           17,433         17,433         17,433          17,433            17,433                 17,433
  R-squared              0.1622         0.2876         0.1230          0.0677            0.1896                 0.2018

 Notes: The table presents the estimated coefficient on the interaction between eligibility status and the post-treatment period.
The regression includes veterans who separated from the Army in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). All
regressions include the following controls, defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, marital
status, and home of record 3-digit zip code fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit zip code level.




                                                              23
Table 12: Heterogeneity in Impacts of PGIB on Education and Earnings (Already Enrolled)

                                (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)
                               Years        Months       Bachelors      Associates        Earnings        Earnings
                              Enrolled       Used         Degree         Degree            Year 9        Mean(7,8,9)


                                              Panel A: High vs. Low AFQT

         High AFQT            0.243***      4.498***      0.041***        0.023*        1,902.777**       1,391.834*
                               (0.051)       (0.352)       (0.012)        (0.013)        (910.125)         (824.813)
         Observations          33,567        33,567        33,567         33,567           33,567            33,567
         R-squared              0.128         0.293         0.171          0.127           0.144             0.152

         Low AFQT             0.140***      2.978***        0.017        0.033***          550.941          293.836
                               (0.054)       (0.388)       (0.011)        (0.013)         (859.846)        (733.090)
         Observations          24,921        24,921        24,921         24,921            24,921           24,921
         R-squared              0.158         0.275         0.150          0.115            0.152            0.165

                              Panel B: High-, Medium-, and Low-Skilled Military Jobs

         PMOS Type 0          0.178***      3.249***       0.023*          0.018           -31.734           75.658
                               (0.055)       (0.412)       (0.013)        (0.014)         (944.456)        (815.353)
         Observations          24,763        24,763        24,763         24,763            24,763           24,763
         R-squared              0.148         0.304         0.172          0.125            0.161            0.168

         PMOS Type 1            0.072       3.583***       0.053**         0.010         1,379.969          460.488
                               (0.119)       (0.812)       (0.025)        (0.024)       (1,640.183)       (1,422.202)
         Observations           8,792         8,792         8,792          8,792           8,792             8,792
         R-squared              0.190         0.316         0.208          0.165           0.196             0.212

         PMOS Type 2            0.036       4.806***       0.057*          0.001         1,752.203          916.922
                               (0.109)       (0.775)       (0.030)        (0.029)       (1,780.676)       (1,709.838)
         Observations           8,250         8,250         8,250          8,250           8,250             8,250
         R-squared              0.178         0.338         0.219          0.163           0.222             0.233

Notes: The table presents estimates from difference-in-difference regressions that include eligible and ineligible veterans who
first enrolled in college in 2003/2004 (pre-period) and 2008/2009 (post-period). The sample is restricted to veterans who enrolled
within two years of their Army separation. All regressions include institution fixed effects along with the following controls,
defined at the time of enlistment: gender, race, age, educational attainment, and marital status. Standard errors are clustered
at the institution level.




                                                               24
Table 13: Oaxaca Decomposition of the PGIB Effect on Earnings Nine Years Since Separa-
tion

                                                Diff-in-Diff Effect              Beta, Pre-Period            Portion Explained
 Earnings                                               ($907.92)
 Enroll Years                                               0.16                          241.26                     38.12
 Work Experience Years                                     -0.19                         3445.25                    -658.04
 Work Experience Squared                                   -2.72                          271.71                    -740.13
 Four-Year Public Within 2 Years                           -0.02                         5167.82                     -82.69
 Four-Year Private Within 2 Years                          0.002                         3416.74                       6.83
 Two-Year Public Within 2 Years                           0.007                          2327.17                     16.29
 For-Profit Within 2 Years                                0.015                           684.25                      10.26
 Online Institution Within 2 Years                        -0.005                         -675.57                       3.38
 Institution Grad Rate Less than 30%                      -0.001                         446.564                      -0.45
 Bachelors Degree within 6 Years                          0.012                          11054.2                     132.65
 Associates Degree Within 3 Years                         0.004                          1120.18                       4.48
                                                                                                                  ($1,269.29)

 Notes: Column (1) shows the estimated effect of PGIB on earnings and each of the other outcomes: years of enrollment, work
experience (level and square) and institution choice within the first two years since separating. Column (2) contains the OLS
coefficients from earnings regressed on those other outcomes (explanators) during the pre-period. Column (3) multiplies the
OLS effect of the explanator (column 2) by the PGIB effect on the explanator (column 1).




                                                            25
                                      Table 14: Forecast Earnings Effect Differential as a Result of PGIB Expansion


                   Parameters                                            Scenario                                                                 NPV Earnings
                                                                                                                                                  Difference
                   Discount Rate                              3%         Forecast years 8-30 w/ returns to experience                                      $   (38,773)
                   Return to Experience                    7.30%         Experience plus additional 9% return to Yrs Education                             $   (31,228)
                   Return to Experience Squared           -0.23%         Experience plus additional 25% return to Yrs Education                            $   (17,547)
                   Difference Months Education               1.90        Experience plus additional 20% return to B.A. Completion                          $   (37,507)
26




                   Difference BA Completion                  0.01
                   Difference Experience Year 7             -0.19
                   Fraction in Labor Force                   0.84
                   Years since Sep in Forecast                 30

      Notes: The table illustrates the estimated effect of the PGIB on net present value (NPV) of earnings under different assumptions on the returns to additional educational
     attainment. We parameterize the return to additional experience using the estimated coefficient on experience in the American Community Survey (ACS) for veterans age 25-55
     (7.3 percent pear year of experience). Because we estimate minimal effect of work experience squared among veterans in the ACS, we set the coefficient equal to the civilian
     equivalent (-0.23 percent). Effects on educational attainment and experience are estimated using the basic difference-in-differences specification 7 years post-separation. To be
     conservative, returns to additional education are assumed to occur after year 7, despite these returns potentially having already shown up by this point.
