                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOUSEHOLD FINANCIAL TRANSACTION DATA

                                        Scott R. Baker
                                        Lorenz Kueng

                                     Working Paper 29027
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29027


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




The authors wish to thank Kwok Yan Chiu and Weijia Zhao for their assistance and Brian Baugh,
Anthony J. Cookson, Jonathan Parker, and Scott Schuh for their comments and questions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Scott R. Baker and Lorenz Kueng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Financial Transaction Data
Scott R. Baker and Lorenz Kueng
NBER Working Paper No. 29027
July 2021
JEL No. C81,D14,G5,H31

                                         ABSTRACT

The growth of the availability and use of detailed household financial transaction microdata has
dramatically expanded the ability of researchers to understand both household decision-making as
well as aggregate fluctuations across a wide range of fields. This class of transaction data is
derived from a myriad of sources including financial institutions, FinTech apps, and payment
intermediaries. We review how these detailed data have been utilized in finance and economics
research and the benefits they enable beyond more traditional measures of income, spending, and
wealth. We discuss the future potential for this flexible class of data in firm-focused research,
real-time policy analysis, and macro statistics.


Scott R. Baker
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Lorenz Kueng
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Suite 4394
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
lorenz.kueng@gmail.com
1    Introduction
Detailed measurement of consumption expenditures is a key ingredient for questions spanning a
range of fields across economics and finance. To address such questions, researchers have typically
turned to government surveys of households, `scanner' data with product-level consumer good
purchases, or imputing consumption as the residual of the budget constraint using administrative
tax records. These approaches each had disadvantages such as high costs, small sample sizes, short
panels, being slow to update, covering only portions of the household budget, or being prone to
measurement error.
    Recent years have seen a surge in research taking advantage of a new class of data that is cen-
tered around comprehensive panels of financial transactions from credit, debit, and checking ac-
counts across many thousands or even millions of individuals. Derived from sources such as banks,
financial aggregator services (eg. FinTech apps), and credit card companies, the data are often able
to be linked to complete views of a households finances across many types of accounts and con-
taining information on both detailed flows as well as high frequency balances. Researchers have
employed this data to answer questions about consumption behavior, household balance sheets,
and the response to income fluctuations or government policy changes and have greatly enhanced
the understanding of heterogeneity in income, balance sheets, beliefs, preferences, and household
decision-making in general.
    The data has seen such a swift uptake among researchers due to a host of advantages it offers
relative to existing survey, scanner, or administrative data. Massive sample sizes, often in the
millions of individuals, offer increased statistical precision and the ability to drill down on small
sub-samples of interest. Moreover, the granularity of the data and the fact that it is often paired
with other financial accounts owned by the individual mean that questions can be asked about the
entirety of the household balance sheet or financial flows. Researchers can better control for any
number of confounding variables and reject alternative explanations for a given question.
    As one example of the rapid proliferation of research in this area, Figure 1 displays the trend
in papers utilizing transaction data over time in two of the major repositories for economics and
finance research: the National Bureau of Economic Research's (NBER) working paper series and
the Social Science Research Network (SSRN) working paper repository. In both cases, there has



                                                 1
been a steady growth in papers utilizing this class of data over the past two decades. Notably,
2020 saw the most dramatic growth in papers written using transaction data as researchers took
advantage of the granularity of this data and the speed with which it can be accessed to quickly
write high impact papers about the COVID-19 pandemic's economic impacts on households and
businesses. This new type of data also allowed researchers to quickly evaluate some of the fiscal,
monetary, and regulatory interventions enacted all over the world.
   As this class of data has increased in availability, researchers have also worked to reduce many
of its inherent disadvantages by linking transaction databases with external credit records, con-
ducting surveys of users, or matching to administrative data. Such external linkages increase the
ability of researchers to gain qualitative data about a household's characteristics, beliefs, and fi-
nancial resources.
   A first wave of research using direct access to consumer's financial transactions was built
around individual brokerage accounts. A range of papers focused on behavioral finance ques-
tions about investors, such as Odean (1998), Barber & Odean (2000), Barber & Odean (2001),
and Choi et al. (2001). With transaction level brokerage data, researchers could better understand
how retail investors made trading decisions, uncovering a number of important stylized facts about
heterogeneity across observable types (eg. gender or trading propensities) and how many investors
seemed to make systematic mistakes that reduced their overall returns.
   Detailed transaction-level data from consumers' bank accounts and credit cards was later to
appear, though some work utilized bank and credit card data aggregated to individual-month lev-
els, such as Agarwal et al. (2007). Beginning in the early 2010s, additional research began to
appear that utilized transaction data across large sample sizes that was also linked to bank account
balances.
   Many of these papers aimed to use the new-found level of granularity to provide additional
insights into the relationship between income and consumption at a household or individual level.
For instance, in one of the first papers to leverage transaction level spending data, Gelman et al.
(2014) showed that households responded to the receipt of predictable income by increasing spend-
ing in the days immediately after a paycheck, demonstrating that many of the classic models of
consumption smoothing may break down at high-frequency levels.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the sources of trans-


                                                 2
action data as well as common linkages made to transaction-level data. Section 3 compares
transaction-level data to some alternative sources of consumption or household financial flows
data. Section 4 details some of the research that has taken advantage of transaction-level data.
Section 5 discusses emerging strands of research utilizing transaction-level data across a number
of fields and Section 6 concludes.



2    Sources of Payments Data
While earlier work such as Barber & Odean (2000) and Choi et al. (2001) utilized data on finan-
cial transactions obtained from brokerage firms, recent transaction data have been derived from a
multitude of sources and has expanded to cover all sorts of financial accounts.
    One major source of transaction data has been banking institutions. Researchers around the
world have been able to form partnerships with both brick and mortar banks (eg. Aydin (2019),
Ganong & Noel (2019), Andersen et al. (2020b)) as well as solely online banks (eg. Loos et al.
(2020), Baker et al. (2021), D'Acunto et al. (2019)) to gain access to anonymized transaction-level
data from their customers. Most banks offer a wide range of services to customers such as savings
and checking accounts, debit and credit cards, and mortgages and other lending facilities. Given
this span of services, these partnerships offer the possibility of not only observing comprehensive
spending and income flows but also various types of assets, borrowing behavior, and other demo-
graphic information collected by the banks. Researchers are sometimes limited to a subset of types
of financial accounts or to transactions from a limited sample of the bank's customers.
    A more limited option has been to obtain access to transaction data directly from credit card
firms (eg. Einav & Klenow (2021)) or credit card issuers (eg. Gathergood et al. (2019b)). Such
sources will be limited to spending through particular channels and cards and likely have no infor-
mation regarding income for a given individual or household. Even narrower sets of transactions
have been obtained from other proprietary sources. Cookson (2018), for instance, uses transaction-
level ATM withdrawal information obtained from casinos throughout the United States. The rise
of payment apps such as Apple Pay, Venmo, and AliPay have also allowed for a new avenue to
directly observe household spending transactions across large portions of the population in many




                                                3
countries.1
       While long-standing financial institutions have provided valuable access to transaction level
data, much of the pioneering work with this class of data has been enabled by an emerging ecosys-
tem of FinTech products and apps. These products take two extremely broad forms: those that act
mainly to aggregate and track a customer's disparate financial accounts for better monitoring and
those that are more focused on a particular end-goal such as increasing savings rates or assisting
in paying down debt.
       For instance, work such as Baugh et al. (2018), Carlin et al. (2017), Baker (2018), and Medina
(2020) utilize data obtained from aggregator apps. A significant benefit of these apps is that users
typically have a more comprehensive set of financial accounts linked, allowing for both more
flexibility in the sorts of questions being asked and also more confidence in the validity of a given
set of results. In contrast, Kuchler & Pagel (2018) and Baker et al. (2020c) use data from apps
that focus more on encouraging savings or debt repayment and thus both have more potential
issues with sample selection but also the completeness of an individual's finances visible within
the product.
       At least one government entity has also worked to develop a transaction database through
a government survey; see Schuh (2018). The Diary of Consumer Payment Choice, run by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, measures spending behavior through a transaction-level diary
among a group of survey respondents. This approach combines much of the utility of surveys with
the granularity of transaction data and makes the data widely available to researchers. However,
the survey suffers relative to proprietary data obtained from financial institutions in a much smaller
sample size and more limited time window (only a few days of transaction data per respondent).


2.1       Ancillary Data Linkages

The basic building blocks of transaction databases shares many similarities across the large variety
of sources of such data: generally a complete view of time-stamped financial flows at a transaction
level for a set of financial accounts across a large sample of individuals. This provides high quality
information regarding household consumption flows. Depending on the source, transaction data
   1
    One paper to utilize this data is Xing et al. (2021), wherein the authors use data from Alipay to determine the
impact of short-term spending subsidies on consumer spending.



                                                        4
can be accompanied and enriched by other types of financial and demographic characteristics.
       Some of the additional data takes the form of account or transaction level metadata. Making use
of not only the date of a transaction but also the precise time within a day that a transaction takes
place, Gu et al. (2018) identifies `shirking' at work by examining online shopping purchases during
working hours. Aggregators and other financial platforms also generally track how individuals
interact with their various online accounts. Olafsson & Pagel (2017) utilize internal data from a
FinTech app in order to proxy for attention paid to investment accounts by measuring the number
of times a user logs into her account.
       Beyond the metadata from the transactions and accounts, many sources link self-reported de-
mographic information to the individual in question, such as age, gender, marital status, levels of
education, and number of children (eg. Farrell et al. (2020)). This can also be combined with either
self-reported or geo-tagged information on locations of residence or of each individual transaction.
While not all sources contain self-reported or administrative data on demographics, some of the
firms take the approach of constructing proxies or best guesses for demographic characteristics
(eg. gender and age ranges) using observable financial or account characteristics.
       A number of researchers are also able to put detailed location data to good use in conjunc-
tion with various observed transactions. For instance, Gelman et al. (2019a) utilize locations to
identify relevant gasoline prices that individuals face, while Meeuwis et al. (2019) use zipcode
level locations to proxy for likely political leanings among users of an investment service. Agar-
wal et al. (2020b) focus explicitly on location-driven peer effects in Singapore as they examine
how bankruptcies affect spending and other financial behavior among co-residents of individual
apartment blocks.
       Another key element of data linked to transaction databases have been surveys, either admin-
istered by the source firm for its own purposes or by the firm on behalf of researchers. Work such
as Bachas et al. (2020), Schuh (2018), Baker et al. (2020c), and D'Acunto et al. (2020) all employ
surveys of individuals to better contextualize the transactions that are directly observed.2 Such
efforts can help researchers better understand the beliefs, expectations, and reasoning behind the
financial decisions that are directly observable, at least partially mitigating one of the issues with
context-free transaction data.
   2
    Others, such as Giglio et al. (2021), have taken this approach to map brokerage transactions to survey responses
regarding beliefs of investors.


                                                         5
    For some sources, researchers may also be able to link to various credit reporting agency infor-
mation like credit scores, numbers of accounts, or negative marks on credit. For instance, Ponce
et al. (2017) and Elizondo & Seira (2017) are able to link bank account data to credit bureau data in
collaboration with the government in Mexico and Baker (2018) observes credit scores for a subset
of users, taking advantage of fact that users of this financial aggregator often choose to connect
their credit report.
    Transaction databases stemming from financial aggregators are some of the most complete and
flexible. This is driven, in part, by the ancillary data that is linked to the financial accounts. Many
aggregators contain self-reported data not only on demographics, but also on financial goals and
budgets, financial risk tolerances, and financial sophistication. Such data can help researchers to
understand how shocks can have heterogeneous responses across agents that vary greatly in key
modeling parameters like risk preferences.
    Access to the underlying data from FinTech apps has also enabled research into the impacts
of this emerging technology, itself, on household financial behavior. Carlin et al. (2017) take a
broad overview of the usage of a FinTech app in Iceland, examining differences in patterns of
usage across generations. Becker (2017) uses transaction data from a large European bank to
demonstrate that access to a money management tool encourages households to start saving and
increase savings balances. Levi & Benartzi (2020) utilize the roll-out of a FinTech app across
different device types (eg. Android, iOS) to establish that users increase attention paid to their
finances and cut discretionary expenditures, with effects concentrated among lower income and
high spending-to-income users.
    Beyond explicitly linked financial accounts or other data, many researchers have been able to
make numerous inferences about individual preferences characteristics using transaction data. For
instance, a number of researchers identify a measure of financial sophistication through the propen-
sity for individuals to make financial `mistakes' like overdrafting or paying credit card penalties
when possessing sufficient liquidity to avoid them (eg. Jorring (2019) and Carvalho et al. (2019)).
Attention to and salience of financial data and accounts are measured with the frequency by which
individuals login to their accounts, and labor market status can be deduced from the receipt of
regular direct deposit paychecks or social security income. Account balances may even be able to
be partially imputed (when lacking account balance data) using interest income in bank accounts.


                                                  6
These types of inferences are continually refined and augmented across a number of transaction
data sources as more researchers begin to work with this class of data.



3     Comparison with Alternate Measures of Consumption
Measuring consumption using household transaction data offers many benefits but also some
downsides compared to other sources of consumption data. Table 1 offers a comparison of the
attributes of transaction data to those of more traditional sources of consumption data. Importantly,
the relative weights placed on these attributes can vary depending on the nature of the question the
researcher is asking; each class of data has situations in which it dominates.
    For instance, research necessitating product level consumption data will necessitate something
akin to scanner data or detailed consumer diary surveys, which sees consumption at a granularity
finer than store-level transactions available from credit card statements for example. Questions
revolving around durable purchases and financing may be difficult to understand using transaction
data, as such purchases often are observed within bank accounts only by a stream of financing
charges rather than the actual purchase information. Here, data from tax registries or credit bureau
data may dominate. Transaction data will also be inferior when approaching questions regarding
aggregate consumption trends over time, since long time horizons are generally unavailable from
such sources.


3.1    Advantages of Transaction Data

Some of the longest-standing measures of consumption available to researchers are government-
run surveys such as the Consumer Expenditure Survey in the US and the Living Costs and Food
Survey in the UK. However, surveys are limited in scope and complexity due to both monetary
and time costs. Individuals cannot be asked to answer every question about types of spending
or sources of income that might ever be of interest to researchers. Data collection in transaction
databases is fully automated, and thus adding an additional transaction incurs no time cost for users
and requires minimal monetary costs for the database to log and store it in perpetuity.
    Unconstrained by marginal cost concerns on both the part of the user and the entity collecting
the data, every individual transaction can be stored along with metadata regarding that transaction.

                                                 7
Therefore, while a survey question cannot easily be asked retroactively, the granular and complete
nature of transaction data means that it can be mined far in the future for indicators of behavior or
purchases. This is often made possible by the extreme detail offered by the transaction description
field, as elaborated on in Section 4.5.
       Conditional on having complete views of all of an individual's accounts, values of spending,
income, and assets are exact and are not as prone to recall bias as in a survey setting. This can be
especially useful when working to measure the value of highly volatile assets like equity portfolios
or when investigating atypical spending patterns.
       This completeness across financial accounts also drives the main benefits relative to so-called
`scanner data' such as the AC Nielsen Consumer Panel, which tracks subsets of household pur-
chases at an individual product level. Scanner data can grant even finer detail on elements of
household spending by decomposing a transaction into its constituent products. However, the set
of covered products and stores is limited (generally to nondurable purchases from retail stores) and
other financial attributes of the individual are often lacking.3
       Similarly, researchers employing data from credit bureaus can track some aggregated versions
of household spending through the observation of credit card balances. Durables purchased with
debt such as vehicles and homes are well tracked in such data, but credit card balances mix re-
volving debt with current charges (see Fulford & Schuh (2020)), making it difficult to ascertain the
flow of household consumption even when all household purchases are made via credit card rather
than debit or cash spending.
       Beyond any of the advantages stemming the types of data available from these databases, trans-
action data is often distinguished from other data sources by its sheer size. Table 2 enumerates the
sample sizes for some common survey databases as well as some of transaction databases used by
researchers in recent years. For many of these databases, sample sizes are often one or two orders
of magnitude larger, yielding correspondingly smaller standard errors, especially when examining
behavior of a particular subset of the population.
       The advantage of size has fueled a substantial expansion in research into the micro-foundations
of the macroeconomy and has focused new attention on models that incorporate heterogeneity
across individuals and households. The ability to divide a sample jointly by income, liquidity,
   3
    For instance, the NCP covers approximately $400 of household spending per month for its panel members, a
small fraction of total household spending in the United States.


                                                     8
credit, and age can help to test new tools such as Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK)
models, which add both heterogeneity and idiosyncratic risk to Representative Agent New Keyne-
sian (RANK) models. More broadly, new questions about inequality of wealth and income can be
more thoroughly answered when the top 1% of a sample is composed of 10,000 individuals rather
than 500.
   Recent years have also seen an increase in researchers employing detailed administrative data
on income and wealth to compute `imputed' consumption as the residual of the household's budget
constraint. Countries such as Denmark, Sweden, and Norway have made annualized financial
data on all citizens available for research, including things like bank balances, income, and asset
holdings. This approach is exemplified by work such as Koijen et al. (2014) in Sweden, De Giorgi
et al. (2020) in Denmark, and Fagereng & Halvorsen (2017) in Norway. Relative to transaction-
level data, these databases substantially reduce issues of sample selection and incompleteness and
also make other links to government databases possible. However, they do not provide any high
frequency measures of financial activity and can generally not directly measure spending, meaning
that only an aggregate annual level of spending or consumption can be imputed. In addition,
calculating consumption as a residual implies that different types of consumption (eg. spending on
non-durables, food, services, or durables) cannot be observed.
   In developing countries with fewer resources to devote to systematically collecting economic
data, transaction data can also fill a gap in coverage. While not all countries collect detailed
survey-based microdata, all have substantial penetration of banks, card payment systems, or Fin-
Tech products. Just as many countries are leap-frogging wired telephone infrastructure in favor
of cell phones, some countries have largely bypassed credit and debit cards, moving to mobile-
based payment systems. In such areas, collaborating with FinTech apps can give researchers and
policymakers a clearer view of the economy through this type of transaction data.
   Finally, transaction data can increasingly provide a tool to understand not only what has hap-
pened, but also what is happening. Seen most clearly with the proliferation of research employing
transaction data during the COVID-19 pandemic, transaction data can be utilized to give policy-
makers a new and highly detailed view into the current state of the real economy, beyond financial
markets, without having to wait weeks, months, or years for surveys to be administered.
   The high frequency nature of the data allows researchers to unpack fast-moving events like a


                                                9
government shutdown (eg. Gelman et al. (2018)) or the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic (eg.
Chen et al. (2020)) or even to examine patterns of spending across hours of the day (eg. Gu et al.
(2018)). This enables researchers to more directly observe economic trends and shocks rather than
imputing effects from data aggregated to monthly, quarterly, or annual level.


3.2     Limitations of Transaction Data

3.2.1   Account Completeness

While transaction data offers a number of substantial advantages over more traditional data sources,
they exhibit disadvantages, as well. One basic difficulty is in interpreting the unit of analysis be-
cause, for many such databases, the unique identifier is an `account'. While in a survey, a surveyor
can set well-defined boundaries on the unit of analysis, households often use individual financial
accounts and aggregator apps in a variety of ways. Take, for instance, a married couple who pos-
sess a number of individual financial accounts as well as several joint accounts. Each member of
this couple may have their own account with the financial aggregator app that then contains links
to their own individual as well as joint accounts. Another possibility is that they may have a single
account with the app that contains both sets of individual accounts as well as all the joint accounts.
   In general, a researcher can never be certain that they are observing all relevant financial ac-
counts owned by an individual or a household, and must make assumptions or sample restrictions
to try to isolate the more `complete' users. Many researchers take the approach of excluding users
with small numbers of transactions per month, no visible sources of income, or financial transfers
to accounts that are unlinked. Such ambiguity may make it difficult to interpret the raw levels of
income and spending and how they can be compared to other sources of information where the unit
of analysis is more clearly documented. More broadly, these databases tend to lack the decades of
supporting documentation found in government surveys and other sources that are designed from
the ground up to be used by researchers and to make accurate economic inferences.


3.2.2   Sample Selection

Even in the most information-rich and comprehensive transaction databases, some disadvantages
remain. One common criticism is that, by their very nature, financial transaction databases are


                                                 10
composed of a selected sample of individuals rather than a nationally representative one. Even
when dealing with data sourced from large national financial institutions, there exists a sizable
minority of the population that do not have bank accounts or credit cards of any type and deal
primarily in cash.
   The selection issue becomes more acute in instances where the transaction data is obtained
from more specialized financial institutions or FinTech apps that are targeted at particular slices
of the population. For instance, some apps may be aimed at poorer individuals, who have trouble
saving, at individuals who enjoy trading stocks, or at individuals who have a large number of
varied financial accounts that need managing. Each of these data sources may exhibit a somewhat
different bias relative to the population when investigating a given question. Baker (2018) uses
the demographic and financial characteristics linked with transaction data to demonstrate that such
sample selection issues can be mostly resolved using population weights given sufficient numbers
of users.


3.2.3   Transaction Categorization

Spending done via cash or paper checks can pose problems for researchers using transaction data.
Cash transactions cannot be observed directly, though may be able to be inferred by measuring
ATM withdrawals. Check transactions can be observed but cannot be automatically categorized
into the types of spending that they represent. This concern has declined as cash and checks have
come to represent smaller fractions of spending, though the growth in peer-to-peer cash transfer
apps (eg. Venmo) often present some of the same concerns.
   More broadly, unlike scanner or some types of survey data, categorization of spending is nec-
essarily done at a transaction level rather than a product level. While a transaction at a restaurant
is easily interpretable, a transaction at a big box retailer (or at an online retailer like Amazon.com)
may contain a range of products from non-durable consumables like groceries to semi-durable and
durables like clothing, furniture, or mechanical equipment. Researchers may choose to focus on
these more unambiguous categories such as restaurants when, for instance, they discuss responses
of `non-durable' spending to an income shock.
   Categorization of spending within household transaction data is generally done by algorithms
constructed by the parent organization collecting the transaction data (eg. the bank or account


                                                  11
aggregator). Typically, these utilize a combination of Merchant Category Codes (MCC) linked
to merchant IDs as well as textual analysis of transaction descriptions to arrive at a category for
a given merchant. In some cases, miscategorizations may occur or transactions may be left as
`uncategorized'. However, the textual descriptions and other metadata linked to each transaction
can allow researchers to improve on such categorization algorithms or directly observe particular
transactions of interest without being limited to the categories assigned by the parent organization.


3.2.4    Replication

The proprietary nature of these databases can also present problems for accessibility for future
research as well as for the ability to replicate a given analysis. At an extreme case, some private
sources of data such as smaller FinTech apps may go out of business or deprecate older data to
minimize storage costs, making it impossible to replicate results. More broadly, research done
with some of these databases is the result of personal relationships between researchers and the
firms and there is often no established way for other researchers to gain access.
    These issues stand in stark contrast to many of the traditional data sources that are primarily
sourced from public agencies. Many common government survey data are publicly accessible
online or have a standard application process for gaining access to more detailed data. One avenue
for expanding the utility of transaction databases is for governments or large research institutions
to cement more permanent means of collaboration between researchers and private data providers.



4       Research Avenues Exploiting Benefits of Linked Accounts

4.1     Micro-based Aggregate Consumption Statistics

When it comes to tracking consumer spending in the economy, many economists have turned
either to national aggregates such as Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) from the National
Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) or to national surveys such as the Census Bureau's Retail
Trade Survey. However, these data are produced with a substantial lag and provide no detail at a
sub-national level. Using transaction data as a building block for better aggregate statistics offers
a promising path to a clearer picture of the economy.


                                                 12
   Batch et al. (2019) test whether modern machine learning paired with alternative (and faster-
to-update) data can provide better advance GDP estimates or lower the size of GDP revisions.
While they themselves only have access to an aggregated version of transaction data provided by
a financial services vendor, they find that such data is extremely valuable for better predicting
components of national accounts. Aladangady et al. (2019) go further, using transaction-level
data from a large electronic payments company to provide a disaggregated and higher frequency
version of these national consumption statistics. They demonstrate the utility of this measure in
tracking spending during fast-moving economic shocks like the 2019 government shutdown and
major hurricanes in 2017.
   Of these various efforts, those found in Chetty et al. (2020) are perhaps the most ambitious. In
the authors' own words: "We build a publicly available platform that tracks economic activity at a
granular level in real time using anonymized data from private companies." Many of the statistics
presented and tracked are derived from detailed transaction data that allow the authors to provide
many dimensions of heterogeneity in high-frequency spending behavior, including disaggregated
statistics by geographic area, income, and industry. The ability to publicly provide such detailed
statistics in a continuous and up-to-date format is of great importance to both researchers as well
as policy-makers when seeking to understand economic events as they occur rather than waiting
months for reliable data.


4.2   Linked Financial Accounts

Household transaction data by itself allows for a wide range of new insights into household behav-
ior and the responses to economic shocks. For instance, Einav & Klenow (2021), Baugh & Correia
(2020), and Baker et al. (2020a) work solely with transaction databases that do not feature much
other information about account balances, assets, or demographics.
   However, while transaction data has proven useful even when unaccompanied by a fuller suite
of financial information, this class of data has had the largest impact when paired with more com-
plete household financial information. Given the sources of the data are most commonly banks and
financial aggregators, it is common to have comprehensive overviews financial information for an
individual across a range of important account types. One of the most important components that
such comprehensive financial data offer is a time-varying measure of individual liquidity and credit

                                                13
access. This has allowed a large group of researchers to demonstrate the importance of liquidity in
driving household responses to both anticipated and unanticipated income shocks. Baker (2018),
Agarwal & Qian (2014), Ganong & Noel (2019), Andersen et al. (2020c), and Kueng (2018) all
leverage metrics like account balances and credit availability to map out household level hetero-
geneity in consumption behavior.
   For instance, Agarwal & Qian (2014) and Baker (2018) take this data to the classic ques-
tion about the consumption response to unanticipated income shocks and how the consumption
response varies across households with different levels of liquid assets and credit access. The for-
mer uses transaction level data from a Singaporean bank to investigate the consumption response
to an economic stimulus policy in Singapore, finding that households begin to respond upon the
announcement of the upcoming payments and that households with lower levels of liquidity and
credit respond more strongly to its receipt. The latter uses shocks to households' employers to in-
strument for permanent income shocks, finding similar levels of heterogeneity across credit access
and liquidity.
   Another common linkage is between transaction accounts and home mortgage accounts, en-
hancing the ability of researchers to examine how home values, mortgage terms, and mortgage
performance interact with consumption decisions. Park (2016) takes advantage of information
from household transactions to predict mortgage delinquencies, using the propensity of house-
holds being charged late fees or overdrafts to proxy for risk. Similarly, Jorring (2019) shows that
mistakes in checking or credit accounts (eg. avoidable overdrafts or late fees) can predict the con-
sumption response to predictable changes in mortgage payments. Households who seem to make
such financial mistakes often fail to smooth consumption around these theoretically known events.
   A number of papers, such as Ganong & Noel (2020) and Bernstein (2020), have been able
to directly examine the impact of home values, mortgage policies and mortgage terms like ARM
resets on household consumption behavior and labor supply. Given the prominence that homes
and mortgages have among household balance sheets around the world, such questions are of first
order importance when thinking about the transmission of monetary policy or associated changes
to federal home loan policies.
   Beyond houses and mortgages, linkages of transaction data to investment and retirement ac-
counts have also been able to provide additional clarity about household balance sheets. For in-


                                                14
stance, Brauer et al. (2019) and Meyer & Pagel (2019) look to more fully characterize consump-
tion responses to dividends as well as both realized and unrealized capital gains and losses. Again,
transaction data provide a way to credibly identify how asset price fluctuations may be transmitted
through the economy and can highlight heterogeneity across owners of these assets, as well.
   Others rely on transactions across multiple financial accounts to test for offsetting behavior
that may net out in aggregate or may be missed if solely observing one type of financial accounts.
Medina (2020) highlights the importance of testing for offsetting financial behavior across separate
financial accounts. Garcia et al. (2020) examine whether similar offsetting behavior comes about
after inducing individuals to save more through a similar intervention, finding little response on
the credit utilization. Kukk & Raaij (2020) look at savings distributions across individual and joint
accounts within households, finding a wide range of joint allocations.


4.3   Evaluating Heterogeneity and Models of Household Behavior

Models working to understand and rationalize household behavior, especially consumption behav-
ior, are also able to be more thoroughly tested when increased sample sizes are combined with the
extreme detail allowed for by transaction data. Key parameters of these models like risk aversion
and salience can be more directly captured and important financial characteristics such as precise
levels of liquidity and credit access are readily available. For instance, Ponce et al. (2017) note
that relative prices, such as interest rates, are poor predictors of how households make decisions
about which cards to utilize and which to pay down. In an experiment with randomized interest
rate offers, they find that households respond to these salient price changes, suggesting models of
limited attention or mental accounting might rationalize the empirical findings.
   The sensitivity of consumption to beliefs, news, and income shocks of various types has gen-
erated a large array of research using transaction data. Most of these papers address models of in-
tertemporal optimization, often test various aspects of the permanent income hypothesis or buffer
stock models. Transaction data at an individual or household level is invaluable to such efforts,
as many of the common explanations for consumption fluctuations revolve around income volatil-
ity or uncertainty, levels of liquidity and wealth, spending shocks, and durables spending. With
detailed transaction data linked with financial account balances and credit information, these ex-
planations can be tested jointly and with great precision across a large sample size. Moreover,

                                                 15
identifying precise income shocks, as well as understanding just how anticipated or unanticipated
those shocks were, is made much easier when each individual income transaction can be observed
and fully characterized according to its source.
   As one example, Ganong & Noel (2020) link transaction data with mortgage data to assign
mortgage defaults into one of two categories: strategic defaults, where households default when
debt is too high relative to home values, and liquidity-driven defaults, where monthly payments
are too high given current household resources. They find evidence for the overwhelming majority
of defaults being liquidity or `adverse event' driven rather than strategic, informing a debate over
optimal mortgage and debt relief policies.
   Looking at responses to macroeconomic news events, Garmaise et al. (2020) use household
transaction data to identify persistent excess sensitivity of consumption, even when such events
are not necessarily meaningful for the household. For more salient events ­ those that garner more
media attention ­ responses are higher, as are responses among lower income households.
   Other papers address the response of households to personal income shocks. Olafsson & Pagel
(2018) highlight excess spending among individuals on their paydays among most of the popula-
tion of Iceland. They show that even for high income and highly liquid individuals, paydays tend to
induce appreciable spending responses across many categories of consumption despite the fact that
paydays are known in advance. They explicitly test multiple models of household behavior and
reject the possibility that either current or imagined future liquidity constraints are likely the driver
of such spending responses. In Olafsson & Pagel (2019), the authors turn towards unanticipated
income shocks from lotteries, finding MPCs above one ­ financed by borrowing ­ for small wins
and low MPCs for large wins, again pointing away from liquidity constraints as the main driver of
large MPCs out of windfalls.
   Households are shown to exhibit excess sensitivity to high profile and perfectly anticipated
payments from the Alaska Permanent Fund, as well. Kueng (2018) notes that excess sensitivity
in this case is actually increasing in income and is high even for those with high levels of liquid
assets. While such behavior stands in contrast to most classical rational models, he shows that
the actual welfare loss from such non-smoothing behavior is exceedingly small for these house-
holds, suggesting that many consumption deviations identified by other researchers are also likely
minimal from a welfare perspective.


                                                   16
   Other evidence against liquidity constraints being the primary driver of excess sensitivity of
consumption is given by Gelman (2019a). The author tests a range of parameters of the canon-
ical buffer stock model and notes that a quasi-hyperbolic version of the model performs better
than the standard exponential formulation in explaining the observed levels of excess sensitivity.
In Gelman (2019b), the author takes advantage of the vast sample size afforded by transaction
data to decompose the aggregate or average MPCs across individuals with varying observable and
unobservable characteristics. He returns to the buffer-stock model and provides perhaps the first
clear data-driven breakdown of the importance of these persistent characteristics and time-varying
shocks.
   Heterogeneity across individuals is also the prime focus of Kuchler & Pagel (2018). They
demonstrate that individuals often fail to stick to explicit plans to pay down their debt, consis-
tent with present-biased agents that feature in models with quasi-hyperbolic discounting. They
push further with detailed transaction data, showing that heterogeneity across individuals in their
debt repayments is strongly correlated with cross-sectional variation in short-run impatience and
financial sophistication.
   Gathergood et al. (2019a) and Gathergood & Olafsson (2020) are able to use such detailed data
to test theories of mental accounting at a household level. In Gathergood et al. (2019a), the authors
find that households do not treat all credit card expenditures equally; they tend to pay down debt
incurred by certain types of expenses more quickly than others. In particular, households tend
to pay down debt more quickly for non-durable expenditures relative to durable expenditures.
Agarwal et al. (2020a) examine how household spending changes in the days around credit card
statement dates. They suggest that household spending tended to rise substantially following these
statement dates but that most of the variation could be rationally accounted for by households
taking advantage of the free float that credit cards offer until the following pay period.
   Lastly, in Gathergood & Olafsson (2020), the authors turn to the puzzle of households that
co-hold liquid balances alongside high-interest debt. Using linked transactions, credit, and bank
balances, they calculate these propensities at a daily level, finding that instances of co-holding are
usually very short term but that rational explanations are likely subordinate to mental accounting
on the part of the household.




                                                 17
4.4      Experimental Interventions

Transaction data has also been utilized in conjunction with experiments on households. With such
detailed data, gathering post-treatment data is automatic and comprehensive, allowing for larger
samples and more detailed questions to be investigated.
   As one example, Aydin (2019) randomizes the extension of credit lines to customers of a large
Turkish bank, finding substantial propensities to borrow even among those with sizable assets. He
takes advantage of the completeness of the credit, income, spending, and asset data to build support
for a buffer-stock model rather than more behavioral explanations. D'Acunto et al. (2020) also
investigate the spending responses to the provision of a new credit facility for borrowers and elicit
preferences through the FinTech app that they obtain transaction data from. With this data, they
are able to fully characterize spending responses across both the income and liquidity distribution
as well as across users with various beliefs and risk preferences.
   Such linked data can also offer convincing evidence for a role for for behavioral `mistakes'
in household behavior. Medina (2020) runs an experiment on users of a financial account aggre-
gator in Brazil, randomly sending reminders to pay credit card bills to users of the service. She
finds that households significantly increase on-time payments but also increase the probability of
over-drafting on other accounts they own. This finding highlights one strength of transaction data
stemming from financial aggregators: researchers are easily able to observe potentially offsetting
behavior occurring in different financial accounts owned by the same individual in response to a
shock.


4.5      Utilization of Transaction Text Fields

One of the most flexible components of the common classes of transaction data thus far used by
researchers is the `text' field. That is, the textual description that accompanies the amount and
time-stamp for each transaction. This text (or a simplified version of it) is what is observed, for
instance, when someone examines their itemized credit card statement at the end of a billing cycle.
While this text may feature complex numerical identifiers or abbreviations of firms, it is generally
possible to use this text to determine which firm a particular expenditure transaction was paid to or
which employer a particular income transaction is from.


                                                 18
    This field thereby allows a researcher to pick out transactions that may signal an employment
relationship, the timing of government benefit receipt, spending at a particular retailer, or the oc-
currence of an event of interest. This can all be accomplished without having to explicitly ask a
household about any of these linkages or events and it gives researchers the ability to extend their
analysis years backwards in time.
    In Baker (2018), the author is able to link households to their employers in order to identify
unanticipated changes to households' source of income. Given the scarcity of data linking em-
ployees and employers, the ability to generate these links is quite valuable in understanding the
transmission of shocks through the economy. Baker & Yannelis (2017) and Gelman et al. (2018)
also utilize this text field to identify households that contain employees of the federal government
in order to analyze differential spending behavior when such households were subjected to missed
paychecks as part of the 2013 Federal Government Shutdown.
    Others, such as Agarwal et al. (2021), Einav & Klenow (2021) and Baker et al. (2020a), have
used a similar approach to map transactions to the numbers of firms that these individuals shop
at, mostly retailers or consumer service firms. Linking to a broad swatch of firms enables these
researchers to analyze the firms' customer bases and provide new dimensions of information re-
garding risks to firm growth and an ability to disaggregated their sources of revenue. Baugh et al.
(2018) focuses on transactions at a single firm, Amazon.com, and examines responses to changes
in sales tax policy. Such linkages to spending at individual firms is not possible using alternative
consumption data sources like government surveys, scanner data, or by imputing consumption via
tax registries.
    Another common tactic when using transaction data has been to identify less `typical' sources
of income or benefits. While administrative data may generally be required to observe precise
amounts of unemployment insurance paid out to individuals, Ganong & Noel (2019) and Andersen
et al. (2020c) are able to pick out UI payments using the textual descriptions within transaction
databases. Similarly, Karger & Rajan (2020) is able to take the same approach with CARES Act
Stimulus payments in 2020, Kueng (2018) with payments from the Alaska Permanent Fund, and
Olafsson & Pagel (2019) with winnings from national lotteries. Baugh (2016) and Carvalho et al.
(2019) pick out loans from and repayments to payday lenders, and Gelman et al. (2019b) can
identify the precise timing and amounts of tax returns deposited into accounts via direct deposit.


                                                 19
   Overall, the text field found in many types of transaction data offers researchers unparalleled
room for creativity in identifying particular sources of income or types of spending.


4.6     Transaction Data During the COVID-19 Pandemic

A unique demonstration of the utility of transaction data came during the COVID-19 pandemic
that swept the world in 2020. This pandemic brought about a deep recession in many countries
that was notable for not only its size but its speed, as well. The rapidity of the economic shocks was
unlike anything seen in modern history, with many countries seeing the largest ever single-month
or single-quarter declines in employment, spending, and GDP.
   The speed at which this event occurred meant that governments were grappling with policy
proposals for household and business support without being able to observe many of the economic
indicators that are only produced with a lag of weeks or months. Turning to transaction data, many
researchers were able to quickly produce diagnoses of the size and distribution of consumption
and income declines. Such analyses were conducted in a wide range of countries; eg. Andersen
et al. (2020a) for Denmark and Sweden, Chetty et al. (2020) and Cox et al. (2020) for the United
States, Chen et al. (2020) for China, Carvalho et al. (2020) for Spain, Chronopoulos et al. (2020)
and Hacioglu et al. (2020) for the United Kingdom, and Bounie et al. (2020) for France.
   Governments and central banks often focus on the behavior of financial markets to provide
high-frequency views on economic activity, especially in response to recent policy initiatives. The
newfound flexibility and utility of transaction-based consumption data during a fast-moving crisis
may prompt governments or other institutions to set up persistent indicators of consumption lever-
aging high frequency transaction data. If these consumption indicators are available in the future,
policymakers may be better able to calibrate counter-cyclical policy armed with more accurate
data.




                                                 20
5       Future Directions of Research

5.1     Analysis of Firms Using Transaction Data

5.1.1    Household-level Transaction Data

An emerging research agenda has begun to leverage households' financial transactions to study
features of and risks facing firms. Researchers are able to map individual households' transactions
to particular firms using either unique firm identifiers or the text fields from credit and debit trans-
actions. Novel firm-level panels detailing revenue sources and customer base attributes can thus
be constructed from household transactions.
    For instance, Agarwal et al. (2021) use credit card data to produce disaggregated firm-level
sales data and find that such data is predictive of future stock returns. Moreover, they find that
the composition of customer bases is important, with stronger stock returns following increases in
spending from customers with higher credit scores, wealth and loyalty.
    Baker et al. (2020b) demonstrate that aggregated firm-level statistics derived from household
transaction data match well to traditional sources of firm-level data like Compustat. They de-
velop two novel statistics relating to customer bases that cannot be generated using traditional data
sources, the rate of churn in a firm's customer base and the pairwise similarity between two firms'
customer bases. They then demonstrate that these statistics can be used to inform alpha-generating
trading strategies as well as providing new insights into firm investment and markups.
    Finally, Einav & Klenow (2021) use debit and credit card transactions spanning Visa's network
to demonstrate the importance of measuring customer bases when working to understand firm
growth. That is, they demonstrate that extensive margin adjustments (eg. customers leaving or
joining a customer base) are responsible for the vast majority of firm-level sales variation over
time.
    While this window into firms provides substantial additional value to these household trans-
action datasets, there are limitations to this approach. Since the source of the data is ultimately a
database of consumer transactions, firms that obtain sizable amounts of revenue from other busi-
nesses or governments will be poorly observed or measured. Moreover, only firm revenue, not
costs or employment and production characteristics, can be directly observed. Despite these draw-



                                                  21
backs, consumer-facing firms constitute a large portion of most economies and feature prominently
in questions spanning fields like finance, marketing, and industrial organization.


5.1.2   Firm-level Transaction Data

Another promising area of research leverages expanded sources of transaction data to directly
observe firm-level transactions. Much as transaction data has enabled a more thorough analysis
of household behavior and heterogeneity, the transactions made by the tens of millions of small
businesses can increase visibility within this large sector of the national economy. Especially
in countries with less reliable measures of small business activity, the ability to directly observe
transactions from these firms by working with banks or other financial intermediaries can greatly
empower researchers and policymakers.
   Two pioneers in this field can be seen in Weber (2019) and Kim et al. (2020). Weber (2019)
links the personal financial transactions from millions of individuals at a large financial institu-
tion to the universe of small business transactions at that institution. The author focuses on the
founders of small businesses, measuring personal financial characteristics such as cash flow man-
agement abilities, which are observable from the founders' personal accounts. He notes that such
financial management skills are highly predictive of the financial success of the small businesses
subsequently founded by these individuals.
   In Kim et al. (2020), the authors work with the JPMCI to gain access to transaction-level data
from hundreds of thousands of small businesses. In particular, they are able to match transactions
of small businesses to the personal accounts of those businesses' proprietors and map out how the
fortunes of the businesses impact proprietors' consumption during the COVID-19 pandemic.


5.2     Integration with Governments

Transaction data may have the potential for substantial future contributions to research and policy
through additional integration with governmental agencies and central banks. Current research
using transaction data often involves one-off relationships between researchers and data providers.
For a range of reasons that encompass both competitive and legal concerns, only a small number
of firms have allowed for more regular access to their transaction databases. As a result, obtaining
and maintaining access to such data is difficult or impossible for most researchers, and the small

                                                22
scale of most collaborations requires re-learning the idiosyncrasies of each particular transaction
database.
    Partnerships with government agencies may provide one way to provide a more standardized
process for access and also leverage the expertise that many agencies have built up in producing
credible and well-documented statistics regarding national product accounts or other economic
indicators. Oversight of data access by federal regulators, built on years of facilitating access
to IRS or Census records, may also provide the legal assurance firms need to ensure that vetted
researchers will not misuse their data.
    In addition, linkages of transaction data to other sensitive economic databases, such as tax
or credit registries, could be facilitated. For instance, in Denmark, Andersen et al. (2020d) use
transaction data matched to government registry data to measure the extent to which informal
transfers from family and friends act as insurance for negative income or labor supply shocks. In
the United States, Chetty et al. (2020) work with a large number of private sector partners to build
a database of economic indicators that is both granular and timely. Overarching sponsorship or
organization of such efforts by a neutral party like the Federal Reserve could provide an avenue
for the expansion of these efforts.
    Governments would be well-served by aiding in these efforts to partner with data providers in
systematic way. As has been seen during the COVID-19 pandemic, transaction data can provide
some of the most up-to-date statistics and can serve to inform policy decisions at a much finer
level than aggregate statistics used in the past. In addition, as governments around the world
tackle persistent questions of inequality, transaction level data offers a ready-made window into
the economic conditions and decisions of millions of households across the income distribution.



6    Conclusion
The past decade has seen a tremendous amount of growth in research utilizing a new class of data
centered on individual financial transactions. This data is often linked to other financial data such
as asset balances, credit, and equity holdings as well as self-reported demographic characteristics
and geographical information. Whereas many of these detailed aspects of household finance were
available for a small slice of the population or could be imputed from less granular survey ques-


                                                 23
tions, financial transaction data makes most financial and labor market attributes of a household
directly observable.
   These databases have enabled researchers to more decisively answer classic economic ques-
tions using new identification strategies and to obtain more precise empirical estimates. Such
questions range from how households respond to economic shocks, the transmission of govern-
ment monetary and fiscal policy, and the importance of household balance sheets.
   Beyond this revisiting of questions first tested using pre-existing survey and administrative
data, this class of data has also proven to be some of the most flexible in terms of its potential
for wider research. Researchers have taken advantage of the massive sample sizes to highlight
the importance of heterogeneity in both economic means and also economic beliefs and behavior
in explaining how the economy moves in response to aggregate shocks. The ability to use the
textual transaction descriptions to ex-post identify particular firms, income sources, and detailed
types of spending has enabled researchers more room to think creatively about particular shocks
to individuals or to define multidimensional characteristics that can be important for structural
estimation.
   The speed of analysis possible using this data has also been highlighted during the COVID-19
pandemic, with both economic fundamentals as well as the response to government fiscal interven-
tions being tracked nearly in real time and with unprecedented granularity. This powerful demon-
stration of value seems likely to cement transaction data as an important tool for policy-makers
and may aid in the construction of more accessible datasets of this type for researchers.
   As the number of sources of transaction data continues to climb around the world, many worries
­ about representativeness, the proprietary nature of the many of the data sources, and the ability
to replicate research ­ are declining. And more researchers from additional fields are beginning
to recognize the value and flexibility of such detailed data, leading to an expansion in use among
fields like marketing, IO, development, asset pricing, and corporate finance.



References
Agarwal S, Bubna A, Lipscomb M. 2020a. Timing to the statement: understanding fluctuations in
  consumer credit use. Management Science


                                                24
Agarwal S, Liu C, Souleles NS. 2007. The reaction of consumer spending and debt to tax rebates--
  evidence from consumer credit data. Journal of Political Economy

Agarwal S, Qian W. 2014. Consumption and debt response to unanticipated income schocks: Evi-
  dence from a natural experiment in singapore. The American Economic Review

Agarwal S, Qian W, Zou X. 2020b. Thy neighbor's misfortune: peer effects on consumption.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy

Agarwal S, Qian W, Zou X. 2021. Disaggregated sales and stock returns. Management Science

Aladangady A, Aron-Dine S, Dunn W, Feiveson L, Lengermann P, Sahm C. 2019. From transac-
  tions data to economic statistics: constructing real time, high frequency, geographic measures
  of consumer spending. Working Paper

Andersen AL, Hansen ET, Johannesen N, Sheridan A. 2020a. Pandemic, shutdown and consumer
  spending: lessons from scandinavian policy responses to covid19. Working Paper

Andersen AL, Hansen ET, Johannesen N, Sheridan A. 2020b. Social distancing laws cause only
  small losses of economic activity during the covid19 pandemic in scandinavia. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences

Andersen AL, Jensen AS, Johannesen N, Kreiner CT, Leth-Petersen S, Sheridan A. 2020c. How
  do households respond to job loss? lessons from multiple high-frequency data sets. Working
  Paper

Andersen AL, Johannesen N, Sheridan A. 2020d. Bailing out the kids: new evidence on informal
  insurance from one billion bank transfers. Working Paper

Aydin D. 2019. Consumption response to credit expansions: Evidence from experimental assign-
  ment of 45307 credit lines. Working Paper

Bachas P, Gertler P, Higgins S, Seira E. 2020. How debit cards enable the poor to save more.
  Working Paper

Baker SR. 2018. Debt and the response to household income shocks: validation and application of
  linked financial account data. Journal of Political Economy

                                               25
Baker SR, Baugh B, Kueng L. 2020a. Income fluctuations and firm choice. Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis

Baker SR, Baugh B, Sammon M. 2020b. Measuring customer churn and interconnectedness. Work-
  ing Paper

Baker SR, Farrokhnia RA, Meyer S, Pagel M, Yannelis C. 2020c. Income, liquidity and the con-
  sumption response to the 2020 economic stimulus payments. Working Paper

Baker SR, Kueng L, Meyer S, Pagel M. 2021. Consumption imputation errors in administrative
  data. Working Paper

Baker SR, Yannelis C. 2017. Income changes and consumption: Evidence from the 2013 federal
  government shutdown. Review of Economic Dynamics

Barber BM, Odean T. 2000. Trading is hazardous to your wealth: the common stock investment
  performance of individual investors. The Journal of Finance 55(2):773­806

Barber BM, Odean T. 2001. Boys will be boys: gender, overconfidence, and common stock invest-
  ment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics

Batch A, Chen J, Driessen A, Dunn A, Kyle K. 2019. Off to the races: a comparison of machine
  learning and alternative data for predicting economic indicators. Working Paper

Baugh B. 2016. Payday borrowing and household outcomes: evidence from a natural experiment.
  Working Paper

Baugh B, Ben-David I, Park H. 2018. Can taxes shape an industry? evidence from the implemen-
  tation of the "amazon tax". The Journal of Finance

Baugh B, Correia F. 2020. Does paycheck frequency matter? evidence from micro data. Working
  Paper

Becker G. 2017. Does fintech affect household saving behavior: findings from a natural field ex-
  periment. Working Paper

Bernstein A. 2020. Negative home equity and household labor supply. The Journal of Finance

                                              26
Bounie D, Camara Y, Galbraith JW. 2020. Consumers' mobility, expenditure and online offline
  substitution response to covid19: evidence from french transaction data. Working Paper

Brauer K, Hackethal A, Hanspal T. 2019. Consuming dividends. Working Paper

Carlin B, Olafsson A, Pagel M. 2017. Fintech adoption across generations: financial fitness in the
  information age. Working Paper

Carvalho L, Olafsson A, Silverman D. 2019. Misfortune and mistake: the financial conditions and
  decision making ability of high cost loan borrowers. Working Paper

Carvalho VM, Garcia JR, Hansen S, Mora SR, Ortiz A, et al. 2020. Tracking the covid19 crisis
  with high resolution transaction data. Working Paper

Chen H, Qian W, Wen Q. 2020. The impact of the covid19 pandemic on consumption: learning
  from high frequency transaction data. Working Paper

Chetty R, Friedman JN, Hendren N, Stepner M, Team TOI. 2020. How did covid19 and stabi-
  lization policies affect spending and employment? a new real-time economic tracker based on
  private sector data. Working Paper

Choi JJ, Laibson D, Metrick A. 2001. How does the internet affect trading? evidence from investor
  behavior in 401(k) plans. Journal of Financial Economics

Chronopoulos DK, Lukas M, Wilson JOS. 2020. Consumer spending responses to the covid19
  pandemic: an assessment of great britain. Centre for Economic Policy Research

Cookson JA. 2018. When saving is gambling. Journal of Financial Economics 129(1):24­45

Cox N, Farrell D, Gannong P, Greig F, Noel P, et al. 2020. Initial impacts of the pandemic on
  consumer behavior: evidence from linked income, spending and savings data. Working Paper

D'Acunto F, Rauter T, Scheuch CK, Weber M. 2020. Perceived precautionary savings motives:
  evidence from fintech. Working Paper

D'Acunto F, Rossi AG, Weber M. 2019. Crowdsourcing financial information to change spending
  behavior. Working Paper

                                               27
De Giorgi G, Frederiksen A, Pistaferri L. 2020. Consumption network effects. Review of Economic
  Studies

Einav L, Klenow P. 2021. Customers and retail growth. Working Paper

Elizondo A, Seira E. 2017. Are information disclosures effective? evidence from the credit card
  market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy

Fagereng A, Halvorsen E. 2017. Imputing consumption from norwegian income and wealth reg-
  istry data. Journal of Economic and Social Measurement

Farrell D, Ganong P, Greig F, Jones D, Noel P, Wheat C. 2020. Wealth, race and consumption
  smoothing of typical income shocks. Working Paper

Fulford S, Schuh S. 2020. Revolving v olving versus conv ersus convenience use of cr enience use
  of credit car edit cards: Evidence fr vidence from u.s. credit bureau data. Working Paper

Ganong P, Noel P. 2019. Consumer spending during unemployment: positive and normative im-
  plications. The American Economic Review

Ganong P, Noel P. 2020. Why do borrowers default on mortgages? a new method for causal
  attribution. Working Paper

Garcia I, Medina P, Pagel M. 2020. Does saving cause borrowing. Working Paper

Garmaise M, Levi Y, Lustig H. 2020. Spending less after (seemingly) bad news. Working Paper

Gathergood J, Loewenstein G, Quispe-Torreblanca EG, Stewart N. 2019a. The red, the black and
  the plastic: paying down credit card debt for hotels, not sofas. Management Science

Gathergood J, Olafsson A. 2020. The co-holding puzzle: new evidence from transaction level data.
  Working Paper

Gathergood J, Sakaguehi H, Stewart N, Weber J. 2019b. How do consumers avoid penalty fees?
  evidence from credit cards. Working Paper

Gelman M. 2019a. The self-constrained hand to mouth. Working Paper


                                               28
Gelman M. 2019b. What drives heterogeneity in the marginal propensity to consume? temporary
  shocks vs persistent characteristics. Working Paper

Gelman M, Gorodnichenko Y, Kariv S, Koustas D, Shapiro MD, et al. 2019a. The response of
  consumer spending to changes in gasoline prices. Working Paper

Gelman M, Kariv S, Shapiro MD, Silverman D. 2019b. Rational illiquidity and consumption:
  theory and evidence from income tax withholding and refunds. Working Paper

Gelman M, Kariv S, Shapiro MD, Silverman D, Tadelis S. 2014. Harnessing naturally occurring
  data to measure the response of spending to income. Science

Gelman M, Kariv S, Shapiro MD, Silverman D, Tadelis S. 2018. How individuals respond to a
  liquidity shock: evidence from the 2013 government shutdown. Journal of Public Economics

Giglio S, Maggiori M, Stroebel J, Utkus S. 2021. Five facts about beliefs and portfolios. American
  Economic Review 111(5):1481­1522

Gu Q, He J, Qian W. 2018. Housing booms and shirking. Working Paper

Hacioglu S, Kanzig D, Surico P. 2020. Consumption in the time of covid19: evidence from uk
  transaction data. Working Paper

Jorring AT. 2019. Financial sophistication and consumer spending. Working Paper

Karger E, Rajan A. 2020. Heterogeneity in the marginal propensity to consume: evidence from
  covid19 stimulus payments. Working Paper

Kim O, Parker J, Schoar A. 2020. Revenue collapses and the consumption of small business owners
  in the early stages of the covid-19 pandemic. Working Paper

Koijen R, Van Nieuwerburgh S, Vestman R. 2014. Judging the quality of survey data by compar-
  ison with truth as measured by administrative records: Evidence from sweden. Improving the
  Measurement of Consumer Expenditure

Kuchler T, Pagel M. 2018. Sticking to your plan: the role of present bias for credit card paydown.
  Working Paper

                                               29
Kueng L. 2018. Excess sensitivity of high income consumers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics

Kukk M, Raaij WFV. 2020. Joint and individual savings within families: evidence from bank
  accounts. Working Paper

Levi Y, Benartzi S. 2020. Mind the app: mobile access to financial information and consumer
  behavior. Working Paper

Loos B, Meyer S, Pagel M. 2020. The consumption effects of the disposition to sell winners and
  hold losers. Working Paper

Medina PC. 2020. Side effects of nudging: Evidence from a randomized intervention in the credit
  card market. Working Paper

Meeuwis M, Parker JA, Schoar A. 2019. Belief disagreement and portfolio choice. Working Paper

Meyer S, Pagel M. 2019. Fully closed: individual responses to realized gains and losses. Working
  Paper

Odean T. 1998. Are investors reluctant to realize their losses. The Journal of Finance 53(5):1775­
  1798

Olafsson A, Pagel M. 2017. Family finances: Intra-household bargaining spending, and capital
  structure. Working Paper

Olafsson A, Pagel M. 2018. The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from personal finance manage-
  ment software. The Review of Financial Studies

Olafsson A, Pagel M. 2019. Borrowing in response to windfalls. Working Paper

Park H. 2016. Financial fragility and mortgage delinquency. Working Paper

Ponce A, Seira E, Zamarripa G. 2017. Borrowing on the wrong credit card? evidence from mexico.
  The American Economic Review

Schuh S. 2018. Measuring consumer expenditures with payment diary surveys. Economic Inquiry
  (56):13­49


                                               30
Weber A. 2019. Financial management skills and entrepreneurial success: evidence from transac-
  tion level data. Working Paper

Xing J, Zou E, Yin Z, Wang Y, Li Z. 2021. Quick response economic stimulus: The effect of
  small-value digital coupons on spending. NBER Working Paper 27596




                                             31
Figure 1: Counts of Papers Employing Transaction Data, by Year; Notes: Yearly counts obtained
from searches of papers containing the terms `credit card data', `bank account data', `transaction
data' and `transaction level data' from SSRN and the NBER working paper series from 2000
through 2020. Searches were conducted on the full text of articles. Searches limited to Economics
and Finance papers in the SSRN database.




                                               32
                                          Table 1: Attributes of Consumption Data Sources
     Properties / Data Source         Transaction                  Survey                    Admin                     Scanner
     Examples                      JPMCI, Mint.com               PSID, CEX            Norwegian Tax Registry   Nielsen Consumer Panel
     Frequency                        Very High                Often Quarterly            Often Annual                  High
     Measurement error ($)               Low                      Medium                      Low                       Low
     Measurement error (category)      Medium                        Low                      High                      Low
     Sample size                         High                        Low                   Very High                   Medium
     Comprehensiveness            Medium to Very High         Medium to High                  High                      Low
     Demographics                      Medium                       High                      Low                      Medium
     Geographic location                 High            Low to High (confidential)           High                     Medium
     Representativeness                 Varied            High (falling; tail issues)      Very High                   Medium
     Historical coverage                 Low                        High                    Medium                      Low
33




     Panel length                  Medium (growing)            Typically Low                  High                     Medium
     Granularity                         High                     Medium                      Low                     Very High
     Asset Coverage                Low to Very High               Medium                      High                      Low

     Properties / Data Source   Banks Credit Cards Neutral Aggregators Focused Aggregators          Payment Apps
     Example                    JPMCI    Visa           Mint.com          ReadyForZero                 Alipay
     Sample Size                 High    High             High                Low                     Medium
     Account Linkages            High    Low           Very High            Medium                      Low
     Observable Income            Yes     No               Yes                 Yes                      No
     Representativeness          High    High           Medium                Low                       Low
     External Links and Surveys Medium   Low             Varied              Varied                     Low
     Legal Access Hurdles        High  Very High        Medium                Low                     Medium
                                    Table 2: Sample Sizes
 Paper                              Data Source           Sample Size & Composition
 Various                    Current Population Survey          60,000 households
 Various                   Consumer Expenditure Survey          7,000 households
 Various                      Nielsen Consumer Panel         40-60,000 households
 Various                   Living Costs and Food Survey      6,000 UK households
 Carvalho et al. (2020)                BBVA                     6.3m individuals
 Baugh et al. (2018)          Large US aggregator app           2.7m individuals
 Andersen et al. (2020d)           Danske Bank                  1.1m individuals
 Bachas et al. (2020)                 Bansefi                 348,802 individuals
 Agarwal et al. (2020b)     Leading bank in Singapore         180,000 individuals
 Ganong & Noel (2019)        JP Morgan Chase Institute        182,361 households
 Kim et al. (2020)           JP Morgan Chase Institute        380,000 businesses
 Baker & Yannelis (2017)      Large US aggregator app       152,810 gov. employees
 Olafsson & Pagel (2018)      Meniga (aggregator app)     65,000 Icelandic households
Notes: Sample sizes obtained from summary statistics tables within listed papers. Survey data
sample sizes are approximate.




                                             34
