                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHEN IS TINKERING WITH SAFETY NET PROGRAMS HARMFUL TO BENEFICIARIES?

                                       Jeffrey Clemens
                                       Michael J. Wither

                                      Working Paper 29028
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29028


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Jean Roth for greatly easing the navigation and analysis of SIPP data, as made
accessible through NBER. We thank Thomas Baranga, Richard Blundell, Prashant Bharadwaj,
Marika Cabral, Julie Cullen, Gordon Dahl, Martin Feldstein, Roger Gordon, Karthik
Muralidharan, Stan Veuger, and participants in the NBER's TAPES conference in Mannheim, as
well as participants in the 2020 symposium on free markets and health care, for helpful comments
and suggestions. Clemens gratefully acknowledges support from the UCSD Academic Senate
through its small grant program, as well as support from the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research and the Harrington Fellowship program at the University of Texas at Austin. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jeffrey Clemens and Michael J. Wither. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
When Is Tinkering with Safety Net Programs Harmful to Beneficiaries?
Jeffrey Clemens and Michael J. Wither
NBER Working Paper No. 29028
July 2021
JEL No. H75,I38

                                        ABSTRACT

Interactions between redistributive policies can confront low-income households with
complicated choices. We study one such interaction, namely the relationship between Medicaid
eligibility thresholds and the minimum wage. A minimum wage increase reduces the number of
hours a low-skilled individual can work while retaining Medicaid eligibility. We show that the
empirical and welfare implications of this interaction can depend crucially on the relevance of
labor market frictions. Absent frictions, affected workers may maintain Medicaid eligibility
through small reductions in hours of work. With frictions, affected workers may lose Medicaid
eligibility unless they leave their initial job. Empirically, we find that workers facing this
scenario became less likely to participate in Medicaid, less likely to work, and more likely to
spend time looking for new jobs, including search while employed. The observed outcomes
suggest that low-skilled workers face substantial labor market frictions. Because adjustment is
costly, tinkering with safety net program parameters that determine the location of program
eligibility notches can be harmful to beneficiaries.


Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu

Michael J. Wither
Powerlytics Inc
michael.j.wither@gmail.com
   The U.S. safety net has many moving parts. Redistributive transfers are made in cash
and in kind, often come through regulation, and are implemented by multiple levels of
government. Arrangements related to health care and health insurance are particularly
complicated, as low-income households must navigate eligibility for free care, Medicaid,
subsidized coverage, and employer provided coverage.
   Policy makers tinker with program parameters regularly. The desirability of any
policy change depends crucially, of course, on the particulars of the program involved.
This paper takes up a question that is distinct from standard program-specific welfare
analysis. We ask whether policy tinkering per se can affect program beneficiaries' well-
being.
   Policy tinkering's effects depend on the ease with which beneficiaries navigate both
the labor market and the programs in which they participate. Changes in program gen-
erosity and eligibility rules can alter beneficiaries' budget constraints in both anticipated
and unanticipated ways. If responding to such changes is difficult, they may generate
significant costs. Alternatively, if little effort is required for beneficiaries to adapt, such
adjustments may be a nuisance rather than a substantive concern. To shed light on
adjustment costs' relevance, we analyze a setting well-suited for precisely this purpose.
   We empirically and theoretically analyze the responses of working Medicaid benefi-
ciaries to minimum wage increases. When the minimum wage rises, jobs that initially
enabled workers to maintain Medicaid eligibility may no longer do so. Because Medi-
caid eligibility phases out with a "notch," small earnings changes can affect eligibility
for benefits worth thousands of dollars (Yelowitz, 1995). In addition to influencing labor
demand, as analyzed in a voluminous literature (Card and Krueger, 1995; Neumark and
Wascher, 2006), a minimum wage increase may thus, in this scenario, have surprising
effects on workers' preferences over hours of work.1

   1 By   "surprising" we mean effects aside from the usual income and substitution effects associated with

                                                     1
   The implications of interactions between Medicaid eligibility notches and the mini-
mum wage depend on factors including the cost of job search and the rigidity of firms'
job offerings (Chetty et al., 2011). If adjustment is seamless, a change in a notch's loca-
tion may have minimal welfare implications; workers shifted out of eligibility can reduce
hours slightly to maintain benefits. If there are significant labor market frictions, how-
ever, reducing hours may require costly search for alternative employment. Workers
shifted "over a notch" may lose access to benefits while they seek employment that per-
mits fewer hours of work. Some may exit employment to maintain benefit eligibility.
Loss of benefits, loss of earned income, and time spent searching are each costly. Both
the empirical and welfare implications of a shift in an eligibility notch's location thus
depend crucially on the relevance of frictions.
   Analyzing the program interaction of interest requires reasonably high frequency
panel data on individuals' wage rates, Medicaid participation, employment, and job
search. The Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) is uniquely suitable for
this purpose.2 Using the 2008 SIPP panel, we estimate the responses of low-wage adult
Medicaid beneficiaries to the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. In July
2009, the federal minimum rose from $6.55 to $7.25 per hour.3 Between 2007 and 2009,
many states saw their effective minimums rise by 40 percent (from $5.15 to $7.25). These
increases were disproportionately binding in states whose initial minimum wage rates


changes in an individual's wage. Many of the minimum wage's potential effects on firms, workers, and
labor markets go beyond the basic employment effects on which the literature has concentrated. Clemens
(2021) discusses a combination of theory and empirical research on a rich set of additional margins that
fit this description.
   2 Administrative  data sources lack the required information on wage rates and job search. Further,
we are unaware of cross-state, panel linkages between administrative earnings data and Medicaid enroll-
ment data that are accessible for research purposes. These shortcomings render administrative sources
impracticable for analyzing the program interaction interest.
   3 Because the relevant SIPP panel began in mid-2008, we are unable to capture our sample's experience
surrounding the July 2008 and July 2007 minimum wage increases. The accumulation of these minimum
wage increases would not qualitatively alter our predictions, but likely contributes to the magnitudes of
our estimates.

                                                   2
were well below $7.25, generating natural treatment and control groups.
   For minimum wage workers, the cumulative $2.10 minimum wage increase implied
a 40 percent reduction in the work hours linked to Medicaid eligibility thresholds. Im-
portantly, this period's eligibility thresholds were often well below 50 percent of the
federal poverty line. For adults in many states, maintaining employment and Medicaid
eligibility could thus be difficult.
   In our sample of affected workers, binding minimum wage increases were followed
by declines in Medicaid participation, declines in employment, and increases in job
search. All three of these outcomes distinguish the theoretical labor market with frictions
from the theoretical labor market without frictions. The observed outcomes point to an
important role for adjustment costs in the labor markets faced by low-skilled workers.4
   There are two primary threats to interpreting the observed changes in employment,
insurance status, and job search as causal effects of the interaction between minimum
wage increases and the Medicaid eligibility notch. First, the states bound by this pe-
riod's minimum wage increases also had relatively low Medicaid eligibility thresholds.
It is thus possible that the transitions of working Medicaid beneficiaries from "bound"
states would have differed from the transitions of those in "unbound" states in the ab-
sence of minimum wage changes. We explore this concern's relevance by examining the
transitions of similarly selected samples during earlier SIPP panels. We find that work-
ing Medicaid beneficiaries in bound states were indeed more likely to transition off of
Medicaid in prior periods, though only moderately so. We implement a triple-difference
estimation framework to net out the transitions we observe during earlier time periods.
This approach has essentially no effect on our estimates of the notch interaction's effect


   4 Additional  details regarding the observed changes in search help to distinguish between the min-
imum wage's standard effects and the program interaction we emphasize. Specifically, we observe in-
creases in job search among individuals who remain employed. This is at odds with the standard search-
model prediction that minimum wage increases will tend to reduce turnover.

                                                  3
on workers' ability to maintain both employment and Medicaid eligibility.
    Second, employment and insurance transitions may in part reflect heterogeneity in
the Great Recession's effects across states. We thus explore our results' robustness to
the inclusion of proxies for the Great Recession's severity. Our baseline analysis follows
the analysis in Clemens and Wither (2019) by controlling directly for a Federal Housing
Finance Agency housing price index.5 We show that alternative approaches to control-
ling for variations in the Great Recession's severity have little impact on our estimates.
The employment and insurance transitions we observe thus do not appear to have been
driven by heterogeneity in macroeconomic factors.
    Our findings connect to two broad literatures. First, we contribute to the ongoing de-
bate over the optimal complexity of redistributive systems. Early analyses in this debate
considered the relative merits of the negative income tax and the patchwork approach
to redistributive policy. Proponents of the negative income tax have long highlighted its
simplicity and straightforward administration (Friedman, 1968; Lampman, 1965; Tobin
et al., 1967). By contrast, insights from Akerlof (1978), Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982),
and others highlight that categorical eligibility rules and in kind benefit structures can
improve the efficiency with which programs target their intended beneficiaries.6 Pro-


   5 Supplementary    analysis by Clemens (2015) provides evidence that the employment changes esti-
mated by Clemens and Wither (2019) carry over to the Current Population Survey's (CPS's) repeated
cross-sectional samples, though the evidence from the CPS is weaker than the evidence from the SIPP.
Zipperer (2016) advances an argument that the estimates in an earlier version of Clemens and Wither
(2019) were biased by variations in the severity of the housing crisis. Clemens (2017b) provides evidence
that the primary falsification test in Zipperer's analysis is both biased and statistically uninformative. In
an additional responsive analysis, Clemens (2017a) provides evidence that Zipperer's assumptions regard-
ing cross-state variations in the severity of the Great Recession are not born out in available proxies for
the effects of the housing crisis on the construction industry, on the housing market, on the labor market,
or on the overall performance of states' economies. Specifically, Clemens (2017a) provides evidence that
these variables experienced larger, more negative shocks in the states that were less bound by increases in
the federal minimum wage, whereas Zipperer's argument requires these shocks to be larger in the states
that were more bound by increases in the federal minimum wage. We encourage interested readers to
evaluate the details of these previous analyses for themselves.
   6 Klevenand Kopczuk (2011) similarly analyze the difficulty of the administrative hurdles to taking up
a program's benefits as a form of screening mechanism.

                                                     4
grams can be complementary if they patch one another's holes, though the functionality
of such patches must be empirically evaluated.
   Our analysis complements existing work on the potential costs associated with ad-
ministratively complex benefit designs. Recent work by Niehaus and Sukhtankar (2013)
and Muralidharan et al. (2014), for example, suggests that non-transparent benefit ar-
rangements may facilitate corruption. On the beneficiary side, work by Aizer (2007),
Bhargava and Manoli (2015), and Manoli and Turner (2014) points to the importance of
informational and administrative impediments to the take-up of benefits for which indi-
viduals are eligible. Our findings imply that the costs of adjusting to changes in complex
benefit designs are relevant to the question of how best to design society's safety net.
   Second, the setting we analyze presents a novel opportunity to learn about labor mar-
kets. The analysis applies insights from Kleven and Waseem (2013) and Kleven (2016)
regarding the usefulness of notches, which result in dominated segments of individu-
als' budget sets, for identifying frictions. Consistent with work by Chetty et al. (2011),
Gelber et al. (2013), and others, our evidence suggests that labor market frictions can
be substantial. Existing work on frictions focuses primarily on middle to high income
taxpayers and the elderly. Our evidence suggests that frictions may also be essential for
understanding labor supply responses to low-income support programs.
   The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1 we use a simple model to demonstrate the
relevance of frictions for assessing the empirical and welfare implications of a change in
the location of a benefit eligibility notch. Section 2 presents background on the minimum
wage changes and Medicaid eligibility rules at the heart of our empirical analysis, as
well as the data we utilize. Section 3 presents our empirical research design. Section
4 presents baseline summary statistics for our analysis samples. Sections 5 through 7
present the analysis itself and Section 8 concludes.




                                            5
1     Implications of Shifting a Benefit Eligibility Notch

    Consider a set of individuals in the following circumstances. First, they are employed
at the legally binding minimum wage wmin . Second, they participate in a benefit program
that phases out with a "notch" at income y . That is, individuals receive a transfer of
value B if and only if income is less than or equal to y . Letting utility be additively
separable in consumption, c, and hours of work, h, we have


              Ui (c, h) = u(c) - Di v(h), subject to c = wmin h + B × 1{wmin h  y }.              (1)

Di scales type i's disutility from work and is distributed continuously on (0, D ).
    Panel A of Figure 1 illustrates the budget constraint such individuals face if they
                                                                                    y           y + B
can select hours of work without restriction. Hours of work between                wmin   and   wmin

are dominated in that an individual could increase both consumption and leisure by
                                        y
reducing labor supply to h =           wmin   and qualifying for the benefit. A mass of types will
thus work precisely h hours, locating at point A.
    In this setting, we analyze the empirical and welfare implications of "policy tinker-
ing," by which we mean incremental changes in program parameters. Specifically, we
consider an incremental change to the minimum wage. For our purposes, an incremental
reduction in the eligibility threshold y would have similar implications.7 We show that
tinkering of this form has very different implications in labor markets with and without
frictions that inhibit workers from freely altering their hours of work.



1.1    Frictionless Hours Adjustment

    We first consider the effects of a differential change in the minimum wage in a fric-
tionless labor market. By frictionless we mean that individuals are uninhibited in select-

    7 We   could also consider a wage that is subsequently shifted by a subsidy.

                                                      6
ing their desired hours of work at the minimum wage.8 Increasing the minimum wage
from wmin to wmin + dw rotates the budget constraint, as illustrated in Figure 1's panel
                              y
B. Individuals working       wmin   = h hours see their earnings rise to y + hdw, making them
ineligible for the benefit. Individuals working h hours thus shift from point A to B.
    If individuals can adjust their work hours costlessly and without constraint, those
                                                                 wmin
initially working h hours will reduce hours to h =             wmin +dw h   to restore benefit eligibility.9
They thus shift to point C, at which neither their earnings nor their program participation
rates differ from their values at point A. Utility following the policy change is simply
u(y + B) - Di v(h ). This marginally exceeds initial utility due to the incremental decline
in work hours.



1.2       Implications of Frictions

    We now introduce limitations on individuals' ability to adjust their work hours. We
assume a very specific, simple structure: some minimum wage jobs require h hours of
work while others require h . The points in the budget set are thus B, C, and D, which
corresponds with unemployment.
    Altering hours requires finding a new job. The cost of exerting search effort s is z(s),
which is convex. We normalize s to be the probability of finding a minimum wage job at
                                        be type i's optimal effort to find a job posted
h hours in the subsequent period. Let si
at h hours. This search occurs from either point B or point D. As illustrated in Figure
1's Panels C and D, different types may have different preferences over these options.

   8 In addition to assuming an absence of frictions, we also assume away disemployment effects of the
minimum wage through the labor demand channel. Our objective is to assess the welfare consequences of
policy tinkering per se, independent of the standard costs and benefits associated with the specific policies
involved.
   9 An  exception to this statement could involve individuals who were initially indifferent between point
A and some point much higher on the budget constraint. We can dispose of this exception by assuming
that these "ties" are broken in favor of greater hours of work, so that such individuals would not choose
point A to begin with.

                                                     7
   Relative to the world of unrestricted hours adjustments, the above frictions have
three novel empirical implications for the effects of shifting the eligibility notch's loca-
tion. First, it is theoretically trivial, though of empirical interest, to note that a shift in the
notch's location only induces search in the model with frictions. Second, the model with
frictions implies that the policy change may reduce the relevant population's employ-
ment rate. Third, it implies that the policy change may reduce the relevant population's
benefit participation rate.
   The model with frictions also contrasts sharply with the frictionless model in its
implications for the welfare consequences of tinkering with program parameters. For
those choosing to search from point C, expected utility in the following period is




                     
  EUi (c, h) = (1 - si )[u((wmin + dw)h) - Di v(h)] + si [u(y + B) - Di v(h )] - z(si )         (2)


For those choosing to search from point D, expected utility in the following period is


                             
          EUi (c, h) = (1 - si )[u( B) - Di v(0)] + si [u(y + B) - Di v(h )] - z(si ).          (3)

In the presence of frictions, it is apparent that incrementally shifting the eligibility notch's
location reduces the relevant population's expected utility through two channels. First,
utility flows are unambiguously lower during time spent at either point B or point D
than at either point A or point C. Second, search is costly. We turn now to an empirical
setting that enables us to provide evidence on the relevance of such costs.




                                                8
2     Background on Our Empirical Setting

    An ideal empirical analysis of the forces modeled above would involve samples of
individuals who, prior to a minimum wage increase, worked very near the number of
hours that would place them at their Medicaid eligibility notch. Reality falls short of this
ideal for several reasons related to measurement and the nuances of Medicaid eligibility.
This section proceeds as follows. Its first sub-section details the nuances of Medicaid
eligibility that complicate efforts to identify individuals at or close to states' Medicaid
eligibility notches. Its second sub-section describes the minimum wage changes at the
heart of our empirical analysis. Its third sub-section describes the data we use for the
analysis.



2.1   Background on Medicaid Eligibility

    As an empirical matter, there are several impediments to identifying workers who,
prior to the minimum wage changes we analyze, had incomes located in the vicinity of
Medicaid eligibility notches. An initial set of issues involves measurement. First, while
Medicaid eligibility is technically linked to monthly pre-tax earned income, the major-
ity of states process renewals on a 12 month basis, with a small minority processing
renewals on a 6 month basis (Heberlein et al., 2013). An individual reporting earnings
close to an eligibility notch in one month may have been beyond it in the previous month
and below it the next. How such earnings patterns translate into renewed eligibility may
be a matter of administrative discretion. A separate issue involves disregards, deduc-
tions, and other earnings adjustments; gross earned income, which is in principle what
we observe, is not the income amount with which eligibility thresholds are compared.
Further, some of the observed variations in self-reported earnings may reflect measure-
ment error and thus not be relevant to program eligibility.


                                             9
   An additional set of issues involve Transitional Medical Assistance (TMA). House-
holds whose incomes rise above their Medicaid eligibility thresholds will generally qual-
ify for at least 6 months, and in some cases 12 months, of TMA (Grady, 2008; Yocom,
2013). These transition rules are relevant for the dynamics of the relationship between
income changes and changes in Medicaid receipt. Notably, TMA assistance is explicitly
intended to ease transitions off of Medicaid; without TMA, income fluctuations would
tend to result in even more disruptions to the insurance status of low-income house-
holds than they do in practice. Because our analysis focuses on individuals who are
employed while receiving Medicaid benefits, some of the individuals in our sample may
have transitioned onto TMA before we first observe them. For individuals already on
TMA, minimum wage increases will reduce the number of jobs that enable them to ei-
ther remain on TMA or qualify once again for Medicaid. Resulting transitions out of
TMA are of as much interest to our analysis as transitions out of Medicaid itself. TMA
may also have implications for measurement of Medicaid coverage. That is, some indi-
viduals may report coverage through TMA as Medicaid, while others may report TMA
as private coverage.10
   How then do we proceed? We observe that during the period we study, and in
particular in states bound by increases in the federal minimum wage, Medicaid eligibility
thresholds were typically below 50 percent of the poverty line. For a household of 3, this
implies eligibility thresholds below $9,000 per year, and often significantly so. Because
these thresholds fall well short of full time minimum wage earnings, employed Medicaid
beneficiaries were, in general, within range of their states' eligibility thresholds. Our
analysis thus focuses on a broad set of low-wage adults who, at baseline, reported being
both regularly employed and covered by Medicaid.


  10 This may occur because, as detailed by (Grady, 2008), TMA assistance can come in the form of
subsidies for any coverage a former Medicaid beneficiary has newly acquired through an employer.

                                               10
2.2   Background on the Late 2000s Federal Minimum Wage Increases

   The minimum wage increases we analyse were driven by federally mandated in-
creases in the minimum wage rates applicable across the U.S. states.11 On May 25, 2007,
Congress legislated a series of minimum wage increases through the "U.S. Troop Readi-
ness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act."
Increases went into effect on July 24th of 2007, 2008, and 2009. In July 2007, the federal
minimum rose from $5.15 to $5.85; in July 2008 it rose to $6.55, and in July 2009 it rose
to $7.25.
   Figure 2 shows our division of states into those that were and were not bound by
changes in the federal minimum wage. As in Clemens and Wither (2019), we base this
designation on whether a state's January 2008 minimum was below $6.55, rendering it
partially bound by the July 2008 increase and fully bound by the July 2009 increase.
Using Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data on states' prevailing minimum wage rates,
we designate 27 states as fitting this description.
   Figure 3 shows the time paths of the average effective minimum wages in the states
to which we do and do not apply our "bound" designation. Two characteristics of
the paths of the minimum wage rates in unbound states are worth noting. First, their
average minimum wage exceeded the minimum applicable in the bound states prior
to the passage of the 2007 to 2009 federal increases. Second, these states voluntarily
increased their minimums well ahead of the required schedule. On average, the effective
minimum wage across these states had surpassed $7.25 by January of 2008. This group's
effective minimum wages rose, on average, by roughly 20 cents over the period we study,
which extends for 4 years beginning in August 2008. By contrast, bound states saw their
effective minimum wages rise by nearly the full, legislated $0.70 on July 24, 2009. Their
minimum wage rates had also risen by nearly a full $0.70 on July 24, 2008. Given the

  11 This   section's text draws liberally on the text from Clemens and Wither (2019)

                                                     11
ambiguities of Medicaid renewal assessments, as discussed in the previous subsection,
the 2008 increase, and perhaps also the 2007 increase, may well have set the stage for the
insurance and employment transitions we analyze.



2.3        Data and Sample Selection

    We analyze the interaction between Medicaid eligibility thresholds and minimum
wage changes using data from the 2008, 2004, 2001, and 1996 panels of the Survey
of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is well-suited to our purposes
because it longitudinally tracks individuals' wages, employment, benefit participation,
and job search at monthly frequency.12 The 2008 SIPP panel, which is central to our
analysis, follows these outcomes over an interval surrounding the July 2009 minimum
wage increase.
    Our analysis involves the experience of employed Medicaid beneficiaries who were
affected by minimum wage increases. In constructing our baseline samples, we thus
require the following. First, we restrict our attention to individuals who reported being
covered by Medicaid for at least 6 of the sample's first 12 months.13 Second, we require
that the individual, when employed, have an average wage rate less than $8.50 during
the baseline months.14 Below, we provide direct evidence that such individuals' wage

   12 As noted previously, there are no administrative data sources in which this combination of infor-
mation is available. U.S. administrative data sources are particularly ill suited for analyses involving the
minimum wage because, with exceptions including several states' unemployment insurance systems, they
contain no information on wage rates or hours of work. Information on job search is similarly sparse.
Further, administrative data on earnings and Medicaid participation are not typically linked.
   13 Inthe 2008 SIPP panel, the first 12 months constitute the baseline period preceding the July 2009
increase in the federal minimum wage. The earlier SIPP panels can be described as "placebo" panels
in that they span time periods during which differentially binding minimum wage changes were not an
important feature of the policy landscape. Note, for example, that although a federal minimum wage
increase was enacted during the 1996 SIPP panel, its bite varied quite modestly around the country. Just
as in the 2008 SIPP panel, we code the first 12 months of the sample as the baseline period in each of the
"placebo" SIPP panels.
   14 For   those workers who do not directly report an hourly wage, but rather a salary, we impute hourly

                                                     12
rates were significantly shifted by the minimum wage increases we analyze. To limit the
relevance of Medicaid eligibility via disability, we restrict our sample to adults ages 55
and younger.
    The SIPP panels we analyze vary in length, with the 2008 panel being the longest.
Our sample from the 2008 SIPP panel extends from August 2008 to January 2013 (4 years,
6 months). Our samples from the 1996, 2001, and 2004 panels of the SIPP cover periods
ranging from August 1996 to December 1999 (3 years, 5 months), August 2001 to October
2003 (2 years, 3 months), and August 2004 to June 2007 (2 years, 11 months) respectively.
As panel balance criteria, we require that individuals from the 2008 SIPP panel have
complete data for at least 36 months, from the 2004 panel for at least 24 months, from
the 2001 panel for at least 18 months, and from the 1996 panel for at least 24 months.
Moderate changes in these criteria have little impact on our results.
    Table 1 displays several economic and demographic characteristics of the individuals
we analyze. During both the 2008 SIPP panel (columns 1 and 2) and prior SIPP panels
(columns 3 and 4), their educational attainment and earnings levels are modest. Demo-
graphically, they are relatively young, relatively likely to have at least one child in the
household, and relatively likely to be female.



3    Empirical Specification

    We initially analyze the effects of interactions between Medicaid eligibility notches
and binding minimum wage increases using the difference-in-differences model below:




wages as earnings divided by the individual's usual hours per week times their reported number of weeks
worked.

                                                  13
                          Yi,s,t =                 p(t) Bounds × Period p(t)
                                     p ( t ) =0

                               + 1s States + 2t Timet + 3i Individuali

                               + X s,t  +  i ,s,t .                                                 (4)


The primary dependent variable of interest, Yi,s,t , is an indicator for whether individual
i in state s at time t maintains both employment and Medicaid coverage. Additional
outcomes of interest include Medicaid coverage by itself, employment by itself, and job
search.
   Equation (4) includes the standard features of difference-in-differences estimation,
namely sets of state (States ) and time (Timet ) fixed effects. Since the SIPP is longitudinal,
we are able to include individual fixed effects (3i ), rendering controls for time-invariant,
individual-specific characteristics redundant. The vector Xs,t contains time varying con-
trols for each state's macroeconomic conditions. Our baseline specification controls for a
housing price index produced by the Federal Housing Finance Authority (FHFA), which
serves as a proxy for the state-level severity of the housing crisis. In robustness checks,
we explore our estimates' sensitivity to the inclusion of additional macroeconomic con-
trols.
   Equation (4) allows for dynamics in the effects of the minimum wage increases we
analyze. Motivated by findings from Clemens and Wither (2019), we designate the three
months preceding the minimum wage increase's implementation as a transition period;
between April and June 2009, workers in bound states became significantly less likely
to report wage rates below the new minimum.15 We designate the year extending from


  15 In  the three "placebo" SIPP panels, namely the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP panels, we similarly code
the last 3 months of the 12 month "baseline" as a transition period.

                                                         14
August 2009 through July 2010 as period "Post 1" and subsequent months as period
"Post 2." Months prior to the transition are the baseline period p = 0. Our primary coef-
ficients of interest are then  Post 1(t) and  Post 2(t) , which estimate the short and medium
run changes in outcomes of interest in bound states relative to unbound states. We
cluster the standard errors on these point estimates at the state level.
   We initially use equation (4) to confirm that binding minimum wage increases shift
the wage distribution of our sample as intended. For this analysis, we construct a set of
outcome variables of the following form:


                          j
                        Yi,s,t = 1{W j-1 < Hourly Wagei,s,t < W j }.                      (5)

These Yi,s,t are indicators equal to 1 if an individual's hourly wage is between W j-1 and
W j , where each band is a $0.50 interval. The  p(t) from these regressions thus trace
out the short and medium run effects of binding minimum wage increases on the wage
distribution's probability mass function.
   We then move to our primary outcome of interest, namely the likelihood that an in-
dividual maintains both employment and coverage by Medicaid. There are two primary
threats to interpreting the estimated changes in employment and insurance status as
causal effects of the interaction between Medicaid eligibility notches and the minimum
wage. The first relates to sample selection and the second to heterogeneity in the Great
Recession's severity across states. We discuss each in turn.
   States bound by this period's minimum wage increases also had relatively low Med-
icaid eligibility thresholds. It is thus possible that the employment and insurance transi-
tions of working Medicaid beneficiaries from "bound" states would have differed from
the transitions of those in "unbound" states in the absence of minimum wage changes.
We explore this concern's relevance by examining the transitions of similarly selected
samples during earlier SIPP panels. More specifically, we implement a triple-difference

                                             15
estimation framework to net out the transitions we observe during earlier time periods.
The relevant specification appears below:




               Yi,s,t =                 p(t) Period p(t) × Bounds × Sipp08 p(t)
                          p ( t ) =0

                    + 1s, p(t) States × Period p(t) + 2s, p(t) States × Sipp08 p(t) +

                    + 3s States + 4t Timet + 5i Individuali + Xs,t  +  i,s,t .          (6)


The variable Sipp08 p(t) is an indicator equal to one if an observation comes from the
2008 SIPP panel. Equation (6) augments the fixed effects from equation (4) with state-by-
period effects and state-by-panel effects. The third set of standard two-way interactions,
namely period-by-panel effects, are incorporated through a full set of time fixed effects.
   Because our setting is somewhat distinctive from common triple-difference environ-
ments, further discussion of the strategy's core assumptions may be of use. Equation (6)
provides a check for the relevance of concerns associated with differences in the Medi-
caid eligibility thresholds in bound and unbound states. Eligibility thresholds in bound
states have historically been low. Consequently, it may, all else equal, be more difficult
to maintain both employment and Medicaid eligibility in these states. This would make
transitions out of either employment or Medicaid participation more common among
bound state samples even in the absence of the minimum wage changes we analyze.
The triple-difference specification thus nets out differences in the transitions associated
with similarly selected samples of individuals in bound and unbound states in prior
periods. To mimic the timing of the July 2009 minimum wage increase within the 2008
SIPP panel, we code the first year of the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP panels as a similarly
structured blend of a "baseline" and "transition" period. For equation (6)'s  p(t) to yield
unbiased estimates, the identifying assumption is that the prior-period transitions cap-


                                                       16
ture any differences that would otherwise have prevailed. Contemporaneous changes
in either Medicaid eligibility policy or minimum wage law pose potential threats to this
approach. Regarding minimum wage law, we provide direct evidence that wage dis-
tributions in our bound and unbound states were not, at least to a significant degree,
affected differentially by minimum wage changes that occurred during the earlier peri-
ods. We further investigate our estimates' sensitivity to controlling directly for changes
in states' Medicaid-eligibility thresholds by including these thresholds in Xs,t .
    Finally, we note that the employment and insurance transitions observed during the
2008 SIPP panel may be affected by heterogeneity in the Great Recession's effects across
states. We thus explore our results' robustness to the inclusion of proxies for the Great
Recession's severity. Our baseline analysis follows the analysis in Clemens and Wither
(2019) by controlling directly for a Federal Housing Finance Agency housing price in-
dex. We show that alternative approaches to controlling for the Great Recession's sever-
ity have little impact on our estimates. The employment and insurance transitions we
observe thus do not appear to have been driven by heterogeneity in macroeconomic fac-
tors. That said, of course, it is not possible to affirmatively rule out all potential biases
of this sort.



4    Baseline Summary Statistics

    Table 1 presents baseline summary statistics for the samples we analyze. Columns 1
and 2 describe the bound and unbound state samples from the 2008 SIPP panel, which
we use in estimating equation (4). Columns 3 and 4 describe the bound and unbound
state samples from the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP panels, which are incorporated into
our estimates of equation (6).
    Row 1 describes the fraction of months individuals spent earning wage rates between



                                             17
$5.15 and $7.25, which were the effective federal minimum wage rates in July 2006 and
July 2009 respectively. The data confirm that, at baseline, such wage rates were far more
common among individuals in our bound states than in our unbound states. Bound
state individuals spent 32 percent of baseline months working at such wage rates. The
same was true of only 11 percent of months for individuals in unbound states, reflecting
the fact that their state minimum wage rates exceeded or were equal to $7.25 at this time.
   Subsequent rows reveal that our sample selection procedure has successfully iden-
tified working, low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries. Individuals in bound and unbound
states were employed in 63 and 62 percent of baseline month respectively. Both sam-
ples reported Medicaid coverage in 85 percent of baseline months. Their probabilities of
maintaining both employment and Medicaid coverage, our primary outcome of interest,
were 52 and 53 percent respectively. As noted previously, the individuals in our analysis
samples are relatively young, relatively likely to have at least one child in the household,
and relatively likely to be female.
   The seventh variable in table 1 ("Earnings") reveals one of the primary differences
between our bound and unbound state samples. Individuals in bound states had aver-
age monthly earnings of $422 while individuals in unbound states had average monthly
earnings of $465. This reflects the fact that bound states tended to have lower Med-
icaid eligibility thresholds than unbound states over this time period. As discussed
above, these differences in eligibility thresholds may independently shape the employ-
ment and insurance transitions of our bound and unbound state samples. Columns 3
and 4 provide evidence that the earlier SIPP panels will provide credible evidence on
the relevance of this concern. Specifically, they show that our selection procedure yields
similar earnings differences in these earlier samples ($536 per month relative to $606 in
inflation adjusted dollars). We are thus reassured that these samples can be informative
regarding the relevance of eligibility threshold differences for our estimates.


                                            18
5    Evidence of the Minimum Wage Increase's Effects on

     Wage Distributions

    This section presents our estimates of the minimum wage increase's effects on the
distribution of wages across our samples of low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries. The panels
of figure 4 present the estimates. Each marker in the figure represents an estimate
of  Post 2(t) from equation (4) when the outcome variables take the form described by
equation (5). The lowest dot in Panel A, for example, is our medium-run estimate of the
minimum wage increase's effect on the probability of earning an hourly wage between
$6.51 and $7.00.
    The estimates show that binding minimum wage increases had substantial bite on the
wage distributions of our samples of low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries. The probability
of wage rates between $6.51 and $7.00 declined by 18 percentage points more in bound
states than in unbound states. This is supplemented by more modest declines in the
probability of wages between $5.51 and $6.50. The shifted mass collects between $7.01
and $8.01. A significant portion of this mass falls between $7.51 and $8, and is thus not
pinned to the new minimum.
    Panels B, C, and D display similar estimates for what one could call "placebo" min-
imum wage changes during the earlier SIPP panels we analyze. That is, we report
similar estimates of equation (4) on samples from the 2004, 2001, and 1996 SIPP panels.
The wage distributions of our bound and unbound state samples appear to evolve simi-
larly during these earlier time periods. A possible exception involves moderate (though
imprecisely estimated) increases, in bound states relative to unbound states, in the prob-
abilities of wage rates between $6.50 and $7.50 during the 2004 SIPP panel. These shifts
likely reflect the effects of state-specific minimum wage increases, which occurred dis-
proportionately in unbound states over this time period. On the whole, however, it


                                           19
appears that the wage trajectories of low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries in bound and un-
bound states were quite similar during these earlier time periods.



6    Graphical Presentations of Employment and Insurance

     Changes

    Figures 5 through 9 present time series tabulations of the unadjusted employment
and insurance coverage data underlying our estimates of equation (4). The panels of
figure 5 present the full set of outcomes of interest for the 2008 SIPP panel. Figures 6
through 9 present tabulations associated with all 4 of the SIPP panels we analyze using
our triple-difference models.
    Figure 5's panel A presents the fraction of individuals in our sample that were both
employed and covered by Medicaid, separately for the bound and unbound states, dur-
ing the 2008 SIPP panel. Just over 50 percent of individuals in both the bound and
unbound states were employed and covered by Medicaid during the baseline months,
during which they followed quite similar trajectories. Between July 2009 and July 2010
these fractions diverge. By late 2010, individuals in bound states had become roughly 13
percentage points less likely to maintain both employment and Medicaid coverage.
    Panels B, C, and D report tabulations for Medicaid participation (panel B), employ-
ment (panel C), and job search (panel D). Trends in Medicaid participation follow a path
mirroring that seen in Panel A. After following similar baseline trajectories, the Medi-
caid participation of individuals in bound states declines by more than 10 percentage
points relative to the Medicaid participation of individuals in unbound states. Panel C
reveals that employment outcomes diverged around July 2010. By July 2011, individuals
in bound states were nearly 10 percentage points less likely to be employed than indi-



                                           20
viduals in unbound states.16 Panel D presents tabulations of job search. Individuals in
bound states spent slightly more weeks per month searching for work during the base-
line period than did individuals in unbound states. Over the first year following July
2009, this pattern reverses.
   The tabulations from the 2008 SIPP panel line up quite consistently with Section
1's predictions for a world in which low-skilled workers face significant labor market
frictions. Following minimum wage increases, the model with frictions predicted that
low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries would spend more time searching for work, be more
likely to exit employment, and be more likely to lose access to Medicaid. None of these
outcomes are predicted in the model without frictions. As discussed above, however,
our initial approach for estimating the causal effect of interactions between the Medicaid
notch and minimum wage increases faces multiple threats. The tabulations presented in
figures 6 through 9 and the regression evidence presented in section 7 encompass our
effort to address these concerns.
   The panels of figure 6 show tabulations of the probability of maintaining both em-
ployment and Medicaid coverage in the 2008, 2004, 2001, and 1996 SIPP panels respec-
tively. Reassuringly, there is little evidence that this outcome evolved differentially
among individuals in bound and unbound states during the earlier SIPP panels. In
the earlier panels, individuals in bound states have slightly lower probabilities of main-
taining employment and Medicaid coverage throughout the relevant sampling frames.
In panels B, C, and D, however, this outcome moves roughly in parallel across the two
groups of states. The data thus reveal that estimates of equations (4) and (6) will yield
similar estimates of the effect of binding minimum wage increases on the maintenance
of both employment and Medicaid coverage.


  16 The observed dynamics highlight the potential importance of insights from Meer and West (2016)
regarding policy changes' dynamic effects.

                                                21
   The panels of figures 7 reveal that estimates of the effect of binding minimum wage
increases on Medicaid participation will be moderately sensitive to shifting from the
difference-in-differences framework to the triple-difference framework. In earlier SIPP
panels, individuals in bound states were moderately more likely to transition off of
Medicaid than were individuals in unbound states. Estimates of the effect of interac-
tions between Medicaid eligibility notches and the minimum wage will thus be mod-
erately smaller in the triple difference specification. The panels of figures 8 reveal that
the relative employment experiences of individuals in bound and unbound states var-
ied somewhat across time periods. Point estimates for employment outcomes may thus
be somewhat sensitive to the inclusion of macroeconomic controls, and triple-difference
specifications will tend to yield less precise estimates than difference-in-differences spec-
ifications. The panels of Figure 9 similarly reveal that job search patterns vary non-
trivially across SIPP panels. It again appears clear, however, that estimates of equations
(4) and (6) will yield similar results.
   It is apparent in figures 5 through 9 that there is relatively little late sample conver-
gence of our bound and unbound state samples' probabilities of maintaining employ-
ment and medicaid coverage. This may be somewhat surprising, as this is the outcome
for which we assumed affected individuals would search. On this point, it is unfortunate
that the 2008 SIPP panel concluded prior to any substantive recovery in employment at
the labor market's lower end. Employment rates among young adults, for example, re-
bounded substantially from 2013 into 2016 after recovering little from 2010 through 2013.
We thus speculate that slack labor market conditions led the adjustments of affected in-
dividuals to take longer than they otherwise might. With reference to our model, our
sample covers a period during which job search was relatively unproductive, implying
that the search cost z(·) for achieving a given probability of finding a new job was rel-
atively high. This can explain both the absence of late-sample convergence and the fact


                                             22
that we observe relatively modest changes in self-reported job search.



7     Regression Analysis

    This section presents our difference-in-differences and triple-difference estimates of
equations (4) and (6). We first present baseline estimates of the effect of interactions
between Medicaid eligibility thresholds and minimum wage increases on employment
and Medicaid participation. Next, we assess our baseline result's robustness to a variety
of specification modifications. We then explore individuals' self-reported reasons for
losing insurance and exiting employment. Finally, we present evidence on job search.



7.1   Effects on Medicaid Receipt and Employment Status

    In table 2, columns 1, 3, and 5 report estimates from equation (4)'s difference-in-
differences specification, while columns 2, 4, and 6 report estimates from equation (6)'s
triple-differences specification. The difference-in-differences estimate in column 1 re-
veals that low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries became significantly less likely to maintain
both employment and Medicaid coverage following binding minimum wage increases.
Relative to low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries in unbound states, their probability of main-
taining employment and Medicaid coverage declined by 6.7 percentage points over the
first year and 14.0 percentage points over subsequent years (the "medium run"). As-
suaging concerns that individuals in bound states differ fundamentally from those in
unbound states, the triple-difference estimates reported in column 2 are similar, with a
short-run estimate of 7.3 percentage points and a medium-run estimate of 15.0 percent-
age points.
    For columns 3 and 4, we replace the dependent variable with an indicator equal
to one if an individual has insurance through Medicaid. Column 3's difference-in-


                                            23
differences estimates include a short-run decline of 7.5 percentage points and a medium-
run decline of 12.9 percentage points.17 As suggested by figure 7, the triple-difference
specification yields moderately smaller estimates. Column 4 reports a short-run decline
of 3.2 percentage points and a medium-run decline of 7.1 percentage points. Columns 5
and 6 report estimates of the associated employment changes. The estimated medium-
run employment decline is 12.3 percentage points in the difference-in-differences speci-
fication and 15.7 percentage points in the triple-difference specification.
   The table also reports p-values on a test for the existence of divergent trends during
the baseline portion of each sample. These p-values are uniformly in excess of conven-
tional significance thresholds, and often substantially so. This is consistent with what
we would have anticipated based on the graphical evidence reported in section 6.
   The changes in employment and insurance status implied by the estimates in table 2
are economically substantial for the individuals involved. The medium-run estimates in
columns 1 and 2, for example, imply declines of just over 25 percent (14 and 15 percent-
age points off of baseline means that are moderately above 50 percent) in the probability
that individuals manage to maintain both employment and Medicaid coverage. The
estimated declines in Medicaid coverage vary non-trivially between the difference-in-
differences and triple-difference specifications, with the estimates implying declines of
15 and 8 percent, respectively. The declines in employment (12.3 and 15.7 percentage
points on baseline means of 62 percent) are of 20 and 25 percent, respectively. These are
quite substantial changes in the household situations of the individuals in our samples.


  17 Our  finding that minimum wage increases are followed by substantial declines in Medicaid partic-
ipation can be contrasted with a finding from Courtemanche et al. (2019), who find that the Affordable
Care Act's Medicaid expansions covered nontrivial numbers of individuals who appear ineligible on the
basis of their incomes as reported in the American Community Survey. Administrative discretion may
play a role in shaping the role of modest income differences in influencing individuals' participation in
Medicaid. Interestingly, state governments face much less of the cost of each Medicaid beneficiary cov-
ered through the Affordable Care Act, as studied by Courtemanche et al. (2019) than of each traditional
Medicaid beneficiary, as analyzed in the current paper.

                                                   24
7.2   Robustness of the Baseline Estimates

   Table 3 presents an analysis of our baseline results' robustness to a variety of spec-
ification changes. Estimates in table 3's Panel A are of equation (4)'s difference-in-
differences model, while estimates in Panel B are of equation (6)'s triple difference
model. The results in column 1 replicate the findings reported in table 2's columns
1 and 2. The results associated with specification modifications appear in subsequent
columns.
   Column 2 replicates our primary specification but without application of the SIPP's
population weights. This modification has essentially no effect on our estimates. In col-
umn 3 we exclude households with infants due to the concern that Medicaid eligibility
thresholds differ for pregnant women relative to other adults. This exclusion modestly
decreases the magnitudes of our short-run point estimates and modestly increases the
magnitudes of our medium-run estimates. In column 4 we exclude our macroeconomic
control for states' median house prices. This decreases our difference-in-differences es-
timate by roughly 1 percentage point and our triple-difference estimate by a less trivial
3 to 4 percentage points. In column 5 we allow for a fairly exhaustive set of interactions
between demographic indicator variables (e.g., individual age dummy variables) and
linear time trends. The specification thus allows for the possibility that differential em-
ployment and insurance transitions are associated with differences in the demographic
composition of our samples. The resulting estimates are economically indistinguishable
from our baseline estimates. In column 6 we control directly for changes in states' Med-
icaid eligibility thresholds. While these thresholds significantly predict the dependent
variable, they have negligible effects on our point estimates of interest. Finally, columns
7 and 8 add additional macroeconomic controls, specifically controls for statewide em-
ployment rates and statewide per capita personal income. The inclusion of these controls
also has negligible effects on our estimates.


                                            25
   As discussed in Sections 3 and 4, our basic estimation strategy faces two primary
threats. The first threat involves variations in the severity of the Great Recession across
states. The second involves differences across states in selection into the Medicaid pro-
gram, which may in turn have implications for individuals' employment and insurance
coverage trajectories.
   Our robustness checks are designed to investigate the relevance of several potential
manifestations of these threats. First, the regressions in which we incorporate additional
macroeconomic variables as controls provides evidence that our estimates are robust to
controlling in several ways for variations in the Great Recession's severity. Second, our
triple-difference specification provides evidence that low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries in
bound states were not on substantially different employment and insurance coverage
trajectories than low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries in unbound states during earlier his-
torical episodes. Further, we find that our results are robust to allowing for the possibility
that individuals of different ages, education levels, or household sizes are on different
employment or insurance coverage trajectories. These robustness checks thus provide
evidence that differences in selection into our samples from bound and unbound states
are not obviously biasing our results. As noted previously, however, it is not possible to
affirmatively rule out all potential biases.
   Table A.1 presents an additional, supplementary piece of analysis in support of our
estimation frameworks. Specifically, it presents a form of placebo estimate. That is, it
presents placebo difference-in-differences estimates on samples consisting of the 1996,
2001, and 2004 SIPP Panels, which are the samples underlying the third layer of differ-
encing in our triple-difference estimates. The estimates are uniformly indistinguishable
from 0 across the same set of robustness checks reported in table 3. It is clear that our
triple difference estimates are not driven by differential changes occurring during our
placebo samples, which is reassuring regarding the validity of our estimation strategy.


                                               26
7.3    Effects on Reasons for Being Uninsured

    In this section we analyze changes in individuals' likelihood of having any insurance
coverage, coupled with self-reported reasons for lacking coverage when uninsured.18
Table 4 reports the estimates. As in table 2, odd-numbered columns report estimates
of equation (4)'s difference-in-differences specification, while even-numbered columns
report estimates from equation (6)'s triple-differences specification.
    Columns 1 and 2 reveal that declines in Medicaid coverage tended not to be associ-
ated with transitions to other forms of insurance.19 The medium-run estimate in column
2, for example, reveals that individuals in bound states became 7.8 percentage points
more likely to be uninsured than did individuals in unbound states. Self-reported rea-
sons for this decline in coverage appear roughly in line with the baseline distribution
of stated reasons for lacking coverage. Columns 3 and 4 reveal significant increases in
lacking coverage due to coverage being "too expensive," while columns 5 and 6 reveal
increases in the likelihood of referencing an inability to obtain coverage through work.
Columns 7 and 8 reveal other reasons to be relatively unimportant.20




  18 The  SIPP asks individuals without any health insurance why they were not covered by any health
insurance plan, and we group their possible responses into three all encompassing categories: 1. Too
Expensive (health insurance was too expensive), 2. Work Restrictions (could not secure insurance from
employer because either the employer did not offer any coverage, they were not working at the job long
enough or enough hours to qualify, or they became unemployed), or 3. Other (includes all remaining
possible reasons including having a pre-existing condition, being in good health with no desire to purchase
health insurance, etc.). Table A.5 in the appendix gives the detailed question and answers pertaining to
this question in the SIPP.
  19 Clemens  et al. (2018) provide evidence that minimum wage increases can directly impact the avail-
ability of employer sponsored coverage, which may contribute to this result.
  20 Note  that the estimates in columns 4, 6, and 8 need not add to the result in column 2 because
respondents are permitted to give multiple responses. Unfortunately for our purposes, respondents are
not asked if they lacked coverage due to being "shifted over the Medicaid eligibility notch."

                                                    27
7.4    Effects on Reasons for Lacking Employment

   Table 5 parallels table 4 in reporting an investigation of individuals' self-reported
reasons for lacking employment. Columns 1 and 2 begin by reporting that, relative to
individuals in unbound states, individuals in bound states became 12 to 16 percentage
points more likely to lack employment over the medium run. The remaining columns
explore the avenues through which these disemployment effects occurred. We group
responses into three categories: 1) Labor Demand (individuals reported being on either
temporary or indefinite layoff), 2) No Match (reported that they were unable to find suit-
able work), or 3) Personal (includes all remaining possible reasons including being unable
to work because of chronic health conditions, being retired, being pregnant, raising chil-
dren, going to school, or being uninterested in working). Table A.6 in the appendix
displays the underlying SIPP question and potential responses in greater detail.
   Employment declines are disproportionately accounted for by declines in the self-
reported ability to find suitable job matches. Decreases in employment for personal
reasons appear economically meaningful, but are estimated with very little precision.
The point estimates associated with strictly demand side factors (i.e., layoffs) are eco-
nomically negligible and statistically indistinguishable from 0. A role for changes in
workers' preferences over hours of work, as emphasized in section 1, thus appears quite
plausible.



7.5    Effects on Workers' Job Search

   We continue our assessment of responses to interactions between Medicaid notches
and minimum wage increases by analyzing job search.21 In our context, job search


  21 Direct evidence of the minimum wage's effects on job search is relatively sparse, with a notable
exception being Adams et al. (2018), who find quite small effects for broader populations of low-skilled
individuals.

                                                  28
captures what may be the most novel implication of labor market frictions. A minimum
wage increase makes minimum wage employment more attractive. Because it may also
reduce the number of such jobs available, those holding minimum wage employment
have little reason to engage in on-the-job search.22 By contrast, Section 1's model with
frictions showed that individuals shifted over a benefit eligibility notch may elect to
search for new employment from their initial job.
   Table 6 presents our estimates of changes in job search. Columns 1 and 2 report
changes in the number of weeks engaged in job search while either employed or un-
employed.23 Relative to individuals in unbound states, individuals in bound states in-
creased job search by an average of 0.05 weeks per month over the short run and 0.19
weeks over the medium run. The precision of these estimates is relatively low, with the
medium-run estimate being statistically distinguishable from 0 at the 0.10 level. Columns
3 and 4 report estimates associated with the intensity of job search while employed. In
both the difference-in-differences and triple-difference specifications, we observe a 0.05
short-run increase in the average number of weeks spent looking for work. The estimate
in column 3 is statistically distinguishable from 0 at the 0.05 level, while the estimate
in column 4 is statistically distinguishable from 0 at the 0.10 level. Notably, this short-
run loading onto search while employed emerges in spite of the fact that individuals in
bound states became less likely to be employed. Though it is not possible to exhaust all
potential alternative explanations, this outcome appears uniquely consistent with a role
for the notch interaction we emphasize. Medium-run increases in job search load onto
search while not employed, as shown in columns 5 and 6.



  22 In  the broader population of minimum wage workers, this will tend to contribute to a negative
relationship between minimum wage increases and employment transitions, in particular from employee-
initiated "quits" (Brochu and Green, 2013; Dube et al., 2016).
  23 Respondents  are asked about job search if they are either unemployed or employed part time, but not
if they are employed full time.

                                                   29
7.6   Summary Effects

    Appendix tables A.2 and A.3 present results associated with two summary outcomes
that simultaneously incorporate changes in employment, job search, and Medicaid par-
ticipation. The outcome in table A.2 is an indicator set equal to one if an individual
was not employed, was not participating in Medicaid, or was searching for work. The
outcome in table A.3 is the sum of the indicators for job search and non-employment mi-
nus an indicator for Medicaid coverage. Estimates associated with these joint outcomes
are strongly statistically significant and are robust to the full set of specification changes
explored previously in table 3.



8     Conclusion

    We analyze the employment and health insurance transitions of low-wage Medicaid
beneficiaries following minimum wage increases. We highlight that the empirical impli-
cations of interactions between wage increases and Medicaid eligibility thresholds can
depend crucially on the relevance of labor market frictions. We find that individuals at
risk of being pushed beyond their Medicaid eligibility thresholds became less likely to be
covered by Medicaid, more likely to lack employment, and more likely to be searching
for new jobs while employed.
    As discussed in section 7.1, our estimates imply quite substantial changes in the
household situations of the individuals in our samples. In particular, they imply a
roughly 20 to 25 percent decline in employment and just over a 25 percent decline in
the probability of maintaining both employment and Medicaid coverage. As shown
in section 7.3, their likelihood of lacking insurance altogether roughly doubles. At the
same time, it is important to keep in mind that our samples represent a modest fraction
of the population that is impacted by either Medicaid or the minimum wage. What our


                                             30
findings suggest is that these low-income households may face substantial adjustment
costs. Because the affected populations are modest in size, these adjustment costs will
tend to be dwarfed by the long-run costs and benefits of major policy reforms. At the
same time, our analysis highlights that persistent tinkering with program parameters
can impose non-trivial cost on low-income households.
    Program interactions of the sort we analyze here have the potential to cause unin-
tended disruption. The costs of adapting to such disruptions can thus have implications
for the social safety net's optimal design. All else equal, program participants will tend
to benefit from efforts to streamline the safety net and reduce its complexity.24
    Our analysis of insurance transitions among low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries pre-
dates the implementation of the Affordable Care Act's (ACA's) subsidies and Medicaid
expansions.25 Importantly, the ACA's subsidies for purchasing insurance soften the im-
plications of Medicaid eligibility thresholds. That is, as a household's income pushes
individuals out of Medicaid eligibility, the ACA will, in many cases, make the house-
hold eligible for subsidized coverage on an insurance exchange. The Transitional Medi-
cal Assistance program also eases the transitions households make as their incomes rise
above their Medicaid eligibility thresholds. As income rises further, the subsidies for
coverage on the exchanges phase out gradually. Nonetheless, the system remains a non-
trivially complicated patchwork in multiple respects. In states that have not expanded
their Medicaid programs, for example, coverage gaps remain between the income levels
at which Medicaid eligibility is lost and at which eligibility for subsidies begins. Even

   24 Complexities associated with federalism are of related interest. While the federal government often
attempts to bind lower governments' actions (Baicker et al., 2012), targeted funds sometimes fail to "stick"
where intended (Knight, 2002; Gordon, 2004). In such settings, it can be difficult for any one level of
government to design policy changes that achieve its objectives. Accounting for patterns of program
crowd out and substitution can thus become an essential wrinkle to the program evaluation problem
(Baicker and Staiger, 2005; Kline and Walters, 2016).
   25 Fora selection of studies on the effects of the ACA's key provisions on insurance coverage and access
to health care, see Courtemanche et al. (2017); Frean et al. (2017); Soni et al. (2017); Ghosh et al. (2017);
Courtemanche et al. (2018).

                                                     31
where there is no gap between eligibility thresholds, the transition from Medicaid to an
insurance exchange requires selecting a new plan, which may alter a households' cost-
sharing arrangements and choices across providers. A non-trivial degree of complexity
thus remains intact, such that simplification may still have substantial value.
   Recent years have been associated with significant uncertainty regarding the safety
net's future shape and generosity. Due to adjustment frictions, including the irreversibil-
ity of many human capital investments, the effects of these uncertainties on the skill
accumulation of low-income individuals merit further study. Our evidence suggests
that low-skilled individuals face significant labor market frictions. Given such frictions,
the stability of redistributive programs' design may be an important, under-appreciated
characteristic of the safety net as a whole. Steady streams of changes, whether radical or
incremental, may significantly complicate low-income households' lives. Our analysis
shows that the costs of these changes can be particularly large when benefits phase out
with notches, so that small earnings adjustments alter eligibility for substantial transfers.




                                             32
References

Adams, C., J. Meer, and C. Sloan (2018). The minimum wage and search effort. NBER
  Working Paper 25128.

Aizer, A. (2007). Public health insurance, program take-up, and child health. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics 89(3), 400­415.

Akerlof, G. A. (1978). The economics of "tagging" as applied to the optimal income tax,
  welfare programs, and manpower planning. American Economic Review 68(1), 8­19.

Baicker, K., J. Clemens, and M. Singhal (2012). The rise of the states: Us fiscal decentral-
  ization in the postwar period. Journal of Public Economics 96(11), 1079­1091.

Baicker, K. and D. Staiger (2005). Fiscal shenanigans, targeted federal health care funds,
  and patient mortality. Quaterly Journal of Economics (1), 345­386.

Bhargava, S. and D. Manoli (2015). Psychological frictions and the incomplete take-
  up of social benefits: Evidence from an irs field experiment. American Economic Re-
  view 105(11), 3489­3529.

Brochu, P. and D. A. Green (2013). The impact of minimum wages on labour market
  transitions. The Economic Journal 123(573), 1203­1235.

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1995). Myth and measurement: the new economics of the mini-
  mum wage. Princeton University Press.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, T. Olsen, and L. Pistaferri (2011). Adjustment costs, firm
  responses, and micro vs. macro labor supply elasticities: Evidence from danish tax
  records. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2), 749­804.

Clemens, J. (2015). The minimum wage and the great recession: Evidence from the
  current population survey. NBER Working Paper 21830.

                                                33
Clemens, J. (2017a). The minimum wage and the great recession: A response to zipperer
  and recapitulation of the evidence. ESSPRI Working Paper 20171.

Clemens, J. (2017b). Pitfalls in the development of falsification tests: An illustration from
  the recent minimum wage literature. ESSPRI Working Paper 20172.

Clemens, J. (2021). How do firms respond to minimum wage increases? understanding
  the relevance of non-employment margins. Journal of Economic Perspectives 35(1), 51­72.

Clemens, J., L. B. Kahn, and J. Meer (2018). The minimum wage, fringe benefits, and
  worker welfare. NBER Working Paper 24635.

Clemens, J. and M. Wither (2019). The minimum wage and the great recession: Evidence
  of effects on the employment and income trajectories of low-skilled workers. Journal
  of Public Economics 170, 53­67.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2017). Early impacts
  of the affordable care act on health insurance coverage in medicaid expansion and
  non-expansion states. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36(1), 178­210.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2018). Early effects of
  the affordable care act on health care access, risky health behaviors, and self-assessed
  health. Southern Economic Journal 84(3), 660­691.

Courtemanche, C. J., J. Marton, and A. Yelowitz (2019). Medicaid coverage across the
  income distribution under the affordable care act. NBER Working Paper 26145.

Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2016). Minimum wage shocks, employment flows,
  and labor market frictions. Journal of Labor Economics 34(3), 663­704.

Frean, M., J. Gruber, and B. D. Sommers (2017). Premium subsidies, the mandate, and



                                             34
  medicaid expansion: Coverage effects of the affordable care act. Journal of Health
  Economics 53, 72­86.

Friedman, M. (1968). The case for the negative income tax. Republican papers 202, 220.

Gelber, A., D. Jones, and D. W. Sacks (2013). Earnings adjustment frictions: Evidence
  from the social security earnings test. NBER Working Paper (w19491).

Ghosh, A., K. Simon, and B. D. Sommers (2017). The effect of state medicaid expansions
  on prescription drug use: evidence from the affordable care act. NBER Working Paper
  23044.

Gordon, N. (2004). Do federal grants boost school spending? evidence from title i.
  Journal of Public Economics 88(9), 1771­1792.

Grady, A. (2008). Transitional medical assistance (tma) under medicaid. Congressional
  Research Service July.

Heberlein, M., T. Brooks, J. Alker, S. Artiga, and J. Stephens (2013). Getting into gear
  for 2014: Findings from a 50-state survey of eligibility, enrollment, renewal, and cost-
  sharing policies in medicaid and chip, 2012-2013. Technical report, Kaiser Foundation.

Kleven, H. J. (2016). Bunching. Annual Review of Economics 8, 435­464.

Kleven, H. J. and W. Kopczuk (2011). Transfer program complexity and the take-up of
  social benefits. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(1), 54­90.

Kleven, H. J. and M. Waseem (2013). Using notches to uncover optimization frictions
  and structural elasticities: Theory and evidence from pakistan. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 128(2), 669­723.

Kline, P. and C. R. Walters (2016). Evaluating public programs with close substitutes:
  The case of head start. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4), 1795­1848.

                                            35
Knight, B. (2002). Endogenous federal grants and crowd-out of state government spend-
  ing: Theory and evidence from the federal highway aid program. American Economic
  Review, 71­92.

Lampman, R. J. (1965). Approaches to the reduction of poverty. American Economic
  Review, 521­529.

Manoli, D. S. and N. Turner (2014). Nudges and learning: Evidence from informational
  interventions for low-income taxpayers. NBER Working Paper 20718.

Meer, J. and J. West (2016). Effects of the minimum wage on employment dynamics.
  Journal of Human Resources 51(2), 500­522.

Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar (2014). Payments infrastructure and the
  performance of public programs: Evidence from biometric smartcards in india. NBER
  Working Paper 19999.

Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2006). Minimum wages and employment: A review of
  evidence from the new minimum wage research. NBER Working Paper 12663.

Nichols, A. L. and R. J. Zeckhauser (1982). Targeting transfers through restrictions on
  recipients. American Economic Review, 372­377.

Niehaus, P. and S. Sukhtankar (2013). The marginal rate of corruption in public pro-
  grams: Evidence from india. Journal of Public Economics 104, 52­64.

Soni, A., M. Hendryx, and K. Simon (2017). Medicaid expansion under the afford-
  able care act and insurance coverage in rural and urban areas. The Journal of Rural
  Health 33(2), 217­226.

Tobin, J., J. A. Pechman, and P. M. Mieszkowski (1967). Is a negative income tax practical?
  Yale Law Journal, 1­27.

                                            36
Yelowitz, A. S. (1995). The medicaid notch, labor supply, and welfare participation:
  Evidence from eligibility expansions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4), 909­
  939.

Yocom, C. (2013). Medicaid: Additional enrollment and expenditure data for the transi-
  tional medical assistance program. United States Government Accountability Office March
  15.

Zipperer, B. (2016). Did the minimum wage or the great recession reduce low-wage
  employment? comments on clemens and wither (2016). Unpublished Working Paper.




                                           37
Tables and Figures




                     38
39
     Figure 1: Illustration of the Interaction between the Minimum Wage and a Benefit Eligibility Notch:
     The figure illustrates the implications of a change in the minimum wage for the budget constraint faced by individuals who may receive a
     benefit that phases out with a notch.
Figure 2: States Bound by the 2008 and 2009 Federal Minimum Wage Increase:
The map labels states on the basis of whether we characterize them as bound by the July 2008 and July
2009 increases in the federal minimum wage. We define bound states as states reported by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) to have had a minimum wage less than $6.55 in January 2008. Such states were at
least partially bound by the July 2008 increase in the federal minimum and fully bound by the July 2009
increase from $6.55 to $7.25.




                                                  40
                                           Average Effective Minimum Wages
                        $8.00
           Avg. Effective Min. Wage
             $6.00         $7.00
                        $5.00




                                  Jul,06       Jul,08             Jul,10             Jul,12

                                           States Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases
                                           States Not Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases


Figure 3: Evolution of the Average Minimum Wage in Bound and Unbound States:
As in the previous figure, we define bound states as states reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
to have had a minimum wage less than $6.55 in January 2008. Such states were at least partially bound
by the July 2008 increase in the federal minimum and fully bound by the July 2009 increase from $6.55 to
$7.25. Effective monthly minimum wage data were taken from the detailed replication materials associated
with Meer and West (2016). Within each group, the average effective minimum wage is weighted by
state population. The first solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal
minimum wage as well as the first month of data available in our samples from the 2008 panel of the
Survey of Income and Program Participation. The second solid vertical line indicates the timing of the
July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage.




                                                            41
                                                   Medium Run Changes in Wage Distribution
                                                   Panel A: 2008 Panel                                             Panel B: 2004 Panel




                                      .2
                                                                                                      .2




                                 .1
                                                                                                 .1




                           0
                                                                                   -.1    0




                  D-in-D Coefficients
                                                                                  D-in-D Coefficients




                -.2 -.1
                                                                                             -.2
                                           $0.00   $5.00   $10.00   $15.00   $20.00                        $0.00   $5.00   $10.00   $15.00   $20.00

                                                   Panel C: 2001 Panel                                             Panel D: 1996 Panel




                                    .2
                                                                                                      .2




                               .1
                                                                                                 .1




42
                        0
                                                                                          0




                 -.1
                                                                                   -.1




                D-in-D Coefficients
                                                                                  D-in-D Coefficients




                            -.2
                                                                                             -.2



                                           $0.00   $5.00   $10.00   $15.00   $20.00                        $0.00   $5.00   $10.00   $15.00   $20.00




     Figure 4: Estimated Effects of the Minimum Wage on Hourly Wage Distributions: The figure reports estimates of binding minimum
     wage increase's medium run effects on the wage distributions of the low-wage Medicaid beneficiary subsample across the four SIPP panels
     used in our analysis as indicated in each panel's title. Each dot is an estimate of the coefficient  p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after each panel's actual or simulated policy change representing the July 2009 increase
                                                                                                     j
     in the federal minimum wage. The dependent variables in each specification take the form Yi,s,t = 1{W j-1 < Hourly Wagei,s,t < W j }. These
     Yi,s,t are indicators equal to 1 if an individual's hourly wage is in the band between W j-1 and W j , where each band is a 50 cent interval.
     The results can thus be described as estimates of the minimum wage's effect on the wage distribution's probability mass function. Panel A
     presents wage distribution changes in our sample from the 2008 SIPP Panel, Panel B the 2004 Panel, Panel C the 2001 Panel, and Panel D the
     1996 Panel.
                                     Evolution of Medicaid, Employment, and Job Search
                                      Panel A: Medicaid & Employed                                                   Panel B: Medicaid Participation




                                                                                                   1




                        .7
                                                                                                .8




                           .5
                                                                                          .6




                     .3
                                                                                          Medicaid




                    Med & Emp
                                                                                                   .4




                        .1
                                  8            9           10            1            2                          8            9           10           11           12
                         2      00         200          20             01           01           2             00           00          20           20           20
                     ul,               ul,          ul,          u l, 2        ul, 2         ul,                        l, 2        l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                 J            J            J            J            J                          Ju           Ju           Ju           Ju

                                                 Panel C: Employed                                                       Panel D: Weeks Looking




                                                                                                           1




                        .75
                                                                                                    .75




43
                                                                                               .5




                    .55 .65
                    Employed
                                                                                             Weeks Looking




                        .45
                                                                                          .25
                                  8            9           10            1            2                          8            9           10           11           12
                         2      00         200          20             01          01            2             00           00          20           20           20
                     ul,               ul,          ul,            l, 2        l, 2          ul,                        l, 2        l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                 J            J            Ju           Ju           J                          Ju           Ju           Ju           Ju


                                                                        Bound States                                    Unbound States


     Figure 5: Medicaid, Employment, and Job Search Trends in Bound and Unbound States: The figure depicts the average trend of Medicaid,
     employment, and job search outcomes in bound and unbound states. In all cases the series are constructed by the authors using data from the
     2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Observations represent the average probability of the given outcome
     variable across all individuals in our previously defined bound and unbound states for each survey month and use individual probability
     sampling weights. Panel A depicts the trend of being both on Medicaid coverage and employed, Panel B the trend of Medicaid coverage,
     Panel C the trend of employment, and Panel D the trend of actively searching for work. In all panels, the solid vertical line indicates the
     timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage.
                                                                        Medicaid and Employed
                                                   Panel A: 2008 Panel                                                           Panel B: 2004 Panel




                        .7
                                                                                                         .7




                           .5
                                                                                                            .5




                     .3
                                                                                                      .3




                    Med & Emp
                                                                                                     Med & Emp




                        .1
                                                                                                         .1
                                  8                9           10            1              2                      4            5            06           07           08
                          2     00         2  00            20             01             01               2     00           00           20           20           20
                      ul,              ul,              ul,          u l, 2          ul, 2             ul,                l, 2         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                 J                J            J              J                 J                 Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju

                                                   Panel C: 2001 Panel                                                           Panel D: 1996 Panel




                        .7
                                                                                                         .7




                           .5
                                                                                                            .5




44
                     .3
                                                                                                      .3




                    Med & Emp
                                                                                                     Med & Emp




                        .1
                                                                                                         .1
                                  1                2               03              4             5                 6            7            98           99           00
                          2     00              00               20              00            00          1     99           99           19           19           20
                      ul,                   l, 2             l ,            l, 2           l, 2        ul,                l, 1         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                     Ju               Ju            Ju              Ju          J                 Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju


                                                                             Bound States                               Unbound States


     Figure 6: Joint Employment and Medicaid Coverage Trends in Bound and Unbound States: The figure depicts the average trend of being
     both employed and covered by Medicaid in bound and unbound states. In all cases the series are constructed by the authors using data
     from the 2008, 2004, 2001, and 1996 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Observations represent the average
     probability of being both employed and with Medicaid coverage across all individuals in our previously defined bound and unbound states
     for each survey month and use individual probability sampling weights. Panel A depicts data from the 2008 panel, Panel B the 2004 panel,
     Panel C the 2001 panel, and Panel D the 1996 panel from the SIPP. In Panel A, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009
     increase in the federal minimum wage, while the dashed lines in the remaining panels represent the simulated minimum wage increase.
                                                                         Medicaid Participation
                                                  Panel A: 2008 Panel                                                          Panel B: 2004 Panel




                        1
                                                                                                        1




                          .8
                                                                                                          .8




                    .6
                                                                                                    .6




                    Medicaid
                                                                                                    Medicaid




                        .4
                                                                                                        .4
                                 8                9           10            1              2                     4            5            06           07           08
                         2     00         2  00            20             01             01              2     00           00           20           20           20
                     ul,              ul,              ul,          u l, 2          ul, 2            ul,                l, 2         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                J                J            J              J                 J                Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju

                                                  Panel C: 2001 Panel                                                          Panel D: 1996 Panel




                        1
                                                                                                        1




                          .8
                                                                                                          .8




45
                    .6
                                                                                                    .6




                    Medicaid
                                                                                                    Medicaid




                        .4
                                                                                                        .4
                                 1                2               03              4             5                6            7            98           99           00
                         2     00              00               20              00            00         1     99           99           19           19           20
                     ul,                   l, 2             l ,            l, 2           l, 2       ul,                l, 1         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                    Ju               Ju            Ju              Ju          J                Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju


                                                                            Bound States                              Unbound States


     Figure 7: Medicaid Trends in Bound and Unbound States: The figure depicts the average trend of being covered by Medicaid in bound
     and unbound states. In all cases the series are constructed by the authors using data from the 2008, 2004, 2001, and 1996 panels of the
     Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Observations represent the average probability of having Medicaid coverage across all
     individuals in our previously defined bound and unbound states for each survey month and use individual probability sampling weights.
     Panel A depicts data from the 2008 panel, Panel B the 2004 panel, Panel C the 2001 panel, and Panel D the 1996 panel from the SIPP. In Panel
     A, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage, while the dashed lines in the remaining
     panels represent the simulated minimum wage increase.
                                                                                         Employed
                                                  Panel A: 2008 Panel                                                          Panel B: 2004 Panel




                        .75
                                                                                                        .75




                    .55 .65
                                                                                                    .55 .65




                    Employed
                                                                                                    Employed




                        .45
                                                                                                        .45
                                 8                9           10            1              2                     4            5            06           07           08
                         2     00         2  00            20             01             01              2     00           00           20           20           20
                     ul,              ul,              ul,          u l, 2          ul, 2            ul,                l, 2         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                J                J            J              J                 J                Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju

                                                  Panel C: 2001 Panel                                                          Panel D: 1996 Panel




                        .75
                                                                                                        .75




46
                    .55 .65
                                                                                                    .55 .65




                    Employed
                                                                                                    Employed




                        .45
                                                                                                        .45
                                 1                2               03              4             5                6            7            98           99           00
                         2     00              00               20              00            00         1     99           99           19           19           20
                     ul,                   l, 2             l ,            l, 2           l, 2       ul,                l, 1         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                    Ju               Ju            Ju              Ju          J                Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju


                                                                            Bound States                              Unbound States


     Figure 8: Employment Trends in Bound and Unbound States: The figure depicts the average trend of being employed in bound and
     unbound states. In all cases the series are constructed by the authors using data from the 2008, 2004, 2001, and 1996 panels of the Survey
     of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Observations represent the average probability of being employed across all individuals in our
     previously defined bound and unbound states for each survey month and use individual probability sampling weights. Panel A depicts data
     from the 2008 panel, Panel B the 2004 panel, Panel C the 2001 panel, and Panel D the 1996 panel from the SIPP. In Panel A, the solid vertical
     line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage, while the dashed lines in the remaining panels represent the
     simulated minimum wage increase.
                                                                                                 Job Search
                                                            Panel A: 2008 Panel                                                                    Panel B: 2004 Panel




                                     1
                                                                                                                               1




                              .75
                                                                                                                        .75




                         .5
                                                                                                                   .5




                       Weeks Looking
                                                                                                                 Weeks Looking




                    .25
                                                                                                              .25
                                           8                9           10            1              2                               4            5            06           07           08
                            2            00         2  00            20             01             01                 2            00           00           20           20           20
                        ul,                     ul,              ul,          u l, 2          ul, 2               ul,                       l, 2         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                          J                J            J              J                 J                          Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju

                                                            Panel C: 2001 Panel                                                                    Panel D: 1996 Panel




                                     1
                                                                                                                        .75    1




                              .75




47
                                                                                                                   .5




                         .5
                       Weeks Looking
                                                                                                                 Weeks Looking
                                                                                                              .25




                    .25
                                           1                2               03              4             5                          6            7            98           99           00
                            2            00              00               20              00            00            1            99           99           19           19           20
                        ul,                          l, 2             l ,            l, 2           l, 2          ul,                       l, 1         l ,          l ,          l ,
                    J                              Ju               Ju            Ju              Ju          J                          Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju


                                                                                      Bound States                                        Unbound States


     Figure 9: Job Search Trends in Bound and Unbound States: The figure depicts the average trend of the number of weeks spent actively
     looking for a job in bound and unbound states. In all cases the series are constructed by the authors using data from the 2008, 2004, 2001,
     and 1996 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Observations represent the average number of weeks in the given
     month actively searching for work across all individuals in our previously defined bound and unbound states for each survey month and use
     individual probability sampling weights. Panel A depicts data from the 2008 panel, Panel B the 2004 panel, Panel C the 2001 panel, and Panel
     D the 1996 panel from the SIPP. In Panel A, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage,
     while the dashed lines in the remaining panels represent the simulated minimum wage increase.
       Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics by Treatment Status and SIPP Panel

                                                   (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)
                                                  2008       2008        Control     Control
                                                 Bound     Unbound       Bound      Unbound
           Earn $5.15-$7.25                       0.320      0.114        0.375       0.343
                                                 (0.467)    (0.318)      (0.484)     (0.475)
           Prob(employed)                         0.623      0.622        0.601       0.639
                                                 (0.485)    (0.485)      (0.490)     (0.480)
           Prob(Medicaid coverage)                0.849      0.852        0.860       0.872
                                                 (0.358)    (0.355)      (0.347)     (0.334)
           Prob(uninsured)                        0.115      0.108       0.0985      0.0857
                                                 (0.319)    (0.310)      (0.298)     (0.280)
           Prob(Medicaid & employed)              0.519      0.526        0.508       0.549
                                                 (0.500)    (0.499)      (0.500)     (0.498)
           Medicaid Eligibility Threshold         0.635      0.993        0.457       0.734
                                                 (0.695)    (0.654)      (0.529)     (0.533)
           Earnings                               422.2      465.6        536.4       606.0
                                                 (539.6)    (599.5)      (728.7)     (798.7)
           Num hours worked/week                  18.74      20.37        20.84       21.42
                                                 (16.05)    (17.20)      (17.18)     (17.57)
           Age                                    25.18      27.88        27.34       29.29
                                                 (9.095)    (10.22)      (9.441)     (10.02)
           Female                                 0.729      0.692        0.735       0.696
                                                 (0.444)    (0.462)      (0.442)     (0.460)
           Any Kids in Family                     0.723      0.726        0.757       0.743
                                                 (0.448)    (0.446)      (0.429)     (0.437)
           Any College Education                  0.288      0.321        0.268       0.273
                                                 (0.453)    (0.467)      (0.443)     (0.445)
           Observations                           4051       5741         16714       27217
 Sources: Baseline summary statistics were calculated by the authors using data from the 1996, 2001, 2004,
and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation. The baseline within each panel
corresponds with the 12 month window from August of the first year of the panel to July of the second
year of the panel. Samples consist of individuals ages 16-55 years old, earning an average baseline wage
of less than $8.50 per hour while employed, having Medicaid coverage for at least six months in the pre-
policy period, and having been in the sample for at least roughly two-thirds of the 1996, 2001, 2004, and
2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Column 1 contains the mean and
standard deviation (in parenthesis) of key variables from individuals in bound states, as defined in Section
2, from the 2008 SIPP panel, while column 2 reports the statistics of individuals in the panel's unbound
states. Columns 3 and 4 report the baseline statistics from individuals in our `control' panels, i.e. the
combination of the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP panels, in similarly designated bound and unbound states
respectively.




                                                    48
                                                Table 2: Effects on Medicaid and Employment

                                                      (1)      (2)                     (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)
                         Dependent Variable            Med&Emp                           Medicaid               Employed
                         Bound x Post 1             -0.067                          -0.075*                 -0.040
                                                   (0.042)                          (0.031)                 (0.042)
                         Bound x Post 2           -0.140**                         -0.129**                -0.123**
                                                   (0.040)                          (0.039)                 (0.040)
                         Bound x Post 1 x SIPP 08            -0.073                            -0.032                 -0.060
                                                            (0.044)                           (0.032)                 (0.050)
                         Bound x Post 2 x SIPP 08          -0.150**                           -0.072*                -0.157**
                                                            (0.043)                           (0.031)                 (0.051)
                         Housing Price Index        0.579   0.941*                   -0.307    -0.144        1.158   1.278**
                                                   (0.779) (0.433)                  (0.754) (0.300)         (0.803) (0.440)
                         N                         40,797 153,940                   40,797 153,940          40,797 153,940
                         Mean of Dep. Var.          0.524    0.533                   0.851     0.865         0.622     0.625
                         Pre-Trend Test P-Value     0.928    0.733                   0.498     0.713         0.159     0.130




49
                         Estimator                   DD      DDD                      DD       DDD            DD       DDD
                         Weighted                    Yes      Yes                     Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes
                         Full Fixed Effects          Yes      Yes                     Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes
                         Triple Dif Interactions      No      Yes                      No       Yes           No        Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports difference-in
     differences and triple-difference estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables. More
     specifically, the estimates in rows 1 and 3 correspond to our short-run effects within one year after the policy. The estimates in rows 2 and
     4 correspond to our medium-run effects one year and beyond from the policy implementation. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable
     is the unconditional probability that an individual has Medicaid coverage and is employed. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable
     is the unconditional probability that an individual has Medicaid coverage, and finally in columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the
     unconditional probability that an individual is employed. Standard errors are clustered at the state level in all models. The regressions
     are run on a sample of individuals 16-55 years old, earning an average baseline wage of less than $8.50 per hour while employed, having
     Medicaid coverage for at least six months in the pre-policy period, and having been in the sample for at least roughly two-thirds of the 1996,
     2001, 2004, and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The full description of the sample selection is outlined
     in Section 2.3.
          Table 3: Robustness of Effects on Joint Medicaid and Employment Status
                                               (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)                  (8)
    Dependent Variable                                                  Medicaid & Employed
    Panel A:                                                        Difference-in-Differences Specifications
    Bound x Post 1                           -0.067     -0.082+      -0.056     -0.059    -0.064    -0.066    -0.068                -0.065
                                             (0.042)     (0.041)     (0.046)   (0.043) (0.046)     (0.042)   (0.042)               (0.043)
    Bound x Post 2                          -0.140**    -0.138**    -0.162** -0.129** -0.131** -0.140*** -0.141***                -0.136**
                                             (0.040)     (0.039)     (0.047)   (0.040) (0.044)     (0.040)   (0.040)               (0.042)
    Housing Price Index                       0.579       0.633       0.533               0.537      0.265    0.473                 0.461
                                             (0.779)     (0.708)     (0.874)             (0.778)   (0.778)   (0.783)               (0.759)
    Med. Eligibility Limit                                                                         0.050*
                                                                                                   (0.021)
    State Employment Rate                                                                                      0.007
                                                                                                             (0.017)
    State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                                                                                     0.000
                                                                                                                                   (0.000)
    N                                        40,797      40,797       27,852      40,797     40,797      40,797       40,797       40,797
    Mean of Dep. Var.                         0.524       0.524        0.553       0.524      0.524       0.524       0.524         0.524


    Panel B:                                                             Triple Difference Specifications
    Bound x Post 1 x SIPP 08                 -0.073      -0.087*      -0.053     -0.041    -0.066     -0.073          -0.075+       -0.067
                                             (0.044)     (0.042)     (0.050)    (0.047) (0.046)      (0.044)          (0.043)      (0.042)
    Bound x Post 2 x SIPP 08                -0.150**    -0.147***   -0.169*** -0.113* -0.137** -0.152**              -0.159***    -0.146***
                                             (0.043)     (0.038)     (0.047)    (0.043) (0.046)      (0.044)          (0.045)      (0.042)
    Housing Price Index                      0.941*      0.697+      0.873*               0.991*     0.884+            0.873*      0.814*
                                             (0.433)     (0.385)     (0.412)              (0.451)    (0.441)          (0.417)      (0.402)
    Med. Eligibility Limit                                                                            0.037*
                                                                                                     (0.015)
    State Employment Rate                                                                                              0.012
                                                                                                                      (0.009)
    State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                                                                                    0.000*
                                                                                                                                  (0.000)
    N                                       153,940     153,940      113,742     153,940     153,940     153,940     153,940      153,940
    Mean of Dep. Var.                        0.533       0.528        0.546       0.533       0.528       0.533       0.533        0.533
    Full Interactions                         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
    Weighted                                  Yes         No           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
    Include Households w/ Infants             Yes         Yes          No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
    Demographic Trends                        No          No           No          No          Yes         No          No            No
Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports difference-in
differences and triple-difference estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run effects on an indicator for whether or not
an individual is both employed and has Medicaid coverage. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 of Panel A are of the coefficient
 p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and extending through July
2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient  p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period
beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of  p(t) from
equation (6), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals from our subsample
of low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries from the 2008 SIPP Panel. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include the similar subsample
of low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries from the collection of the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP Panels. The full description of the sample
selection is outlined in Section 2.3. The columns explore our baseline results' (column 1) robustness to a variety of specification
changes, which are further described in the main text and within the table itself. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                      50
                                              Table 4: Effects on Reasons for Being Uninsured

                                             (1)      (2)                 (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)                 (7)       (8)
                  Dependent Variable          Uninsured                  Too Expensive Work Limitations                    Other
                  Bound x Post 1           0.080**                      0.080**         0.086***                      0.010
                                           (0.023)                      (0.025)          (0.021)                     (0.007)
                  Bound x Post 2           0.124**                      0.126**         0.119**                      0.012+
                                           (0.039)                      (0.037)          (0.038)                     (0.007)
                  Bound x Post 1 x SIPP 08          0.043                       0.044+           0.044+                         0.006
                                                   (0.026)                      (0.025)          (0.025)                      (0.008)
                  Bound x Post 2 x SIPP 08          0.078*                       0.076*          0.074*                         0.007
                                                   (0.035)                      (0.035)          (0.031)                      (0.011)
                  Housing Price Index       0.332   0.082                0.203   0.127    0.722   0.301               0.043    -0.025
                                           (0.675) (0.234)              (0.744) (0.208) (0.743) (0.194)              (0.162) (0.066)
                  N                        40,797 153,940               40,797 153,940 40,797 153,940                40,797 153,940
                  Mean of Dep. Var.         0.111   0.094                0.087   0.067    0.080   0.058               0.011    0.010
                  Estimator                  DD     DDD                   DD     DDD       DD     DDD                  DD      DDD
                  Weighted                   Yes     Yes                  Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes                 Yes       Yes




51
                  Full Fixed Effects         Yes     Yes                  Yes     Yes      Yes     Yes                 Yes       Yes
                  Triple Dif Interactions    No      Yes                  No      Yes      No      Yes                 No        Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports difference-in
     differences and triple-difference estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables. More
     specifically, the estimates in rows 1 and 3 correspond to our short-run effects within one year after the policy. The estimates in rows 2 and 4
     correspond to our medium-run effects one year and beyond from the policy implementation. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is
     the probability that an individual has no health insurance (i.e., is uninsured). In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the unconditional
     probability that an individual reports the cost of health insurance being too expensive as the reason for being uninsured. Columns 5 and 6's
     dependent variables are the unconditional probability that an individual claims work limitations as the reason for being uninsured. Finally,
     the dependent variable in columns 7 and 8 is the probability that an individual claims `other' as the reason for being without health insurance.
     A full description of how the dependent variables were constructed can be found in Table A.5 in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered
     at the state level in all models. The regressions are run on a sample of individuals 16-55 years old, earning an average baseline wage of
     less than $8.50 per hour while employed, having Medicaid coverage for at least six months in the pre-policy period, and having been in the
     sample for at least roughly two-thirds of the 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).
     Additional details are provided in the main text and within the table itself.
                                            Table 5: Effects on Reasons for Lacking Employment

                                                   (1)     (2)            (3)     (4)            (5)      (6)     (7)      (8)
                Dependent Variable                Not Employed              Demand                 No Match         Personal
                Bound x Post 1                    0.040                  0.003                  0.025            0.011
                                                 (0.042)                (0.005)               (0.016)           (0.033)
                Bound x Post 2                   0.123**                 0.004                0.074***           0.043
                                                 (0.040)                (0.005)               (0.016)           (0.034)
                Bound x Post 1 x SIPP 08                  0.060                  0.004                   0.021            0.019
                                                         (0.050)                (0.005)                 (0.017)          (0.044)
                Bound x Post 2 x SIPP 08                 0.157**                 0.008                 0.073***           0.051
                                                         (0.051)                (0.006)                 (0.020)          (0.044)
                Housing Price Index              -1.158 -1.278**         0.005  -0.013        -0.840* -0.281* -0.314 -0.998*
                                                 (0.803) (0.440)        (0.084) (0.022)        (0.417)  (0.122) (0.690) (0.386)
                N                                40,797 153,940         40,797 153,940         40,797 153,940 40,797 153,940
                Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.378   0.375          0.010   0.005          0.053    0.036   0.210    0.231
                Estimator                          DD     DDD             DD     DDD             DD      DDD      DD      DDD




52
                Weighted                           Yes     Yes            Yes     Yes            Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes
                Full Fixed Effects                 Yes     Yes            Yes     Yes            Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes
                Triple Dif Interactions            No      Yes            No      Yes            No       Yes     No       Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports difference-in
     differences and triple-difference estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables. More
     specifically, the estimates in rows 1 and 3 correspond to our short-run effects within one year after the policy. The estimates in rows 2 and 4
     correspond to our medium-run effects one year and beyond from the policy implementation. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the
     probability that an individual is unemployed. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the unconditional probability that an individual
     reports a labor demand reason (layoff) as the reason for being unemployed. Columns 5 and 6's dependent variables are the unconditional
     probability that an individual claims being unable to find a suitable job as the reason for his or her unemployment. Finally, the dependent
     variable in columns 7 and 8 is the probability that an individual reports a personal explanation for being unemployed. A full description of
     how the dependent variables were constructed can be found in Table A.6 in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the state level
     in all models. The regressions are run on a sample of individuals 16-55 years old, earning an average baseline wage of less than $8.50 per
     hour while employed, having Medicaid coverage for at least six months in the pre-policy period, and having been in the sample for at least
     roughly two-thirds of the 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Additional details are
     provided in the main text and within the table itself.
                                                          Table 6: Effects on Job Search

                                                      (1)      (2)    (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)
                           Dependent Variable           Looking      Looking&Emp Looking&Unemp
                           Bound x Post 1            0.051          0.050*           0.001
                                                    (0.087)         (0.024)         (0.086)
                           Bound x Post 2           0.191+           0.024           0.166
                                                    (0.109)         (0.026)         (0.106)
                           Bound x Post 1 x SIPP 08           0.038          0.046           -0.008
                                                            (0.098)         (0.030)         (0.091)
                           Bound x Post 2 x SIPP 08           0.170          0.018            0.152
                                                            (0.126)         (0.031)         (0.119)
                           Housing Price Index       1.794   -0.808  0.645   0.209   1.149   -1.017
                                                    (3.399) (0.723) (0.759) (0.289) (2.934) (0.783)
                           N                        40,797 153,940 40,797 153,940 40,797 153,940
                           Mean of Dep. Var.         0.660   0.531   0.127   0.108   0.533    0.423




53
                           Estimator                  DD     DDD      DD     DDD      DD     DDD
                           Weighted                   Yes      Yes    Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes
                           Full Fixed Effects         Yes      Yes    Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes
                           Triple Dif Interactions    No       Yes    No      Yes     No       Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports difference-in
     differences and triple-difference estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables. More
     specifically, the estimates in rows 1 and 3 correspond to our short-run effects within one year after the policy. The estimates in rows 2 and
     4 correspond to our medium-run effects one year and beyond from the policy implementation. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable
     is the number of weeks that an individual was actively looking for a job in the given month. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is
     the number of weeks spent looking for work while being employed, and finally in columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the number of
     weeks looking for work while unemployed. Standard errors are clustered at the state level in all models. The regressions are run on a sample
     of individuals 16-55 years old, earning an average baseline wage of less than $8.50 per hour while employed, having Medicaid coverage for
     at least six months in the pre-policy period, and having been in the sample for at least roughly two-thirds of the 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008
     panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Additional details are provided in the main text and within the table itself.
54
Appendix




   55
                         Macroeconomic Trends Across Bound and Unbound States
                                                Panel A: BLS Unemployment Rate                                               Panel B: BLS Employment to Pop.




                                         12
                                                                                                                      66




                                   9
                                                                                                                63




                              6
                                                                                                          60




                         3
                                                                                                     57
                                                                                                 BLS Employment to Pop.




                     BLS Unemployment Rate
                    0
                                                                                               54
                                              Jul,05       Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13                               Jul,05   Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13

                                                       Panel C: Housing Price Index                                             Panel D: Per Capita Real GDP




                                                                                                                52    56




56
                                                                                                    44    48




                     300 400 500 600
                    Housing Price Index
                                                                                               Per Cap. Real GDP (1000s)
                                                                                               40




                                200
                                              Jul,05       Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13                               Jul,05   Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13




     Figure A.1: Macroeconomic Trends in Bound and Unbound States:
     Bound and unbound states are defined as in previous figures and in Section 2. This figure's panels plot the evolution of macroeconomic
     indicators over the course of the housing bubble and Great Recession. Panel A plots the average monthly unemployment rate, as reported
     by the BLS. Panel B plots the average monthtly employment to population ratio, also as reported by the BLS. Panel C plots the average of
     the Federal Housing Finance Agency's quarterly housing price index. Panel D plots the average of annual real per capita GDP, as reported
     by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). In each panel, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal
     minimum wage.
             Panel A: 2008 Min. Wages                            Panel B: 2004 Min. Wages
             (Period w/ Fed. Increase)                               (No Fed. Change)




             Panel C: 2001 Min. Wages                             Panel D: 1996 Min. Wages
                (No Fed. Change)                                  (Period w/ Fed. Increase)




Figure A.2: Variation in State Minimum Wages by SIPP Panel: The figure depicts variation in state
minimum wage rates across the United States at the beginning of each SIPP panel used in our analysis.
Panel A displays wage rates across the U.S. in January 2008, Panel B 2004, Panel C 2001, and Panel D
1996. In all cases, the lightest shade of blue represents a state whose minimum wage was set at the federal
minimum wage at the time, and each successively darker shade of blue represents being within a 50 cent
increase above the federal minimum.




                                                    57
                                                            Probability of Earning Wage of $5.15-$7.25
                                                            Panel A: 2008 Panel                                                                             Panel B: 2004 Panel




                                      .6
                                                                                                                                     .6




                                 .4
                                                                                                                                .4




                           .2
                                                                                                                          .2




                      0
                                                                                                                     0




                    Prob(Earn $5.15-$7.25)
                                                                                                                   Prob(Earn $5.15-$7.25)
                                               8             9               10            1              2                                   4            5            06           07            08
                             2               00         2 00              20             01             01                  2               00           00           20           20           20
                         ul,                        ul,               ul,          u l, 2          ul, 2                ul,                          l, 2         l ,          l ,          l ,
                     J                             J                 J            J              J                 J                              Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju

                                                            Panel C: 2001 Panel                                                                             Panel D: 1996 Panel




                                      .6
                                                                                                                                     .6




                                 .4
                                                                                                                                .4




58
                           .2
                                                                                                                          .2




                      0
                                                                                                                     0




                    Prob(Earn $5.15-$7.25)
                                               1                 2               03              4             5   Prob(Earn $5.15-$7.25)     6            7            98           99            00
                             2               00              00                20              00            00             1               99           99           19           19           20
                         ul,                             l, 2              l ,            l, 2           l, 2           ul,                          l, 1         l ,          l ,          l ,
                     J                                 Ju                Ju            Ju              Ju          J                              Ju            Ju           Ju           Ju


                                                                                          Bound States                                             Unbound States


     Figure A.3: Trend of Fraction Earning Hourly Wage of $5.15-$7.25 in Bound and Unbound States: The figure depicts the average trend
     of earning an hourly wage between $5.15 and $7.25 in bound and unbound states. In all cases the series are constructed by the authors
     using data from the 2008, 2004, 2001, and 1996 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). Observations represent the
     average probability of earning an `affected wage' across all individuals in our previously defined bound and unbound states for each survey
     month and use individual probability sampling weights. Panel A depicts data from the 2008 panel, Panel B the 2004 panel, Panel C the 2001
     panel, and Panel D the 1996 panel from the SIPP. In Panel A, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal
     minimum wage, while the dashed lines in the remaining panels represent the simulated minimum wage increase.
                                             Medium Run Changes in Wage Distribution, Triple Dif




                       -.1     .2
                               0      .1
                     DDD Coefficients
                               -.2




59
                                                                $6 $7
                                           $0.00       $5.00      .5 .2
                                                                    5 5       $10.00                   $15.00                    $20.00
                                                                    Hourly Wage Cutoffs

                                                                          95% CI           Coefficient


     Figure A.4: Estimated D-D-D Effects of the Minimum Wage on Hourly Wage Distributions: The figure reports estimates of binding
     minimum wage increase's medium run effects on the wage distributions of the low-wage Medicaid beneficiary subsample across the four
     SIPP panels used in our analysis as indicated in each panel's title. Each dot is an estimate of the coefficient  p(t) from equation (6), where the
     relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after each panel's actual or simulated policy change representing the July 2009
                                                                                                             j
     increase in the federal minimum wage. The dependent variables in each specification take the form Yi,s,t = 1{W j-1 < Hourly Wagei,s,t < W j }.
     These Yi,s,t are indicators equal to 1 if an individual's hourly wage is in the band between W j-1 and W j , where each band is a 50 cent interval.
     The results can thus be described as estimates of the minimum wage's effect on the wage distribution's probability mass function. The left
     vertical dashed line represents the federal minimum wage of $6.55 from July 2008 to July 2009, and the right vertical dashed line represents
     the federal minimum wage of $7.25 from July 2009 onwards.
Table A.1: Placebo Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Effects on Joint Medicaid
and Employment Status
                                                 (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)             (8)
        Dependent Variable                                          Medicaid & Employed
                                                             Placebo Difference-in-Differences Specifications
        Bound x Post 1                         0.004      0.003    -0.003   -0.020    -0.003     0.003     0.004           0.000
                                              (0.015)    (0.017) (0.018) (0.016) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015)                  (0.016)
        Bound x Post 2                         0.016      0.010    0.015    -0.009     0.005     0.015     0.022           0.016
                                              (0.023)    (0.023) (0.024) (0.023) (0.024) (0.023) (0.022)                  (0.023)
        Housing Price Index                   1.131**    0.855* 1.024**               1.062** 1.121** 1.063**             0.987**
                                              (0.345)    (0.328) (0.356)              (0.357) (0.348) (0.320)             (0.345)
        Med. Eligibility Limit                                                                   0.032
                                                                                                (0.021)
        State Employment Rate                                                                             0.021*
                                                                                                          (0.010)
        State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                                                                      0.000+
                                                                                                                         (0.000)
        N                                     113,143    113,143    85,890    113,143    113,143    113,143    113,143   113,143
        Mean of Dep. Var.                      0.535      0.528     0.548      0.535      0.528      0.535      0.535     0.535
        Full Interactions                       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
        Weighted                                Yes        No        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
        Include Households w/ Infants           Yes        Yes       No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
        Demographic Trends                      No         No        No         No         Yes        No         No        No
Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports placebo
difference-in differences estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run relationship with an indicator for whether or not
an individual is both employed and has Medicaid coverage. The estimates are placebo estimates in that they involve difference-in-
differences estimates for the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP Panels, during which large minimum wage increases did not exert differential
impacts on wages across the states we define as "bound" and "unbound." That is, the samples involve the SIPP Panels that are used
to generate an additional layer of controls in the triple difference specifications reported in the main text. The full description of the
sample selection procedure is outlined in Section 2.3. The columns explore our baseline results' (column 1) robustness to a variety
of specification changes, which are further described in the main text and within the table itself. Standard errors are clustered at the
state level.




                                                                   60
                        Table A.2: Robustness of Effects on Any Costly Outcome
                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)                   (7)          (8)
  Dependent Variable                                                            Any Costly Outcome
  Panel A:                                                            Difference-in-Differences Specifications
  Bound x Post 1                               0.086*   0.093*          0.076+    0.080*    0.083+    0.084*                0.086*       0.083*
                                               (0.040)  (0.040)         (0.042)   (0.040) (0.043) (0.039)                   (0.040)      (0.040)
  Bound x Post 2                              0.150*** 0.143***        0.170*** 0.143*** 0.143** 0.150***                  0.151***     0.147***
                                               (0.038)  (0.039)         (0.044)   (0.038) (0.041) (0.037)                   (0.038)      (0.039)
  Housing Price Index                           -0.399   -0.540          -0.328              -0.381   -0.092                 -0.359       -0.265
                                               (0.703)  (0.666)         (0.775)             (0.688) (0.706)                (0.734)      (0.673)
  Med. Eligibility Limit                                                                             -0.049*
                                                                                                     (0.020)
  State Employment Rate                                                                                                      -0.003
                                                                                                                            (0.015)
  State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                                                                                             -0.000
                                                                                                                                         (0.000)
  N                                            40,797       40,797       27,852       40,797      40,797       40,797       40,797       40,797
  Mean of Dep. Var.                             0.519        0.518        0.494        0.519       0.518        0.519        0.519        0.519


  Panel B:                                                                  Triple Difference Specifications
  Bound x Post 1 x SIPP 08                     0.090*       0.095*        0.069      0.061    0.085+     0.090*             0.092*       0.084*
                                               (0.042)      (0.040)      (0.045)    (0.042) (0.044) (0.042)                 (0.042)      (0.040)
  Bound x Post 2 x SIPP 08                    0.157***     0.148***     0.172*** 0.123** 0.146** 0.159***                  0.166***     0.153***
                                               (0.042)      (0.036)      (0.044)    (0.039) (0.044) (0.042)                 (0.044)      (0.040)
  Housing Price Index                         -0.867+      -0.664+      -0.805+               -0.918* -0.808+              -0.798+      -0.733+
                                               (0.440)      (0.385)      (0.420)              (0.453) (0.449)              (0.417)      (0.408)
  Med. Eligibility Limit                                                                                -0.039*
                                                                                                        (0.015)
  State Employment Rate                                                                                                      -0.013
                                                                                                                            (0.009)
  State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                                                                                           -0.000+
                                                                                                                                        (0.000)
  N                                           153,940      153,940      113,742      153,940      153,940     153,940      153,940      153,940
  Mean of Dep. Var.                            0.505        0.511        0.493        0.505        0.511       0.505        0.505        0.505
  Full Interactions                             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
  Weighted                                      Yes          No           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
  Include Households w/ Infants                 Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
  Demographic Trends                            No           No           No           No           Yes         No           No           No
Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports difference-in
differences and triple-difference estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run effects on the probability of experiencing
any costly outcome, defined as either lacking employment, being without Medicaid coverage, or actively looking for work for at
least one week out of the month. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 of Panel A are of the coefficient  p(t) from equation (4),
where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in
row 2 are of the coefficient  p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after
the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of  p(t) from equation (6), namely our
triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals from our subsample of low-wage Medicaid
beneficiaries from the 2008 SIPP Panel. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include the similar subsample of low-wage Medicaid
beneficiaries from the collection of the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP Panels. The full description of the sample selection is outlined in
Section 2.3. The columns explore our baseline results' (column 1) robustness to a variety of specification changes, which are further
described in the main text and within the table itself. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.


                                                                      61
                 Table A.3: Robustness of Effects on Costly Outcomes Combined
                                                (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)                 (7)          (8)
  Dependent Variable                                                      Combination of Costly Outcomes
  Panel A:                                                           Difference-in-Differences Specifications
  Bound x Post 1                              0.133+   0.146*            0.111   0.127*    0.123+    0.130+              0.132+       0.136*
                                              (0.066)  (0.062)         (0.075)   (0.062)   (0.070)   (0.065)             (0.066)      (0.067)
  Bound x Post 2                             0.297*** 0.294***        0.300*** 0.290*** 0.275*** 0.297***               0.296***     0.302***
                                              (0.061)  (0.059)         (0.070)   (0.056)   (0.064)   (0.061)             (0.061)      (0.063)
  Housing Price Index                          -0.399   -0.832          -0.120              -0.261    0.247               -0.516       -0.573
                                              (1.344)  (1.242)         (1.640)             (1.364)   (1.362)             (1.363)      (1.398)
  Med. Eligibility Limit                                                                            -0.102**
                                                                                                     (0.033)
  State Employment Rate                                                                                                   0.008
                                                                                                                         (0.024)
  State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                                                                                          0.000
                                                                                                                                      (0.000)
  N                                           40,797      40,797       27,852      40,797       40,797       40,797      40,797       40,797
  Mean of Dep. Var.                           -0.292      -0.297       -0.332      -0.292       -0.297       -0.292      -0.292       -0.292


  Panel B:                                                                Triple Difference Specifications
  Bound x Post 1 x SIPP 08                     0.105      0.118+        0.071     0.063      0.097     0.105              0.106        0.104
                                              (0.065)     (0.061)      (0.072)   (0.063)    (0.068)   (0.064)            (0.065)      (0.064)
  Bound x Post 2 x SIPP 08                   0.268***     .258***     0.278*** 0.218*** 0.248*** 0.270***               0.274***     0.267***
                                              (0.063)     (0.060)      (0.070)   (0.057)    (0.065)   (0.064)            (0.065)      (0.061)
  Housing Price Index                        -1.253*      -0.969*     -1.154*               -1.319* -1.152*             -1.204*      -1.229*
                                              (0.525)     (0.468)      (0.544)              (0.550)   (0.532)            (0.511)      (0.507)
  Med. Eligibility Limit                                                                              -0.066*
                                                                                                      (0.027)
  State Employment Rate                                                                                                   -0.009
                                                                                                                         (0.014)
  State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                                                                                         -0.000
                                                                                                                                     (0.000)
  N                                          153,940      153,940     113,742      153,940     153,940      153,940     153,940      153,940
  Mean of Dep. Var.                           -0.341       -0.334      -0.356       -0.341      -0.334       -0.341      -0.341       -0.341
  Full Interactions                            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
  Weighted                                     Yes           No         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
  Include Households w/ Infants                Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
  Demographic Trends                            No           No          No           No         Yes           No          No           No
Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports difference-
in differences and triple-difference estimates of the minimum wage's short and medium run effects on the sum of costly outcomes
experienced by an individual, constructed as the sum of the indicators for job search and non-employment minus the indicator for
Medicaid coverage. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 of Panel A are of the coefficient  p(t) from equation (4), where the
relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are
of the coefficient  p(t) from equation (4), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009
increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of  p(t) from equation (6), namely our triple-difference
specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals from our subsample of low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries from
the 2008 SIPP Panel. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include the similar subsample of low-wage Medicaid beneficiaries from
the collection of the 1996, 2001, and 2004 SIPP Panels. The full description of the sample selection is outlined in Section 2.3. The
columns explore our baseline results' (column 1) robustness to a variety of specification changes, which are further described in the
main text and within the table itself. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.


                                                                     62
                           Table A.4: SIPP Time Period Identification

   SIPP              Pre-Policy Period                            Post-Policy Period
  Panel         Baseline          Transition               Short Run           Medium Run
   2008     Aug. 08 - Apr. 09 May 09 - Jul. 09          Aug. 09 - Jul. 2010 Aug. 10 - Jan. 13
   2004     Aug. 04 - Apr. 05 May 05 - Jul. 05          Aug. 05 - Jul. 2006 Aug. 05 - Jun. 07
   2001     Aug. 01 - Apr. 02 May 02 - Jul. 02          Aug. 02 - Jul. 2003 Aug. 03 - Oct. 03
   1996     Aug. 96 - Apr. 97 May 97 - Jul. 97          Aug. 97 - Jul. 1998 Aug. 98 - Dec. 99
  p(t) =           0              Transition                  Post 1               Post 2
 Note: This table outlines the specific months that comprise each period of the samples used in the
analysis. Data from the 2008 SIPP Panel spans 4 years, 6 months from August 2008 through January 2013,
data from the 2004 SIPP Panel lasts 2 years, 11 months from August 2004 through June 2007, data from
the 2001 SIPP Panel covers 2 years, 3 months from August 2001 through October 2003, and ifnally the 1996
SIPP Panel spans 3 years, 5 months from August 1996 through December 1999.




                                                  63
                        Table A.5: SIPP Reasons for Being Uninsured

 SIPP Question            "Which of these reasons describes why . . . was not covered by
                          health insurance?"
 SIPP variables           ehirsn01 - ehirsn12
 Category                 Response
 Too Expensive            Too expensive, can't afford
 Work Restrictions        No health insurance offered by employer of self, spouse, or par-
                          ent
 Work Restrictions        Not working at a job long enough to qualify
 Work Restrictions        Job layoff, job loss, or any reason related to unemployment
 Work Restrictions        Not eligible because working part time or temporary job
 Other                    Can't obtain insurance because of poor health, illness, age, or a
                          pre-existing condition
 Other                    Dissatisfied with previous insurance or don't believe in insur-
                          ance
 Other                    Have been healthy, not much sickness in the family, haven't
                          needed health insurance
 Other                    Able to go to VA or military hospital for medical care
 Other                    Covered by some other health plan, such as Medicaid
 Other                    No longer covered by parents policy
 Other                    Some other reason
 Note: This table contains the specific question and responses in the Survey of Income and Program
Participation used to analyze the reasons why an individual might not be covered by health insurance in
the reference month. The differential effects of the minimum wage increase on these outcomes are found
in Table 4.




                                                  64
                     Table A.6: SIPP Reasons for Lacking Employment

 SIPP Question           "What is the main reason . . . did not work at a job or business
                         during the reference period?"
 SIPP variable           ersnowrk
 Category                Response
 Demand                  On layoff (temporary or indefinite)
 No Match                Unable to find work
 Personal                Temporarily unable to work because of an injury
 Personal                Temporarily unable to work because of an illness
 Personal                Unable to work because of chronic health condition or disability
 Personal                Retired
 Personal                Pregnancy/ childbirth
 Personal                Taking care of children/ other persons
 Personal                Going to school
 Personal                Not interested in working at a job
 Personal                Other
Note: This table contains the specific question and responses in the Survey of Income and Program
Participation used to analyze the reasons why an individual may have been unemployed in the reference
month. The differential effects of the minimum wage increase on these outcomes are found in Table 5.




                                                 65
