                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CAREER EFFECTS OF MENTAL HEALTH

                                         Barbara Biasi
                                        Michael S. Dahl
                                         Petra Moser

                                      Working Paper 29031
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29031


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank Janet Currie, Manasi Deshpande, Monica Deza, Camelia Kahmen, Sheri Johnson,
Jonathan Feinstein, Mushfiq Mobarak, Nicholas Papageorge, Nicola Pierri, and Lars Skipper, as
well as seminar participants at Aarhus, the AEA, NYU, Yale, and the NBER for helpful
comments and conversations. Dahl thanks Statistics Denmark and the Department of
Management of Aarhus University for research support. Moser gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the National Science Foundation through CAREER grant 1151180. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Barbara Biasi, Michael S. Dahl, and Petra Moser. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Career Effects of Mental Health
Barbara Biasi, Michael S. Dahl, and Petra Moser
NBER Working Paper No. 29031
July 2021
JEL No. I12,J23,J24,O31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the career effects of mental health, focusing on depression, schizophrenia,
and bipolar disorder (BD). Individual-level registry data from Denmark show that these disorders
carry large earnings penalties, ranging from 34 percent for depression and 38 percent for BD to
74 percent for schizophrenia. To investigate the causal effects of mental health on a person's
career, we exploit the approval of lithium as a maintenance treatment for BD in 1976. Baseline
estimates compare career outcomes for people with and without access in their 20s, the typical
age of onset for BD. These estimates show that access to treatment eliminates one third of the
earnings penalty associated with BD and greatly reduces the risks of low or no earnings.
Importantly, access to treatment closes more than half of the disability risk associated with BD.


Barbara Biasi                                    Petra Moser
Yale School of Management                        Department of Economics
165 Whitney Avenue                               NYU Stern
New Haven, CT 06520                              44 West 4th Street
and NBER                                         New York, NY 10012
barbara.biasi@yale.edu                           and NBER
                                                 pmoser@stern.nyu.edu
Michael S. Dahl
Aalborg University Business School
Fibigerstraede 11
Aalborg SO 9220
Denmark
msd@business.aau.dk




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29031
One in eleven people in the world are affected by a mental health disorder, such as
depression, schizophrenia, or bipolar disorder.1 According to the World Health Organization
(WHO, 2011), mental health disorders are the leading cause of lost disability-adjusted years
of life. Yet, anecdotes about prominent executives have linked mental health disorders ­ and
in particular bipolar disorder (BD) ­ with professional success, to the point that BD is often
called a "CEO's disease" (Cooper et al. 1988).
            Estimating the effects of mental health and its treatments on a person's career
involves two major empirical challenges. First, privacy regulations often restrict access to
individual-level data on diagnoses that researchers need to estimate causal effects of changes
in mental health. Second, differences in mental health and access to treatment are rarely
random: For example, people who grow up in low-income families are more likely to face
traumatic events that trigger depression (Mortensen et al. 2003; Gardner and Oswalt 2007)
and less likely to receive treatment (Katz et al. 1997; Wang et al. 2005).2
            To overcome these challenges and investigate the career effects of mental health, we
combine individual-level registry data on mental health and career outcomes with a
significant change in treatment. Our data cover mental health diagnoses, earnings,
employment and disability status for the population of Denmark, including 2.4 million people
born between 1946 and 1977. Nearly 100,000 of these individuals were affected by
depression, 23,000 by BD, and 42,000 by schizophrenia; these three major disorders are the
focus of our analyses. To study the causal effects of changes in access to treatment on a
person's career, we exploit the approval of lithium as a maintenance treatment for BD by
Denmark's drug authority in 1976 and compare cohorts with and without access to treatment
in their 20s, the typical age of onset for BD.
            Registry data show that mental health disorders are associated with large earnings
penalties. People with depression, BD, and schizophrenia earn 36, 38, and 74 percent less
than the general population, respectively. People with mental health conditions are also
substantially more likely to decline into the bottom quantiles of earnings or have no earnings
at all. For example, people with depression and BD are 99 percent and 120 percent more

*
 We thank Janet Currie, Manasi Deshpande,
 Monica Deza, Camelia Kahmen, Sheri Johnson, Jonathan Feinstein, Mushfiq Mobarak, Nicholas
Papageorge, Nicola Pierri, and Lars Skipper, as well as seminar participants at Aarhus, the AEA,
NYU, Yale, and the NBER for helpful comments and conversations. Dahl thanks Statistics Denmark
and the Department of Management of Aarhus University for research support. Moser gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation through CAREER grant
1151180.
nditions.


                                                                                                   1
likely, respectively, to have earnings in the lowest decile and 110 percent more likely to have
no earnings at all. These findings are consistent with quantile regression analyses of data
from the National Comorbidity Study, which indicate that mental health disorders are
associated with larger earnings losses at the lower tail of the distribution (Marcotte and
Wilcox 2003).
        To control for socio-economic status and other characteristics that vary across
families, we compare career outcomes between people with a disorder and their healthy
siblings. Controlling for family background reduces earnings penalties only slightly,
indicating that these penalties are not driven by differences in the family backgrounds of
people with and without mental health conditions.
       Event studies indicate that earnings decline dramatically after a diagnosis of
depression, BD, and schizophrenia. Earnings begin to recover two years after a diagnosis, but
never return to their pre-diagnosis levels. Ten years after the diagnosis, people with
depression, BD, and schizophrenia earn 9, 23, and 31 percent less, respectively, relative to
their pre-diagnosis earnings. Earnings begin to decline four years before a diagnosis
consistent with people experiencing symptoms that reduce their ability to work or with job
loss triggering a mental health episode (Ahammer, Grübl, and Winter-Ebmer 2020; Ahammer
and Packham, 2020).
       Next, we examine possible mechanisms for the dramatic decline in earnings. Mental
health symptoms could impact a person's ability to work directly, leading to the loss of
income. In addition, the scarring effects of unemployment may further reduce earnings and
job security. Examining both mechanisms, we find that earnings penalties are more likely to
be driven by mental health symptoms that make people unable to work, rather than by the
scarring effect of unemployment. First, we document that people with depression, BD, and
schizophrenia are 1.2, 2.7, and 7 times more likely, respectively, to receive disability pay.
Second, while the probability of unemployment peaks in the year of the diagnosis,
unemployment is not associated with larger earnings penalties for people with BD
conditional on the severity of BD, proxied by the number of diagnoses.
       While suggestive of a strong link between mental health and career outcomes, the
estimates presented so far cannot measure the causal effect of mental health on career
outcomes. In fact, it is possible for causality to operate in the opposite direction if negative
labor market shocks trigger episodes of a mental health disorder. To establish the causal
effects of changes in mental health on labor market outcomes we exploit a major change in
the treatment of BD. In 1976, the Lægemiddelstyrelsen (Denmark's equivalent of the US


                                                                                                   2
Food and Drug Administration, or FDA) approved lithium as a maintenance treatment for
BD. Compared with other pharmaceuticals used to treat mental health disorders, lithium
consumption is highly effective for treating BD and associated with a significant reduction in
suicide and hospitalizations (Tondo et al 1999; Angst et al 2005, Kessler et al 2005a).
       To estimate the causal effects of access to treatment, we compare labor market
outcomes of people with and without access at age 20, the typical age of onset for BD
(Kessler et al. 2005) and a critical period for a person's career (Kahn 2010; Oreopoulos 2012;
Arellano-Bover 2020). Under the assumption that people with BD born before and after 1956
would have had similar labor market outcomes without access to treatment, this identification
strategy estimates the causal effect of access to treatment on people with BD. If access to
treatment eliminates the adverse labor market effects of BD, these estimates capture the
career penalties associated with BD.
       Our analyses indicate that access to treatment leads to large improvements in career
outcomes for people with BD. Specifically, access to treatment eliminates 28 percent of the
earnings penalty associated with BD. It also reduces the risk of declining into the bottom
earnings decile by 17 percent and lowers the risk of zero earnings by 33 percent. Cohort-
specific estimates reveal that penalties start to gradually decline for cohorts born after 1956,
confirming that access to treatment is most critical at age 20 and that the effect increases with
the length of exposure. Comparing individuals to their siblings reveals even larger benefits of
access to treatment.
       Controlling for a person's family background through family fixed effects further
strengthens these estimates. Access to treatment eliminates nearly two thirds of the earnings
penalty that people with BD face compared with their siblings. It also lowers the risk of
earnings in the bottom decile by 42 percent and reduces the risk of zero earnings by 36
percent.
       A challenge for our identification strategy is that unobservable factors, such as
reductions in stigmatization or improvements in access to healthcare, may improve career
outcomes for people with mental health disorders over time. To address this challenge, we
use depression and schizophrenia as an additional control group to account for changes that
affect career outcomes for people with any mental health disorder over time and estimate the
additional penalties associated with BD with a triple-difference model. All estimates are
robust to this alternative specification, which indicates that our results cannot be explained by
secular trends.



                                                                                                   3
       Notably, our estimates suggest that a large portion of the benefit of access to
treatment is due to a reduced risk of disability for people with BD. Access to treatment
eliminates 59 percent of the excess risk of disability for people with BD relative to the
population and 57 percent relative to their siblings. Using the number of diagnoses as a
measure for the intensity of the disorder, we find that the benefits from treatment are greatest
for people with a more severe form of BD.
       We also find that people with lower socioeconomic status (SES) benefit
disproportionally from access to treatment. Existing studies have documented a connection
between health and socioeconomic status (SES) (Aizer and Currie 2014). People with lower
SES are also less likely to access mental health treatments (Katz et al. 1997; Wang et al.
2005). Measuring SES with parental assets, we find that the earnings penalties from BD are
12.6 percent lower for people with parental assets in the top quartile compared with people in
the second and third quartile. People in the second and third quartile, however, benefit twice
as much from access to treatment compared with people in the top quartile. People with
parental assets in the bottom quartile benefit three times as much.
       While our identification strategy leverages the introduction of lithium as an early
effective treatment for BD, other improvements in treatment (including cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT), mood stabilizers, antidepressants, and antipsychotics) became available over
time and not everyone who received a diagnosis of BD was treated with lithium. CBT, for
example, began in the early 1980s (Cochran 1984) after the introduction of lithium. To reflect
these changes in treatments over time, our preferred interpretation of the main specifications
is as the intent-to-treat (ITT) of improvements in treatment. Taken together, our findings
indicate that mental health disorders are associated with immense career penalties and that
access to treatment mitigates a large proportion of these penalties, particularly for people
with lower SES.
       This paper contributes to the literature on the causal effects of mental health on socio-
economic and labor market outcomes. Most of these studies use survey data and are either
correlational (Bartel and Taubman, 1986; Goodman, Joyce, and Smith 2011; Hakulinen et al.
2019) or observational, relying on instrumental variables (Ettner, Frank, and Kessler 1997;
Lu, Frank, Liu, and Shen 2009; Banerjee, Chatterji, and Lahiri 2017), selection models
(Chatterji, Alegria, and Takeuchi, 2011), and correlated random effects (Peng, Meyerhoefer,
and Zuvekas 2015) to establish causality. We contribute to this literature in two ways. First,
the use of administrative data on medical diagnoses linked to labor market outcomes, for
individuals and their siblings, enables us to track people over a longer time period and to


                                                                                                 4
account for family background. Second, a large-scale quasi-experiment allows us to identify
the causal impacts of mental health on outcomes.
        This study also connects with recent research that has quantified the causal effects of
mental health by exploiting differences in the availability and use of medications. These
differences are driven by changes in spending on drug advertisements (Shapiro,
forthcoming), the introduction of black-box warnings for SSRI (Butikofer, Kronin, and Skira
2020), or physicians' propensity to prescribe drugs (Laird and Nielsen, 2017).3 Building on
these existing analyses, we compare the labor market penalties associated with different types
of mental health conditions and we use a major change in treatment to investigate the causal
effects of changes in access to treatment. We perform these analyses for BD, which has been
the subject of much research in psychology (e.g., Jamison 1996; Kyaga et al. 2011; Kyaga et
al. 2013) but received little attention from economists, despite its prevalence and severity.
        Our estimates on the effects of lithium on earnings and disability relate to the
literature on the effects of health treatments, and specifically access to medication, on labor
market outcomes (see Currie and Madrian 1999 for a review). In this literature, our paper is
most closely related to Garthwaite (2012), which shows that the removal of a branded Cox-2
inhibitor (Vioxx), a class of pharmaceuticals used for the treatment of chronic pain, in 2005
was associated with a 0.35 percentage point decline in overall labor force participation and
$19 billion in lost wages in the United States. Using Norwegian administrative data,
Bütikofer and Skira (2018) show that the withdrawal of Vioxx increased sick days for
individuals with joint pain by 12 to 16 percent and raised their probability of receiving
disability benefits by 6 to 15 percent. Our research complements these estimates by
examining the effects of access to treatment for mental health disorders. Given the high
prevalence of mental health disorders and their debilitating effects, our estimates imply that
universal access to treatment could save $88 million in wages per year, roughly 9 percent of
total healthcare costs associated with mental health in Denmark (Santini et al. 2021).4
        In addition, our findings provide new evidence on the differential impact of mental
health conditions and access to treatment across the spectrum of socio-economic status and


3
  For instance, Shapiro (forthcoming) shows that increased spending on advertisement of anti-depressants in the
US leads to more prescriptions and fewer lost days of work. Butikofer et al. (2020) document that the
introduction of black box warnings for SSRIs in 2004 decreased antidepressant prescriptions and reduced labor
supply. Exploiting quasi-random separations of individuals from their physicians, Laird and Nielsen (2017) find
that having a physician who is prone to prescribe mental health drugs has no discernable labor market effects.
4
  Specifically, we find that treatment increases wages of people with BD by 11 percent; there are 22,694 people
with BD in the population, earning an average of $35,359 without access to treatment. This implies that access
to treatment leads to a $35,359 * 11% * 22,694 = $88,268,086 increase in total wages.


                                                                                                              5
wealth. Building on existing research on the effects of economic status on mental health
(Haushofer and Shapiro 2016; Ridley, Rao, Schilbach, and Patel 2020; Ahammer, Grübl, and
Winter-Ebmer 2020; Ahammer and Packham, 2020), on the intergenerational persistence of
mental health outcomes (Aizer and Currie 2014, Persson and Rossin-Slater 2017, Van der
Bergh et al. 2015), and on the relationship between parents' earnings and children's mental
health (Adhvaryu et al. 2019), we demonstrate that access to treatment can be a powerful tool
to reduce inequality in labor market outcomes due to differences in mental health.


                    I. DATA AND BACKGROUND ON MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS
This section describes our data and summarizes relevant research from medicine and
psychology on the three disorders that are the focus of this paper ­ depression, bipolar
disorder (BD), and schizophrenia. Our data cover mental health diagnoses, earnings, and
disability payments for the population of Denmark, including 2,692,479 people in birth
cohorts from 1946 to 1977.5


A. Mental Health Disorders
We measure people's mental health using registry-level data from the Central Psychiatric
Register (Landspatientregistret for Psykiatri Diagnoser), which includes all mental health
diagnoses from psychiatric departments in Denmark between January 1, 1995, and December
31, 2015. The register uses the World Health Organization (WHO)'s International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10) to classify mental health
disorders.6 Appendix Table A2 includes a detailed description of this classification.
         We construct indicators for people with at least one diagnosis of three among the
most frequent mental health disorders: depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia.7


Depression
A major depressive disorder, or depression in short, is a common and serious mental disorder
that negatively affects how people feel, think, or act. Symptoms include sadness, a loss of
interest in activities, trouble sleeping, a loss of energy, difficulties concentrating or making



5
  These data are administered by Statistics Denmark. Appendix Table A1 describes the individual registries.
6
  See http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2016/en#/F30-F39.
7
  These variables are not mutually exclusive: each individual can be diagnosed with different disorders over his
or her lifetime. Approximately 0.4 percent of the population receives diagnoses for more than one type of
disorder between 1995 and 2015. Appendix Table A3 tabulates comorbidities by disorder.


                                                                                                               6
decisions, and thoughts of death or suicide. For a diagnosis of depression, symptoms must
last at least two weeks.
    In our data, this condition is identified by diagnosis code ICD-10: F32: "Mild, moderate,
severe or recurrent depressive episodes, the patient suffers from lowering of mood, reduction
of energy, and decrease in activity." According to the WHO, depression affects 264 million
people worldwide; in our data, 97,932 people (3.6 percent) receive at least one diagnosis of
depression between 1995 and 2015.8


Bipolar Disorder
Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a brain disorder that causes extreme shifts in mood, energy, and
activity levels, limiting a person's ability to carry out day-to-day tasks. The National Institute
of Mental Health (NIMH) and the American Psychiatric Association (APA, 2000) distinguish
between two types of BD:
    ·    BD I is defined by at least one lifetime manic or mixed episode. Manic episodes are
         characterized by irritability, euphoria, a decreased need for sleep, increased activity,
         grandiose ideas, racing thoughts, impulsivity, and distractibility. For a diagnosis of
         BD I, manic episodes must last at least a week or require hospitalization. Mixed
         episodes combine symptoms of mania with simultaneous symptoms of depression for
         at least one week. Symptoms of depression are not necessary for a diagnosis of BD I.
    ·    BD II is defined by a pattern of depressive and hypomanic episodes, without the full-
         blown manic episodes that are typical of BD I.
The ICD classification does not distinguish between BD I and II and only categorizes
"Bipolar Disorder" and "Manic Episode." "Bipolar disorder" (diagnosis code ICD-10: F31)
is described as "A disorder characterized by [...] some occasions of an elevation of mood and
increased energy and activity (hypomania or mania) and on others of a lowering of mood and
decreased energy and activity (depression)." "Manic episode" (diagnosis code ICD-10: F30)
is "A disorder [...] which varies from carefree joviality to almost uncontrollable excitement,
[...] accompanied by increased energy, resulting in overactivity, pressure of speech, and a
decreased need for sleep." The variable BD variable is an indicator for a diagnosis of BDI or
BDII, captured by diagnosis codes ICD-10: F31 and ICD-10. In our data, 22,694 people (0.8
percent) are diagnosed at least once with BD. Worldwide, BD affects about 45 million

8
  World Health Organization Fact Sheet, April 2017 (http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs396/en/).
In the National Comorbidity Study-Replication of 9,282 people in the continental United States, 16.2 percent
had been affected by depression at least once and 6.6 percent within the 12 months prior (Kessler et al. 2003).


                                                                                                                  7
people, most of whom remain. Estimates of suicide risks range between 3.5 and 50 percent
around an average of 15 percent (Simpson and Jamison 1999).
        Although the precise causes of BD are unknown, existing evidence points towards
differences in the brain systems that regulate emotions and a dysregulation in the use of
dopamine, a neurotransmitter that helps regulate reward-motivating behavior (Miklowitz and
Johnson 2006).9 The median age of onset for BD is 18 years (Kessler et al. 2005). We exploit
this fact to compare people with and without access to treatment when they entered their
twenties.


Schizophrenia
The variable schizophrenia is an indicator for having at least one diagnosis with code (ICD-
10: F20-F29): "schizophrenia, schizotypal, delusional disorders and a larger group of acute
and transient psychotic disorders."
Reassuringly, the share of people with BD is stable across cohorts, with 0.9 percent for the
1946, 1954, and 1960 cohorts and 0.8 for the 1975 cohort, respectively (Appendix Figure
A2). Rates of diagnosis for schizophrenia are stable around 1.4 percent, while rates of
diagnosis for depression increase over time, from 2.8 percent for birth cohorts until 1956 to
3.3 for younger cohorts (Appendix Figure A2).


B. Lithium as a Treatment for BD
Denmark's equivalent to the Federal Drug Administration, the Lægemiddelstyrelsen,
approved the mood-stabilizer lithium as a "maintenance" treatment for BD in 1976 (Bech et
al. 1976).10 As a treatment for BD, lithium is typically given in stages. The first is the acute
treatment of an episode that has already developed. The second is maintenance treatment to
delay and moderate future episodes and to reduce symptoms between episodes.
        To measure lithium usage and to further identify people with BD, we modify our
indicator for people with BD to include people with either (i) a diagnosis or (ii) at least one
lithium prescription. To do so, we combine data on medical diagnoses with information on
drug prescriptions from the Prescription Register (Lægemiddeldatabasen), which includes all
prescriptions from 1995 to 2015 from all doctors and hospitals in Denmark. On average, 1.0

9
  Imaging studies of the brain have found that people with BD and their family members have less grey matter
and lower levels of activity in the pre-frontal cortex, an area of the brain that is typically associated with
moderating executive functions (Drevets et al. 1997, Krüger et al. 2006, Naranjo et al. 2001).
10
   Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia 1976, Price and Heninger 1994, McInnis et al. 2014. The US FDA had
approved lithium two years earlier, in January 1974.


                                                                                                                 8
percent of all people have at least one lithium prescription during our time period, including
64 percent of people with at least one diagnosis of BD (Appendix Figure A3).
        Complementary treatments in the form of psychosocial interventions ("therapy") and
other drug treatments (such as antidepressants, anti-anxiety medications, and other types of
mood-stabilizers) also improved substantially after 1976. For example, interest in the
application of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) began in the early 1980s (Cochran 1984),
after the introduction of lithium.11 Among all treatments, however, lithium has the strongest
scientific record of controlling mania and preventing recurrences. Approximately 60%­70%
of persons with BD show a remission of manic symptoms on lithium (Goldberg 2000).
Lithium take-up is also associated with a significant reduction in the risk of hospitalization
and with a 7-fold reduction in suicide rates for people with BD (Baldessarini et al. 1999;
Tondo et al. 1999).
        Despite its effectiveness, many people with BD are reluctant to take it due to side
effects that include tremors, weight gain, feelings of sedation, stomach irritations, thirst, and
kidney problems (Miklowitz and Johnson 2006; Price and Heninger 1994; McInnis et al.
2014).12 People also report stopping treatment because they miss "periods of exuberance or
creativity" (Goodwin and Jamison 2007; Jamison and Akiskal 1983).


C. Earnings and Disability
To calculate a person's earnings, we add income from wages and self-employment
(Appendix Table A1). We convert earnings from Danish Kroner (DKK) to 2015 dollars using
the Danish CPI and the 2015 exchange rate. Individuals with positive earnings earn $52,307
on average, with a standard deviation of $83,476 (Table 1).
        A separate variable measures disability receipt (førtidspension). People with
disabilities apply for these benefits with their municipal government, which evaluates their
ability to work (ressource-forløb), and assigns payments based on severity of the disability
and family status. People who receive disability can work part-time, earning up to an amount
that depends on household structure, income, and wealth; if they earn more they forfeit




11
   Recent approaches in CBT focus on psychoeducation and cognitive restructuring to challenge overly negative
or positive cognitions. By 2005, the American FDA had approved four additional mood stabilizers for the
treatment of BD: the anticonvulsant divalproex sodium (also known as valproate or valpro), the antipsychotic
chloprozaine, the atypical antipsychotic olanzapine, and the anticonvulsant lamotrigine.
12
   Between 25 and 50 percent of patients experience hand tremors. Abnormalities in the thyroid and parathyroid
affect 10 to 20 percent (Price and Heninger 1994; McInnis et al. 2014).


                                                                                                             9
disability pay for that calendar year.13 Eleven percent of people with depression, BD, or
schizophrenia receive disability pay in an average year, including 6,026 people with BD (26
percent of all people with BD), 16,981 with depression (17 percent), and 19,327 with
schizophrenia (46 percent, Table 1).
         To measure whether a person experienced unemployment in a given year, we use an
indicator that equals one if they were unemployed for one day or more within the year.


D. Family Identifiers and Parental Wealth
To control for unobservable factors that vary across families, we link each person to their
siblings using their mother's or father's anonymized social security number as a family
identifier. Family identifiers are available for 1,788,166 people (71 percent of the
population). Seventy-five percent of all people have one or more siblings. Among people
with BD, the share of people with siblings is slightly larger (82 percent).
         Among people who can be linked with their parents, 38 percent have at least one
parent who had financial assets for at least one year between 1980 and 2015. For the
remaining observations, we set parental assets to zero.14 To define a person's position in the
distribution of parental wealth, we calculate the percentile of parental assets for each year and
assign the person to their parents' median percentile across all years.


                        II. MENTAL HEALTH AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
We start our analysis by examining earnings and other career outcomes for people with three
major mental health disorders: depression, bipolar disorder (BD) and schizophrenia.


A. Average Earnings Penalties
First, we investigate whether mental health disorders are associated with lower earnings. We
estimate the following model:


(1)      ln(earningsit) = 1 Depressioni + 2 BDi + 3 Schizophreniai + c(i) + t + it




13
   After a reform on March 1, 2013, restricted disability pay to Danish citizens below the age of 40, the number
of new recipients declined from 14,450 in 2012 to 5,684 in 2014. Our results are robust to excluding data after
the reform (Appendix Tables A4 and A5).
14
   All results are robust to excluding individuals without information on parental assets from the analyses.
Assets are reported by banks and other financial institutions.


                                                                                                              10
where the dependent variable ln(earningsit) is the natural logarithm of earnings of individual
i, born in cohort c(i), in the calendar year t. The indicator variable Depression equals one for
people who have been diagnosed with depression at least once. Indicators for BD and
Schizophrenia are defined accordingly. Year fixed effects control for changes in aggregate
rates of employment and other economic factors that may influence earnings and
employment over time. Cohort fixed effects c control for unobservable factors that vary
across birth cohorts and affect the earnings of healthy and sick people in the same way (for
example the state of the economy).
         OLS estimates show vast earnings penalties for all three mental health disorders.
People with depression earn 36 percent less (with an estimate of -0.438, Table 2, column 1,
significant at 1 percent). People with BD earn 38 percent less (significant at 1 percent), and
people with schizophrenia earn 74 percent less (significant at 1 percent).


B. Controlling for Family Background
Both earnings and the incidence of mental health conditions may vary across families.
Medical research has shown that mental health disorders can be triggered by abuse, neglect,
the death of a parent, or other family-related stress (Mortensen et al. 2003; Persson and
Rossin-Slater 2017). In addition, a person's family background and socioeconomic status can
influence the incidence of the condition and the odds of diagnosis and treatment (Adhvaryu et
al. 2019).15 If families with lower earnings have a higher rate of mental health disorders, a
simple comparison of people with BD with the population may overstate the earnings
penalties from mental health disorders. To address this issue, we re-estimate equation (1)
with controls for family fixed effects. This specification compares people with mental health
conditions with their healthy siblings.
         Including controls for a person's family background leaves the estimates substantially
unchanged. Only the estimated earnings penalty associated with depression is reduced
slightly by controlling for family background, but it stays large at 31 percent (Table 2,
column 2, significant at 1 percent), compared with 35 percent when calculated relative to the
population. These results are particularly striking considering that siblings may be affected by
mental health disorders either indirectly (if parents focus time and attention on children with
mental health disorders) or directly (if siblings are affected by undiagnosed and untreated


15
  Low income is associated with an increased risk for the manic and hypomanic symptoms of BD (Bauer et al.
2011, Sareen et al. 2011, Hakulinen et al. 2019), and access to specialized mental health care is associated with
socio-economic status (Katz et al. 1997; Wang et al. 2005).


                                                                                                               11
forms of a disorder, e.g., Kruger et al. 2006).16 Our results suggest that the effects on the
siblings are small relative to the earnings penalties for people with the disorder.17


C. Event Studies Surrounding the Date of First Diagnosis
Changes in earnings might not be instantaneous after a diagnosis. First, earnings may decline
before the diagnosis if a person experiences symptoms before the diagnosis.18 Second,
earnings may recover with some delay after the diagnosis because treatments require time to
have an effect. To investigate the timing of these changes, we estimate event studies of
earnings in the 10 years before and after a diagnosis:

(2)      ln(earningsit)= 10k = -10 dk Ci 1(t-Y(C)i = k) +1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3
         Schizophreniai + c(i) + t + it

where Ci is an indicator for Depression, BD, or Schizophrenia and Y(C)i denotes the first year
in which person i is diagnosed with condition Ci in our data. Normalizing d-2 to zero, the
parameters dk capture changes in earnings k years after a diagnosis relative to the two years
preceding the diagnosis.
         OLS estimates of equation (2) show that earnings decline dramatically and
persistently after the diagnosis. Two years after the diagnosis, people with depression earn 29
percent less than they did two years before the diagnosis (Figure 1, significant at 1 percent).
Similarly, people with BD earn 34 percent less and people with schizophrenia earn 49 percent
less two years after the diagnosis. Declines in earnings are long-lasting: Ten years after the
diagnosis, people with depression earn 21 percent less than they did two years before the
diagnosis, people with BD earn 34 percent less, and people with schizophrenia earn 57
percent less.
         Consistent with symptoms before the diagnosis, earnings decline in the decade
leading up to the diagnosis. Between 10 and 2 years before a diagnosis, earnings for people
with depression decline by 9 percent (significant at 1 percent). People with BD and
schizophrenia experience even larger declines, with 23 percent and 31 percent, respectively
(Figure 1, significant at 1 percent).


16
   Siblings may also be affected by "courtesy stigma," distancing and rejecting family members and other
people who are associated with a devalued group (Hinshaw and Stier 2008, p. 372).
17
   We can identify siblings for 71 percent of the population. Restricting the sample for the baseline estimate to
people with known siblings yields results similar to our baseline estimates (Appendix Tables A6 and A7).
18
   Calabrese et al (1996), for example, find that roughly one in five people who enter outpatient treatment for
BD have experienced four or more episodes within the prior year.


                                                                                                                12
D. Differences in the Probability of Extremely High or Low Earnings
In addition to influencing average earnings, mental health disorders may determine a person's
place in the distribution of earnings. Medical studies have found that people with BD have an
elevated tolerance for risk; this may lead some of them to select into high-risk, high-return
careers and reach the top of the distribution (Mason et al. 2014; Reddy et al. 2011; Swann
2009).19 Referring to BD as a CEO's disease, Cooper et al. (1999) note that people with BD
share a high tolerance for risk and other personality traits with entrepreneurs.20 Yet,
debilitating symptoms may cause people with mental health disorders to have zero earnings
or receive disability pay, forcing them into the lower quantiles of earnings.21
        We find that people with mental health disorders are much more likely to fall into the
bottom quantiles of earnings. People with BD are 12 percentage points (120 percent) more
likely to be in the bottom 10 percent of earnings compared with the population (Table 3,
column 1, significant at 1 percent) and 110 percent more likely compared with their siblings
(column 2, significant at 1 percent). Estimates are similar for depression (with a 99 percent
higher probability compared to the population and an 86 percent higher probability compared
with their siblings, significant at 1 percent) and much larger for schizophrenia (a 319 percent
higher probability compared to the population and a 309 percent higher probability compared
with their siblings, significant at 1 percent). Examining the bottom 25 percent of earnings
yields similar results (columns 3 and 4).
        Population data also show that people with mental health disorders are substantially
less likely to reach the top quantiles of earnings. People with depression are 52 percent less
likely than the population to be in the top 10 percent of the distribution (Table 3, column 7,
significant at 1 percent) and 41 percent less likely compared with their siblings (column 8,
significant at 1 percent). Similarly, people with BD are 3 percentage points (30 percent) less


19
   Mason et al. (2014) show that brain circuits involved in pursuing rewarding experiences (the nucleus
accumbens) are more strongly activated in people with BD, guiding them towards riskier gambles, while the
prefrontal cortex is more strongly activated in control subjects, guiding them towards safer gambles.
Experimental evidence from a balloon analogue risk task (BART) analysis suggests that people with BD take
the same levels of risks as other people, even though they score higher on self-reported tests of impulsiveness
(Reddy et al 2011). Swann (2009) argues that impulsivity, the tendency to pursue rewards without considering
negative consequences, is elevated in people with mania.
20
   Successful entrepreneurs overestimate their firm's probability of survival (Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg
1988), employment expansion, and sales growth (Landier and Thesmar 2008). Incorporated entrepreneurs are
also more likely to have engaged in risky and illicit behavior in their youth (Levine and Rubinstein 2017).
21
   Jamison (1993), for instance, documents that exceptionally creative people, such as Vincent Van Gogh,
Ernest Hemingway, and Virginia Woolf exhibited traits of BD. Using administrative data from Sweden, Kyaga
et al. (2011) find that people with mental health disorders may be more likely to pursue creative professions.


                                                                                                             13
likely to reach the top earnings decile compared with the population and 3.3 percentage
points (33 percent) less likely than their siblings. People with schizophrenia are 58 and 44
percent less likely (Table 3, columns 7 and 8). Examining the top 25 percent of earnings
corroborates these patterns (columns 5 and 6).


E. Differences in the Probability of No Earnings
While our analyses so far have focused on people with positive earnings; people with mental
health disorders may also face an elevated risk of having no earnings at all. Examining these
differences in the Danish population data, we find that people with mental health disorders
are substantially more likely to have no earnings. In the population, 13.4 percent of people
have zero earnings in a given year. For people with depression, this share is 15.3 percentage
points higher, which implies that depression is associated with a 1.1-fold increase in the risk
of no earnings (Table 2, column 3, significant at 1 percent). People with BD are 15
percentage points more likely to have no earnings, implying a 1.1-fold higher probability.
People with schizophrenia are 45 percentage points more likely to have no earnings, implying
a 3.36 times higher probability (Table 2, column 3, significant at 1 percent). Controlling for
family fixed effects leaves these estimates substantially unchanged (Table 2, column 4,
significant at 1 percent).
        Event study estimates show that a person's risk of having no earnings increases
dramatically after a mental health diagnosis. Two years after the diagnosis, people with
depression, BD, and schizophrenia have a 1.2-times higher risk of no earnings compared with
2 years before the diagnosis (Figure 2, significant at 1 percent). For people with depression,
the risk of no earnings declines slightly over time after a diagnosis. For people with BD and
schizophrenia, however, the risk of no earnings remains high in the ten years after a
diagnosis.
        Event study estimates also show that the risk of no earnings begins to increase before
the diagnosis. For a person with depression, the risk of no earnings increases by 18 percent
between the tenth and the second year before their diagnosis (significant at 1 percent). For
people with BD, the risk of no earnings increases by 61 percent, and for people with
schizophrenia, it increases by 87 percent.


E. Mechanisms (I): Disability Risk
A higher risk of no earning suggests that symptoms of mental health disorders may prevent
people from participating in the labor force. Estimates by the WHO suggest that mental


                                                                                               14
illness is the leading cause of lost disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) worldwide,
accounting for more than one third of years lost due to non-communicable diseases (WHO
2011 and Ormel et al., 2008).22 In the United States, mental illness accounts for over half of
the rise in disability receipt after 1990 for men (Duggan and Imberman 2009).
         To examine the extent to which the estimated earnings penalties for people with
mental health conditions might be due to an increased risk of disability, we test whether
people with these conditions face significantly higher risks of disability compared with the
population. Estimating equation (1) with an indicator for people who receive disability pay as
the outcome variable, we find that people with BD are 2.7 times more likely to receive
disability pay compared with the population (12.8 percentage points compared with a
population average of 5.9 percent, Table 2, column 5, significant at 1 percent). People with
schizophrenia have the highest disability risk; they are 7 times more likely than the
population to receive disability pay (41 percentage points, Table 2, column 5, significant at 1
percent). People with depression face the lowest risk of disability; they are 1.2 times more
likely to receive disability pay compared with the population (7.4 percentage points
compared with a population average of 5.9 percent). All results are robust to controlling for
family fixed effects (Table 2, column 6).
         Event-study estimates show a large and persistent increase in the risk of disability
after the diagnosis. Ten years after a diagnosis, a person with depression is 4.2 times more
likely to receive disability pay compared with the year prior to the diagnosis (Figure 3). A
person with BD is 5.8 times more likely, and a person with schizophrenia is 8.5 times more
likely to receive disability pay. Similar to other career outcomes considered above, the risk of
disability increases in the years leading to the diagnosis. For people with depression, the risk
of disability grows by 63 percent between the tenth and the second year before the diagnosis
(significant at 1 percent). For people with BD, the risk of disability increases by 101 percent,
and for people with schizophrenia, it increases by 140 percent.


F. Mechanisms (I): Unemployment
In addition to an increased risk of disability, the symptoms of a mental health condition may
cause some people to lose their jobs. Unemployment reduces earnings not only directly,

22
  In a survey of 253 people with BD, Suppes et al. (2001) found that 57 percent of respondents were unable to
work, and another 9 percent held part-time jobs. In self-reported data from the World Health Organization's
Health and Work Performance Questionnaire (HPQ) BD and depression are associated with 65.5 and 27.2
excess lost workdays per worker, respectively (Kessler et al. 2003). Projecting these estimates to the US labor
force suggests that 225.0 million workdays are lost to depression each year, and 96.2 million are lost to BD.


                                                                                                             15
through the immediate loss of income and indirectly, by worsening future labor market
opportunities through "unemployment scarring" (Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan 1993;
Davis and von Wachter 2012). We examine both types of effects by estimating event studies
for three groups of people with a mental health condition: (a) people who received a single
diagnosis and experienced an unemployment spell between two years before and two years
after a diagnosis, (b) people who received a single diagnosis but did not experience
unemployment; and (c) people who received multiple diagnoses (and thus are likely to have
more severe symptoms) but did not experience unemployment. A comparison between (a)
and (b) isolates the scarring effect of unemployment on people with a milder expression of
the condition, while a comparison of (b) and (c) illustrates the impact of severe symptoms.
        Event study estimates in Figure 4 indicate that earnings losses are due primarily to
severe symptoms of BD, rather than unemployment scarring. People who receive only one
diagnosis and experience an unemployment spell see their earnings fall by 42 percent in the
year of the diagnosis, relative to two years before the diagnosis. Earnings then start to
recover, returning to their pre-diagnosis levels six years after the diagnosis. People who also
receive one diagnosis but do not become unemployed have a similar earnings trajectory, with
earnings falling by 32 percent two years after a diagnosis and then returning to pre-diagnosis
levels ten years after it. The absence of differences in earnings between these two groups
suggests that the scarring effect of unemployment is unlikely to drive the earnings decline
that follows a diagnosis. Instead, our data support the hypothesis that the post-diagnosis
earnings decline is due to an impairing effect of mental health symptoms: People who receive
more than one diagnosis and do not become unemployed see their earnings fall significantly
more, by 56 percent two years after the first diagnosis. For these people, earnings also remain
at this lower level in the ten years following the first diagnosis.
        People with mental health disorders may not be recorded as unemployed because they
leave the labor force. In fact, even for people who do not experience unemployment, the odds
of no earnings and disability increase leading up to a diagnosis and peak two years afterwards
(Appendix Figure A4). This is true especially for people with a more severe type of BD
(measured by multiple diagnoses) and are never unemployed.
        Taken together, these results suggest that lost earnings are mostly due to the direct
effects of symptoms rather than the scarring effect of unemployment.23


23
  Using data from the NESARC survey of the U.S. Census, Ettner Maclean and French (2011) show that
personality traits and symptoms experienced by people with mental health conditions (such as antisocial,
paranoid, and obsessive-compulsive behavior) are associated with an increased probability of unemployment.


                                                                                                             16
                               III. EFFECTS OF ACCESS TO TREATMENT
Reduced earnings for people with mental health conditions point to an important link
between mental health and labor market outcomes, but they cannot establish a causal effect of
mental health on creativity. In fact, causality may operate in the oppositive direction if
negative labor market shocks trigger mental health episodes (Ahammer, Grübl, and Winter-
Ebmer 2020; Ahammer and Packham, 2020).24 To address this issue and investigate the
causal effect of mental health on labor market outcomes, we exploit the approval of lithium
as a maintenance treatment for BD.


A. Access to Treatment Greatly Increases Average Earnings
Baseline OLS estimates compare differences in earnings between the population and people
with BD who had access to treatment when they turned 20, with the same differences for
people with BD who did not have access to treatment at age 20, the typical age of onset for
BD (Kessler et al. 2005):


(3)     ln(earningsit)=  BDi +  BDi x postc(i) + c(i) + t + it

where the dependent variable ln(earningsit) represents the natural logarithm of earnings for
individual i in year t. The variable postc equals 1 for cohorts born after 1956, who had access
to lithium treatment at age 20. Cohort fixed effects c control for differences in earnings
across cohorts and year fixed effects t control for variation in earnings over time. Baseline
specifications focus on people with positive earnings; separate analyses in Section III.D
examine the risk of zero earnings. Under the identifying assumption that differences in
earnings for people with and without BD would have been comparable for cohorts born
before and after 1956, the coefficient  on the interaction BDi x postc estimates the effect of
access to treatment.
        OLS estimates of equation (3) confirm large penalties for people with BD without
access to treatment and reveal that treatment eliminates one third of these penalties. An
estimate of -0.560 for BD indicates that people with BD who did not have access to treatment


24
  Ahammer et al. (2020) show that downsizing has negative effects on mental health of non-laid off employees,
who might be fearing for their jobs. Ahammer and Packham (2020) compare unemployed workers with and
without access to unemployment benefits and find that the latter have worse mental health outcomes.


                                                                                                          17
earned 42.9 percent less than the population (Table 4, column 1, significant at 1 percent). An
estimate of 0.112 for BD x post (significant at 1 percent) indicates instead that people with
BD who did have access to treatment earned 12 percent more than people with the same
disorder but without access to treatment. These estimates imply that treatment closes 28
percent of the earnings penalty associated with BD. Controlling for family characteristics
further increases the estimated benefits from treatment. Compared with their siblings, people
with BD earn 42 percent less, and access to treatment closes 64 percent of this gap (with an
estimate of 0.240 for BD x post Table 4, column 2, significant at 1 percent).25
         Since only 64 percent of people diagnosed with BD receive lithium (Appendix Figure
A3), our estimates capture the intent to treat, rather than the average treatment effect of
lithium.26 The estimates may also be attenuated because diagnoses are only observable
starting in 1995, so that we cannot observe people who were sufficiently ill to die before we
observe their diagnosis. We also might assign people who were diagnosed before 1995 (but
not after) to the control group. If these people are less sick, this assignment further attenuates
our estimates.27 Finally, our results may be influenced by secular changes in labor market
outcomes for people with mental health conditions, e.g., because of changes in stigmatization
over time. We examine these forces in Section VI.A.


B. Event Study Estimates
To investigate the timing of changes in earnings, we estimate event studies in equation (2)
separately for cohorts with and without access to lithium. Leading up to a diagnosis, earnings
of people with and without access to treatment are similar. Ten years before a diagnosis,
people with access to treatment earn 26 percent more compared with two years before the
diagnosis, and people without access earn 24 percent more (Figure 5). In the year of the
diagnosis, earnings decline by 34 percent for both groups.
         After the diagnosis, the earnings trajectories of people with and without access to
treatment diverge. Without access to treatment, people with BD earn 16 percent less in the
year after the diagnosis than in the last year before the diagnosis; ten years after the
diagnosis, they earn 43 percent less. With access to treatment, earnings of people with BD
begin to recover four years after a diagnosis; ten years after the diagnosis, people with access

25
   See Appendix Table A7 for estimates without family fixed effects for the sample of people with siblings.
26
   Aagaard and Vestergaard (1990) find that 58 percent of 133 patients, initially prescribed with lithium at the
Aarhus Psychiatric Hospital (Denmark) between 1981 and 1983, continue treatment for at least two years.
27
   The composition of the sample of people with BD relative to the population is constant across cohorts in
terms of gender, education, comorbidity, and parental wealth (Appendix Figure A5).


                                                                                                               18
to treatment earn just 29 percent less. Access to treatment closes nearly one third of the
decline in earnings associated with BD.


C. Access to Treatment Improves a Person's Position in the Distribution of Earnings
Next, we investigate the effects of access to treatment on a person's position in the
distribution of earnings. These estimates indicate that access to treatment greatly reduces the
risks of low earnings and increases the probability of high earnings. Notably, these effects are
stronger when we control for a person's family background.
       Specifically, access to treatment reduces the risk that a person with BD has earnings
in the bottom decile by 17 percent compared with the population (estimate for BD x post
equal to 1.7 percentage points, Table 5, column 1, significant at 1 percent) and more than
twice as much, by 42 percent, compared with their siblings (Table 5, column 2, significant at
1 percent). Access to treatment also increases the probability that a person with BD has
earnings in the top decile by 21 percent compared with their siblings (BD x post = 0.021,
Table 5, column 1, significant at 1 percent) though there is no effect compared with the
population (BD x post = -0.004, Table 5, column 1).


D. Access to Treatment Greatly Reduces the Risk of No Earnings
Treatment may allow people with BD to stay in the labor force, reducing their risks of no
earnings. To investigate this mechanism, we estimate equation (3) with an indicator for zero
earnings as the dependent variable.
       OLS estimates imply that people with BD are 1.5 times more likely than the
population to have no earnings at all (19.6 percentage points more likely compared with a
population share of 0.134, Table 4, column 3, significant at 1 percent). Treatment reduces
that risk by 6.5 percent or 33 percent (Table 4, column 1, significant at 1 percent), which
implies that, with access to treatment, people with BD are only 98 percent more likely than
the population to have no earnings. Controlling for family fixed effects leaves these estimates
substantially unchanged. Compared with their siblings, people with BD are 19.7 percentage
points more likely to have no earnings; access to treatment eliminates 36 percent of this risk
(-7.1 percentage points, column 2, significant at 1 percent).
       Event studies show that, leading up to the diagnosis, the probability that a person with
BD has zero earnings is similar with and without access to treatment (Figure 6). After the
diagnosis, estimates diverge: Without access to treatment, people with BD face a 1.5- times



                                                                                              19
higher risk of zero earnings 10 years after the diagnosis compared with the year before the
diagnosis. With access to treatment, they only face a 1-time increase in the risk of earnings.


E. Access to Treatment Eliminates more than Half the Risk of Disability
Access to treatment may enable people with BD to work. Examining depression, Shapiro
(forthcoming) finds that encouraging people to take drugs for depression via advertising leads
them to miss fewer days at work. Garthwaite (2012) shows that the removal of Vioxx (a
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, or NSAIDs, and a branded Cox-2 inhibitor) from the
market was associated with a 0.35 percentage point decline in overall labor force
participation. If treatments for BD are similarly effective, they may reduce the risk of
disability.
        OLS estimates in Table 4 indicate that access to treatment reduces the risk of
disability for people with BD by more than half. Without access to treatment, people with BD
are almost 4 times more likely to receive disability pay compared with the population (21.8
percentage points, Table 4, column 5, significant at 1 percent, compared with a population
average of 5.9 percent). Access to treatment eliminates 59 percent of this risk (with an
estimate of BD x post equal to 0.128, Table 4, column 5, significant at 1 percent).
        Controlling for a person's family background increases the disability risk associated
with BD slightly but leaves the benefits from treatment substantially unchanged. Compared
with their siblings, people with BD are nearly 5 times more likely to receive disability pay
(21.4 percentage points, Table 4, column 6, significant at 1 percent, compared with a
population average of 4.7 percent for people with one or more siblings). Access to treatment
closes 57 percent of this gap (with an estimate of 0.122 for BD x post compared with 0.214
for BD, Table 4, column 6, significant at 1 percent).
        Event study estimates reveal significant post-diagnosis differences in disability risks
for people with and without treatment (Figure 7). Before the diagnosis, the risk of disability
follows a similar trend for people with and without access to treatment. In the year of the
diagnosis, this risk increases by 9.8 percent for people without access to treatment and 4.3
percentage points for people with access (166 and 73 percent, respectively). The likelihood of
receiving disability pay continues to rise for both groups; ten years after a diagnosis,
however, the increase is substantially more pronounced for people without access to
treatment (with a 6.3-times increase compared to a 5.6-times increase with access).


F. No Significant Effects of Treatment on Siblings


                                                                                               20
In addition to directly affecting people with BD, the disorder may also create negative
spillover effects on siblings, for instance if parents shift resources to the sibling with BD. To
investigate whether siblings are affected by BD, we compare "healthy" siblings of people
with BD with the population (Table 6).
         OLS estimates confirm that BD creates negative spillovers for siblings of people with
BD. Healthy siblings of people with BD earn 6.6 percent less than the population (with an
estimate of -0.067 for BD sibling, Table 6, column 1, significant at 1 percent). Notably,
siblings, do not appear to benefit from treatment (with an estimate of -0.032 for BD sibling x
post, Table 6 column 1, significant at 10 percent), possibly because the shift in family
resources is permanent. Alternatively, "healthy" siblings may be affected by a "subthreshold"
form of BD, even if they are not diagnosed (Mortensen et al 2003, Kruger et al. 2006).28


                          IV. TREATMENT EFFECTS ACROSS BIRTH COHORTS
Our baseline specifications estimate the average benefits of access to treatment by comparing
people with BD who had access to lithium by age 20 (born before 1956) with people who did
not have access at the same age (born in or after 1956). Using the 1956 cohort as a cutoff
capture the true effect of lithium if the following assumptions hold: a) treatment is most
important when a person enters their 20s and b) lithium was not available at all until 1976
and became available immediately to everyone afterwards.
         In reality, these assumptions might fail. First, it could take years for a new drug to
reach all patients (Agha and Molitor, 2018) and some patients might have used lithium before
it was approved.29 This would lead us to under-estimate the benefits of treatment. Moreover,
the impact of treatment may increase with the length of exposure instead of changing
discontinuously for cohorts born after 1956. Take-up rates (defined as the share of people
who receive prescriptions of lithium each year) increased gradually across cohorts, from 47
percent of people with BD born in 1946 to 84 percent born in 1976 (Appendix Figure A3,
controlling for year effects and a cubic polynomial for age).
         To investigate the heterogeneous effects of lithium across cohorts, we estimate
cohort-specific treatment effects  separately for two-year cohorts between 1946 and 1976

(4)      ln(earningsit)=  BDi + c c BDi x c +  Zit + f + c + t + ict

28
   Analyses of US data indicate that people with a family history of BD are more likely to be affected by a
milder form of (subthreshold) BD than the population (Judd and Akiskal 2003).
29
   Agha and Molitor (2018) show that, within the first four years after the approval of a new cancer drug,
patients who live near the lead investigator are more likely to be treated.


                                                                                                              21
where the birth year 1953-54 is the omitted cohort.
           These estimates show that our baseline specification captures the most salient change
in access to treatment for BD. Cohort-specific estimates indicate no positive treatment effects
for people born before 1955 who did not have access to lithium when they turned 20.
Estimates range from -0.054 for the 1946 cohort to 0.127 for 1948 (Figure 8) and are not
statistically significant.
           Cohort-specific estimates first become positive for people born in 1960: An estimate
of 0.170 implies a 19 percent increase in earnings (exp(0.17)-1, significant at 5 percent,
Figure 8, darker series). This four-year delay after access to treatment is consistent with
delays in the diffusion of drugs (Agha and Molitor 2018). Estimates further to 0.200 for
people born in 1963-64 (significant at 1 percent) and 0.262 for people born in 1975-76
(significant at 1 percent, Figure 8), implying a 22 and 30 percent increase, respectively.
Controlling for family fixed effects increases the size of the estimates (Figure 8, lighter
series).


A. People with Access in their Early 20s have Much Lower Risks of Zero Earnings
Next, we estimate cohort-specific effects for the risk of no earnings. These estimates also
show no measurable effects of treatment on people in cohorts born before 1955. The risk of
no earnings is flat across cohorts born between 1946 and 1954 (Figure 9).
           Estimates first become statistically significant for cohorts born in 1957-58, with a 2.5
percentage points (-0.025) decline in the probability of no earnings (significant at 5 percent).
Estimates decline continuously, reaching -0.089 for people born in 1975-76 (significant at 1
percent, Figure 9). Compared with a population share of 0.154, these estimates imply a 16
and 58 percent reduction in the risks of no earnings. Younger people, who had access to
lithium for a larger share of their professional lives, are substantially more likely to have
positive earnings.


B. People in Cohorts with Access to Treatment are Less Likely to Receive Disability Pay
Cohort-specific estimates indicate that access to treatment reduces the risk of disability. For
cohorts without access to treatment (born between 1946 and 1954) there are no significant
differences in the probability of disability (Figure 10).
           The risk of disability declines for cohorts after 1956, with an estimate of -0.039 for
the 1957-58 cohort (significant at 5 percent) and -0.218 for the 1975-76 cohort (significant at


                                                                                                    22
1 percent, Figure 10). Compared with an average probability of 0.059, this corresponds to a
66 and 369 percent lower probability of disability, respectively. Estimates are robust to
controlling for family fixed effects (Figure 10, lighter series).


C. Sensitivity to Violations of the Parallel Trends Assumption
        Our estimates of the effects of access to treatment across cohorts rely on the
assumption that the outcomes of people with and without BD would have been on parallel
trends in the absence of the treatment. While the assumption of parallel trends is untestable,
we can examine the sensitivity of our estimates to violations of this assumption. Following
Rambachan and Roth (2019), we compare 95-percent confidence intervals of OLS estimates
of the parameters c in equation (5), for c = 1966 and c = 1976, with estimates that allow for
deviations from a linear trend up to an amount M. Appendix Figure A6 shows sensitivity
plots for 0 < M < se(c), where se(c) is the standard error of c (panel (a) shows estimates on
log earnings, panel (b) shows estimates on P(no earnings), and panel (c) shows estimates on
P(disability)). All estimates remain largely significantly different from zero.


      V. HETEROGENEOUS OUTCOMES ACROSS THE DISTRIBUTION OF PARENTAL WEALTH
Population data on mental health diagnoses and earnings reveal immense career effects of
mental health disorders and large benefits from treatment. In this section, we examine how
these costs and benefits vary with a person's socio-economic status (SES), measured by their
parents' position in the distribution of wealth.
        Existing research has documented a strong link between SES and the incidence of
mental health conditions. For example, adverse health shocks in utero or during childhood
have been linked to mental health disorders in adults (McClellan et al. 2006; Neugebauer et
al. 2006, Van der Bergh et al. 2005; Persson and Rossin-Slater 2017; Adhvaryu, Finske, and
Nyshadham 2019; Gardner and Oswalt 2007).30 Moreover, SES influences access to
treatment. For example, Katz et al. (1997) and Wang et al. (2005) show that low-income
urban populations in the United States are less likely to receive appropriately targeted
treatment for mental health conditions. Unequal access to care may be due to the monetary

30
   McClellan et al. (2006) and Neugebauer et al. (2006) show that maternal exposure to famine increases rates of
schizophrenia and anti-social behavior among children. Van der Bergh et al. (2005) and Persson and Rossin-
Slater (2017) show that in utero exposure to maternal stress and anxiety increase the incidence of mental health
conditions during adulthood. Adhvaryu et al. (2019) use variation in the price of cocoa in Ghana to show that
children who are exposed to negative wealth shocks in utero have lower mental health outcomes as adults.
Gardner and Oswalt (2007) find that lottery winners in Britain experienced an improvement in their well-being
and that larger wins are followed by stronger improvements.


                                                                                                             23
costs of treatment or to informal barriers and stigmatization. In our empirical setting, health
care is essentially free, allowing us to shut down monetary costs and isolate the influence of
other factors.
       First, we estimate whether the penalties associated with depression, BD, and
schizophrenia vary with a person's position in the distribution of parental assets, measured by
a person's median percentile in the distribution of parental assets over time. Then, we
investigate whether the benefits of treatment differ across the distribution of parental wealth.


A. Parental Wealth Mitigates Earnings Penalties Associated with Mental Health Disorders
OLS estimates indicate that high levels of parental wealth can help shield a person from the
negative career effects of a mental health disorder. People with depression experience an
earnings penalty of 31 percent if they are in the second and third quartile of parental wealth;
this is captured by the coefficient for Depression in column 1 of Table 7, equal to -0.378 and
significant at 1 percent, and the conversion (exp(-0.378)-1=-0.315). By comparison, people
with depression in the fourth, top quartile earn 4.0 percentage point more compared with
people with depression and parental assets in the second and third quartile (with an estimate
of 0.039 for Depression x Parents >= 75th percentile in Table 7, column 1, significant at 1
percent). This implies that moving from the middle to the top quartile of parental assets
eliminates 12.6 percent of the earnings penalty associated with depression. By comparison,
the estimate for Depression x Parents < 25th percentile is small (-0.015) and not statistically
different from zero (Table 7, column 1, p-value equal to 0.21).
        For people with BD, the benefits of having wealthy parents are even larger. People
with BD who have parental assets in the second and third quartiles suffer an earnings penalty
of 35 percent (significant at 1 percent). That penalty is 5.3 percentage points lower for people
with BD and parental assets in the top quartile (with an estimate of 0.052 for BD x Parents
>= 75th percentile in Table 7, column 1, significant at 10 percent). This implies that moving
from the middle to the top quartile of parental assets eliminates 15.4 percent of the earnings
penalty associated with BD. The estimate of BD x Parents < 25 percentile is not statistically
significant (at 0.042 with a p-value of 0.18, Table 7, column 1).
       In the case of schizophrenia, high levels of parental wealth are less effective at
mitigating adverse career effects while low levels are more damaging. People with
schizophrenia and parental assets in the second and third quartile experience an earnings
penalty of 71 percent (with an estimate for Schizophrenia equal to 1.234, significant at 1
percent). This penalty is 6.0 percentage point higher for people with schizophrenia and


                                                                                              24
parental assets in the top quartile (with an estimate of 0.058 for Schizophrenia x Parents >=
75th percentile in Table 7, column 1, significant at 10 percent), which implies that moving
from the middle to the top quartile of parental assets eliminates only 8.4 percent of the
earnings penalty associated with schizophrenia. People in the bottom quartile of parental
wealth experience an even larger penalty, 9.6 percentage points (or 13.6 percent) compared
with people with parental assets in the second and third quartiles (estimate for Schizophrenia
x Parents < 25th percentile equal to -0.101, Table 7, column 1, significant at 1 percent).
          Parental wealth also protects people with depression and BD but not people with
schizophrenia. People with depression and BD are less likely to have no earnings when their
parents' assets are in the top quartile (3.6 and 2.8 percentage points less, respectively, Table
7, column 2). On the contrary, parental assets do not appear to move the risk of no earnings
for people with schizophrenia (with an estimate for Schizophrenia x Parents >= 75th
percentile equal to -0.002 and a p-value of 0.77, Table 7, column 2).
          People with wealthy parents also face a reduced risk of disability from mental health
disorders (3.4 percentage points less likely for BD, 1.5 percentage points less likely for
depression, and 1.6 percentage points more likely for schizophrenia, Table 7, column 3).


B. Benefits of Treatment are Largest for People with Low Parental Wealth
To examine whether benefits from access to treatment vary across the distribution of parental
wealth, we interact BD and BD * post in equation (3) with indicators for quartiles of parental
assets.
          While OLS estimates have wide confidence intervals, they suggest that the benefits
from treatment are much larger for people with lower parental wealth. An estimate of 0.103
for BD x post indicates that access to treatment reduces the earnings penalty associated with
BD by 11 percentage points for people with parental assets in the second and third quartile
(Table 8, column 1, p-value equal to 0.44). An estimate of 0.191 for BD x Parents < 25 pctile
x post shows that this reduction is nearly three times as large for people with BD and parental
assets in the bottom quartile (Table 8, column 1, p-value equal to 0.47). People at the top
quartile of parental wealth benefit the least; for them, the effect of access to treatment is 50
percent smaller (with an estimate for BD x Parents >= 75 pctile x post equal to -0.047, Table
8, column 1, p-value equal to 0.83).
          People in the lower quartiles of the earnings distribution also experience a
disproportionate reduction in the risk of no earnings and disability. Access to treatment
reduces the risk of no earnings by 5.7 percentage points for people with parental assets in the


                                                                                                   25
second and third quartile (BD x post, Table 8, column 2, significant at 10 percent. This
reduction is 7.0 percentage point (123 percent) larger for people with BD and parental assets
in the bottom quartile (BD x Parents < 25 pctile x post, Table 8, column 2, p-value equal to
0.29) and 2.4 percentage point (48 percent) smaller for people with BD and parental assets in
the top quartile (BD x Parents >= 75 pctile x post, Table 8, column 2, p-value equal to 0.83).
Similarly, treatment reduces the risk of disability by 15.2 percentage points for people with
parental assets in the second and third quartile (BD x post, Table 8, column 3, significant at 1
percent), with a 5.8 percentage point (38 percent) larger reduction for people with BD and
parental assets in the bottom quartile (BD x Parents < 25 pctile x post, Table 8, column 3, p-
value equal to 0.33) and a 9.0 percentage point (59 percent) smaller reduction for people with
BD and parental assets in the top quartile (BD x Parents >= 75 pctile x post, Table 8, column
3, p-value equal to 0.12).
       Although imprecise, our estimates suggest that family wealth plays an important role
in shaping the career effects of mental health conditions. High levels of parental wealth help
shield individuals with BD from the most severe effects of a disorder. In the absence of
monetary barriers to treatment, people with lower levels of financial wealth benefit most
from access to treatment. Combined with existing evidence on disparate access to mental
health treatment across the spectrum of SES, these results suggest that mental health might be
an important driver for the persistence of low SES across generations, documented by
Boserup et al (2013) for Denmark and Chetty et al. (2014) for the United States.


                             VI. HETEROGENEITY AND ROBUSTNESS
In this final section, we examine heterogeneous effects on people with more or less severe
forms of BD. We also investigate whether our results may be driven by changes in the
stigmatization of mental health disorders or other forces that change career outcomes of
people with mental health disorders over time. Additional tests use prescriptions, rather than
diagnoses, to identify people with BD.


D. Controlling for Changes in Unobservable Factors that Influence Outcomes for People
   with Mental Health Disorders Over Time
Our identification strategy implicitly assumes that labor market outcomes for people with BD
would have remained unchanged had lithium not been introduced as a maintenance treatment
for BD. Yet, this period saw many other changes that may have affected outcomes for people
with mental health disorders, such as the de-institutionalization of mental health care and the


                                                                                                26
growth of community-based treatment centers (Geddes and Miklowitz, 2013), as well as
changes in health insurance coverage31 and in the stigmatization of mental health disorders
(Hinshaw 2007).32 All of these forces may have influenced career outcomes for people with
mental health disorders over time, confounding our estimates.
        To control for the influence of these unobservable factors we estimate a triple-
difference model using people with depression or schizophrenia as an additional control:


(5)     ln(earningsit)= 1 Depri + 2 BDi +3 Schizoi + c 1,c Depri x c + c 2,c BDi x c
                       + c 3,c Schizoi x c +  Zit + c + t + ict

The coefficients 1,c and 3,c estimate cohort-specific differences in log earnings between
people with depression and schizophrenia, respectively, and the population; the coefficients
2,c estimate the cohort-specific differences for people with BD. Controlling for c 1,c Depri
x c and c 3,c Schizoi x c, estimates of 2,c for c>1956 capture the effects of access to
treatment that is specific to BD, controlling for the influence of changes in stigmatization and
other unobservable factors that are shared with other mental health disorders.
        Triple-difference estimates confirm that access to treatment greatly improved the
career outcomes of people with BD, even controlling for other unobservable factors that may
have impacted all people with a mental health disorder across cohorts. Estimates of 2,c,
shown in panel A of Figure 11, are indistinguishable from zero for cohorts before 1955-56
and become positive for people born in 1960, with an estimate of 0.204, implying a 23
percent increase in earnings (significant at 5 percent, Figure 11). Estimates for the risk of no
earnings (Panels B, Figure 11) and for the risk of disability (Panel C) further corroborate
substantial improvements in response to access to treatment.


E. Variation in Severity of BD
To assess whether the labor market penalties and the benefits from treatment vary with the
intensity of BD, we exploit variation in the number of diagnoses that a person receives.
People with just one diagnosis may have just experienced a single episode and be therefore

31
   Mental health care in Denmark has undergone considerable change during the last decades, including an
increase in outpatient treatment, a reduction in the number of hospital beds, and the establishment of community
mental health centers (Danish Ministry of Health, 2017). The Social Assistance Act of 1976 transferred
psychiatric services from the state to local county responsibility. A Patients' Right law of 1992 prohibited
treatment without consent and required providers to explain treatment options to patients (European
Observatory on Health Care Systems, 2001).
32
   In principle, evidence on the genetic drivers of mental health may mitigate stigmatization. Yet surveys show
that stigmatization towards BD and other disorders has intensified since the 1950s (Phelan et al. 2000).


                                                                                                             27
less sick, while people with multiple diagnoses must have observed as least as many
episodes. On average, people with BD receive 2.4 diagnoses of BD between 1995 and 2015,
with a median of 2 diagnoses. To incorporate this information, we estimate:


(6)    ln(earningsict)= 1 BDi + 1 BDi x postc + 2 # BD episodesi
                       + 2 # BD episodesi x postc+  Zit + c + t + ict

where # BD episodesi is the number of BD episodes experienced by individual i.
OLS estimates show that even people with just a single diagnosis suffer earnings penalties
from BD; however, the size of the earnings penalties increases with the number of diagnoses.
People with just one single diagnosis of BD have 44 percent lower earnings compared with
the population (calculated as the sum of the exponents of the estimates for BD and # BD
episodes in Table 9, column 1, significant at 1 percent). On top of this, each additional
diagnosis of BD is associated with an additional 22 percent loss in earnings.
       People with a more severe expression of BD benefit the most from access to
treatment. For people with a single diagnosis, access to treatment closes 25 percent of the
earnings gaps associated with BD (exp(0.008) -1+ exp(0.098)-1/0.438, Table 9, column 1).
For people with more than one diagnosis, the benefits from treatment increase by 10
percentage points for each additional diagnosis. Controlling for family fixed effects reduces
the estimated additional benefit from treatment for people with additional diagnoses (Table 9,
column 2).
       People with more frequent episodes are also more likely to have zero earnings and
benefit more from treatment. People with a single diagnosis of BD are 1.2 times more likely
to earn nothing (with an estimate of 0.167 for BD + BD x #BD episodes and compared with a
13.4 percent population share of zero earning, Table 9, column 3, significant at 1 percent).
Access to treatment eliminates 30 percent of this penalty (BD + BD x # BD episodes x post is
-0.051, Table 9, column 3, p-value equal to 0.2). Each additional diagnosis of BD is
associated with a 7.1 percentage point increase in the probability of zero earnings (with an
estimate of 0.071 for # BD episodes, Table 9, column 3, significant at 1 percent). Access to
treatment eliminates more than half of this penalty, with an estimate of 4.1 percentage for #
BD episodes x post (Table 9, column 3, significant at 1 percent). For the median person with
BD, who receives 2 diagnoses of BD, these estimates imply a 23.8 percentage point increase
in the risk of zero earnings; access to treatment eliminates 5.1 percentage points of this
increased risk.



                                                                                                28
                                            VII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has used registry data on mental health diagnoses, earnings, and disability to
investigate the career effects of mental health. Population data indicate that mental health
disorders carry enormous adverse career effects, with earnings penalties that range from 34
percent for a person with depression to 74 percent for a person with schizophrenia. Risks of
no earning range from 110 percent for depression and BD to 336 percent for schizophrenia.
Risks of disability range from 120 percent for depression and 270 percent for BD to 700
percent for schizophrenia.
        Using the approval of lithium as a maintenance treatment for BD in 1976, we evaluate
the effects of a major change in access to treatment. Baseline difference-in-differences
estimates indicate that access to treatment closed one third of the earnings penalties from BD
compared with the population and 44 percent compared with siblings. Access to treatment
also greatly reduces the risks of low or no earnings. Moreover, it eliminates 59 percent of the
excess risk of disability compared with the population and 57 percent compared with
siblings.
        These results imply that policies that expand access to mental health treatments could
create major economic and social benefits by increasing earnings, reducing the risk of low
earning, and mitigating the risk of disability. In the United States, estimates from the National
Comorbidity Survey (NCS-R) indicate that one in three people with BD remain untreated
(Kessler et al 2003).33 Expansions in Medicaid coverage have increased access to
psychotropic prescriptions for mental illness by 22 percent (Maclean, Cook, Carson, and
Pesko 2017). Our findings suggest that such changes have major welfare effects: Access to
treatment could save $88 million in wages.
        Our results also suggest that parental wealth plays an important role in shaping the
career impact of mental health, and that people whose parents are less wealthy benefit most
from access to treatment. For example, the effect of access to treatment on earnings is three
times larger for people with BD with parents in the bottom quartile of financial assets
compared to the second and third quartile. It is important to remember that Denmark offers
universal health care, so that our results estimate the benefits of access to treatment in a


33
   Even when people are treated, the quality of treatment is highly uneven. In the NCS-R, more than one third of
all people with BD were treated by mental health professionals who are not psychiatrists (35.4 percent, Kessler
et al 2003), even though a striking 73 percent in general medical treatment received the wrong drugs (compared
with an also large 43 percent in specialist treatment). See also Kessler, Merikangas, and Wang (2007).


                                                                                                             29
context where treatment is free. In countries where access to mental health care treatment is
costly, such as the United States, the distributional impact of mental health ­ and the potential
benefits of expanding access to treatment - is likely to be greater.

                                          REFERENCES

Aagaard, Jørgen, and P. E. R. Vestergaard. 1990. "Predictors of outcome in prophylactic
lithium treatment: a 2-year prospective study." Journal of Affective Disorders 18.4: 259-266.

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, James Fenske, and Anant Nyshadham. 2019. "Early life circumstance
and adult mental health." Journal of Political Economy, 127(4).

Ahammer, Alexander, Dominik Grübl, and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2020. "The health
externalities of downsizing." Working paper.

Ahammer, Alexander, and Analisa Packham. 2020. "The Blessing of Leisure or the Curse of
Unemployment? Effects of Unemployment Insurance Duration on Health." NBER working
paper n. 27267.

Agha, Leila and David Molitor. 2018. "The Influence of Pioneer Investigators on Technology
Adoption: Evidence from New Cancer Drugs." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 100
(1): 29-44.

Aizer, A., & Currie, J. 2014. The intergenerational transmission of inequality: maternal
disadvantage and health at birth. Science, 344(6186), 856-861.

Angst, Jules, et al. 2005. "Suicide in 406 Mood-Disorder Patients With and Without Long-
Term Medication: A 40 to 44 Years' Follow-Up." Archives of Suicide Research 9: 279-300.

Arellano-Bover, Jaime. 2019. "Career Consequences of Firm Heterogeneity for Young
Workers: First Job and Firm Size." Working paper.

Baldessarini, Ross J., Leonardo Tondo, and John Hennen. 1999. "Effects of lithium treatment
and its discontinuation on suicidal behavior in bipolar manic-depressive disorders." Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry 60.2: 77-84.

Banerjee, Souvik, Pinka Chatterji, and Kajal Lahiri. 2007. "Effects of psychiatric disorders
on labor market outcomes: a latent variable approach using multiple clinical
indicators." Health Economics 26, no. 2: 184-205.

Bartel, Ann and Paul Taubman. 1986. "Some economic and demographic consequences of
mental illness." Journal of Labor Economics 4 (2):243­256.

Bauer, Michael, Tasha Glenn, Natalie Rasgon, Wendy Marsh, Kemal Sagduyu, Rodrigo
Munoz, Rita Schmid, Sara Haack, and Peter C. Whybrow. 2011. "Association between
median family income and self-reported mood symptoms in bipolar
disorder." Comprehensive psychiatry 52, no. 1: 17-25. -treated patients with bipolar
disorder," Biological Psychiatry, vol. 62(1), pages 7-16.



                                                                                               30
Bech, P., Vendsborg, P. B. and Rafaelsen, O. J. 1976. "Lithium Maintenance Treatment of
Manic-Melancholic Patients: Its Role in the Daily Routine," Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
vol. 53, pp. 70­81.

Bütikofer, Aline, and Meghan M. Skira. 2018. "Missing work is a pain the effect of Cox-2
inhibitors on sickness absence and disability pension receipt." Journal of Human
Resources 53.1: 71-122.

Bütikofer, Aline, Christopher J. Cronin, and Meghan M. Skira. 2020. "Employment effects of
healthcare policy: Evidence from the 2007 FDA black box warning on
antidepressants." Journal of Health Economics 73: 102348.

Calabrese, Joseph R., S. Hossein Fatemi, Mary Kujawa, and Mark J. Woyshville. 1996.
"Predictors of response to mood stabilizers." Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 16,
no. 2: 24S-31S.

Chatterji, Pinka, Margarita Alegria, and David Takeuchi. 2011. "Psychiatric disorders and
labor market outcomes: Evidence from the National Comorbidity Survey-
Replication." Journal of Health Economics 30, no. 5: 858-868.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., Saez, E. and Turner, N. 2014. Is the United States still a
land of opportunity? Recent trends in intergenerational mobility. American Economic
Review, 104(5), pp.141-47.

Cochran, Susan D. 1984. "Preventing medical noncompliance in the outpatient treatment of
bipolar affective disorders." Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 52.5: 873.

Cohen, S., Doyle, W.J. and Baum, A. 2006. Socioeconomic status is associated with stress
hormones. Psychosomatic medicine, 68(3), pp. 414-420.

Cooper, Arnold C., Carolyn Y. Woo, and William C. Dunkelberg. 1998. "Entrepreneurs'
perceived chances for success." Journal of business venturing 3, no. 2: 97-108.

Currie, Janet, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 1999. "Health, health insurance and the labor
market." Handbook of Labor Economics 3: pages 3309-3416.

Danish Ministry of Health. 2017. Healthcare in Denmark - an Overview. Version 1.2. ISBN:
978-87-7601-365-3. Copenhagen: Ministry of Health.

Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter. 2011. "Recessions and the Costs of Job
Loss." Brookings papers on economic activity 2011, no. 2: 1.

Drevets, Wayne C. Joseph L. Price, Joseph R. Simpson Jr, Richard D. Todd, Theodore Reich,
Michael Vannier and Marcus E. Raichle. "Subgenual prefrontal cortext abnormalities in
mood disorders." Nature, Volume 386, April 24, 1997.

Duggan, Mark and Imberman, S. A. 2009. "Why are the disability rolls skyrocketing? The
contribution of population characteristics, economic conditions, and program generosity."
in Health at older ages: The causes and consequences of declining disability among the
elderly (pp. 337-379). University of Chicago Press.


                                                                                                 31
E. J. H. 1970. "Current Drug Information: Lithium Carbonate," Ann Intern Med. 73:2, pages
291-293.

Ettner, Susan L., Richard G. Frank, and Ronald C. Kessler. 1997. "The impact of psychiatric
disorders on labor market outcomes." ILR Review 51, no. 1: 64-81.

Ettner, Susan L., Johanna Catherine Maclean, and Michael T. French. 2011. "Does having a
dysfunctional personality hurt your career? Axis II personality disorders and labor market
outcomes." Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 50, no. 1: 149-173.

European Observatory on Health Care Systems. 2001. Health Care Systems in Transition.
Denmark, 2001, 79.

Gardner, Jonathan, and Andrew J. Oswald. 2007. "Money and mental wellbeing: A
longitudinal study of medium-sized lottery wins." Journal of Health Economics 26.1: 49-60.

Garthwaite, Craig L. 2012. The economic benefits of pharmaceutical innovations: The case
of cox-2 inhibitors. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(3), pages 116-37.

Geddes John R., and David J. Miklowitz. 2013. "Treatment of bipolar disorder." Lancet,
381(9878), pp.1672-1682.

Goodman, Alissa, Robert Joyce, and James P. Smith. 2011. "The long shadow cast by
childhood physical and mental problems on adult life." Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 108, no. 15: 6032-6037.

Goodwin Frederick K, Kay Redfield Jamison. Manic-depressive illness: Bipolar disorders
and recurrent depression. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2007.

Hakulinen, Christian, Katherine L. Musliner, and Esben Agerbo. 2019. "Bipolar disorder and
depression in early adulthood and longterm employment, income, and educational
attainment: A nationwide cohort study of 2,390,127 individuals." Depression and anxiety 36,
no. 11 (2019): 1080-1088.

Haushofer, Johannes and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. "The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional
Cash Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 131(4): pp. 1973-2042.

Hinshaw, Stephen P., and Andrea Stier. 2008. "Stigma as related to mental
disorders." Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 4, pp. 367-393.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. "Earnings losses of
displaced workers." The American Economic Review: 685-709.

Jamison, Kay Redfield. 1993. "Touched by Fire. Manic Depressive Illness and the Artistic
Temperament." New York: Free Press.

Jamison, Kay R., and Hagop S. Akiskal. 1983. "Medication compliance in patients with
bipolar disorder." Psychiatric Clinics of North America.


                                                                                           32
Judd, L.L. and H.S. Akiskal. 2003. "The Prevalence and Disability of Bipolar Spectrum
Disorders in the US Population: Re-analysis of the ECA database taking into account
subthreshold cases. Journal of Affective Disorders. Volume 73, pp. 123-31.

Kahn, Lisa B. 2010. "The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in
a bad economy." Labour Economics 17(2), pp. 303-316.

Katz, S. J., Kessler, R. C., Frank, R. G., Leaf, P., & Lin, E. 1997. "Mental health care use,
morbidity, and socioeconomic status in the United States and Ontario." Inquiry, 38-49.

Kessler Ronald C, Berglund Patricia, Demler Olga, Jin R, Koretz D. et al. 2003. The
Epidemiology of Major Depressive Disorder: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication (NCS-R). JAMA: 289_ 3095-105

Kessler, Ronald C., Berglund, Patricia, Demler, Olga, Jin, Robert, Merikangas, Kathleen R.,
and Ellen E. Walters. 2005. "Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication," Arch Gen Psychiatry, 62 (6), pp.
593­602.

Kessler, Ronald C., Kathleen R. Merikangas, and Philip S. Wang. 2007. "Prevalence,
comorbidity, and service utilization for mood disorders in the United States at the beginning
of the twenty-first century." Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 3: 137-158.

Krüger, Stephanie, Alda, Martin, Young, L. Trevor, Goldapple, Kim, Parikh, Saghar, and
Mayberg, Helen S. 2006. "Risk and Resilience Markers in Bipolar Disorder: Brain Responses
to Emotional Challenge in Bipolar Patients and Their Healthy Siblings," American Journal of
Psychiatry, 163:2, pages 257-264.

Kyaga, Simon, Lichtenstein, Paul, Boman, Marcus, Hultman, Christina, Langstrom, Niklas,
and Mikael Landen. 2011. "Creativity and mental disorder: family study of 300 000 people
with severe mental disorder," The British Journal of Psychiatry, 199 (5), pages 373-379.

Kyaga, Simon, Landen, Mikael, Boman, Marcus, Hultman, Christina M, Laangstrom, Niklas,
and Paul Lichtenstein. 2013. "Mental illness, suicide and creativity: 40-year prospective total
population study," Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47(1), pages 84-90.

Laird, Jessica, and Torben Nielsen. 2017. "The Effects of Physician Prescribing Behaviors on
Prescription Drug Use and Labor Supply: Evidence from Movers in Denmark." Harvard
University Job Market Paper: https://scholar. harvard. edu/files/lairdja/files/Laird_JMP_1.
pdf

Landier, Augustin and David Thesmar. 2009. "Financial Contracting with Optimistic
Entrepreneurs," The Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), pp. 117-150.

Levine, Ross and Yona Rubinstein. 2017. "Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur
and Do They Earn more?," Quarterly Journal of Economics. 132(2), pages 963-1018.




                                                                                                33
Lu, Chunling, Richard G. Frank, Yuanli Liu, and Jian Shen. 2009. "The impact of mental
health on labour market outcomes in China." Journal of Mental Health Policy and
Economics 12, no. 3: 157.

Marcotte, Dave E., and Virginia Wilcox-Gok. "Estimating earning losses due to mental
illness: a quantile regression approach." 2003. Journal of Mental Health Policy and
Economics 6, no. 3: 123-134.

Mason, Liam, Noreen O'Sullivan, Daniela Montaldi, Richard P. Bentall, and Wael El-
Deredy. 2014. "Decision-making and trait impulsivity in bipolar disorder are associated with
reduced prefrontal regulation of striatal reward valuation." Brain 137, no. 8: 2346-2355.

McClellan, Jack M., Susser, Ezra, and Mary-Claire King. 2006. "Maternal famine, de novo
mutations, and schizophrenia." JAMA, 296.5: 582-584.

McInnis, Melvin G., B. Thomas, and Nancy Upjohn Woodworth. 2014. "Lithium for bipolar
disorder: a re-emerging treatment for mood instability," Current Psychiatry, 13(6), pages 39-
44.

Miklowitz, David J. and Sheri L. Johnson. 2006. "The Pscychopathology and Treatment of
Bipolar Disorder." Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, Volume 3:199­235.

Mortensen, Preben Bo, Pedersen, C. B., Melbye, M., Mors, O., and Edwald, H. 2003.
"Individual and familial risk factors for bipolar affective disorders in Denmark," Arch Gen
Psychiatry, vol. 60 (2), pages 1209-15.

Naranjo CA. Tremblay LK, Busto UE, 2001. "The Role of the Brain Reward System in
Depression." Prog. Neurophsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry. Vol. 25, pp. 781-823.

Neugebauer, R., Hoek, H.W and Susser, E. 1999. Prenatal exposure to wartime famine and
development of antisocial personality disorder in early adulthood. JAMA, 282(5), pp.455-462.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till Von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. "The short-and long-term
career effects of graduating in a recession." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
4(1), pp. 1-29.

Ormel, Johan, Maria Petukhova, Somnath Chatterji, Sergio Aguilar-Gaxiola, Jordi Alonso,
Matthias C. Angermeyer, Evelyn J. Bromet et al. 2008. "Disability and treatment of specific
mental and physical disorders across the world." The British Journal of Psychiatry 192, no. 5:
368-375.

Peng, Lizhong, Chad D. Meyerhoefer, and Samuel H. Zuvekas. 2016. "The ShortTerm
Effect of Depressive Symptoms on Labor Market Outcomes." Health Economics 25, no. 10:
1223-1238.

Persson, Petra, and Maya Rossin-Slater. "Family ruptures, stress, and the mental health of the
next generation." American Economic Review 108.4-5 (2018): 1214-52.




                                                                                              34
Phelan, Jo C., Bruce G. Link, Ann Stueve, and Bernice A. Pescosolido. 2000. "Public
conceptions of mental illness in 1950 and 1996: What is mental illness and is it to be
feared?" Journal of Health and Social Behavior, pp. 188-207.

Price, Lawrence H., and Heninger, George R. 1994. "Lithium in the treatment of mood
disorders," N Eng J Med., vol. 331, pages 591­598.

Rambachan, Ashesh, and Jonathan Roth. 2019. "An honest approach to parallel
trends." Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.

Reddy, L Felice, Lee, Junghee, Davis, Michael C, Altshuler, Lori, Glahn, David C,
Miklowitz, David J, and Michael F Green. 2014. "Impulsivity and Risk Taking in Bipolar
Disorder and Schizophrenia," Neuropsychopharmacology, 39, pp. 456­463.

Ridley, Matthew, Rao, Gautam, Schilbach, Frank, and Vikram Patel. 2020. "Poverty,
depression, and anxiety: Causal evidence and mechanisms." Science, 370(6522).

Santini, Ziggi Ivan, et al. 2021. "Economics of mental well-being: a prospective study
estimating associated health care costs and sickness benefit transfers in Denmark." The
European Journal of Health Economics: 1-13.

Sareen, Jitender, Tracie O. Afifi, Katherine A. McMillan, and Gordon JG Asmundson. 2011.
"Relationship between household income and mental disorders: findings from a population-
based longitudinal study." Archives of general psychiatry 68, no. 4: 419-427.

Shapiro, Bradley. forthcoming. "Promoting wellness or waste? evidence from antidepressant
advertising." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.

Swann, Alan C. 2009. "Impulsivity in mania." Current psychiatry reports 11, no. 6: 481.

Simpson, Sylvia G., and Kay R. Jamison. 1999. "The risk of suicide in patients with bipolar
disorders." Journal of clinical psychiatry 60.2: 53-56.

Suppes, T. GS Leverich, PE Keck, WA Nolen, KD Denicoff, et al. 2001. The Stanley
Foundation Bipolar Treatment Outcome Network II Demographis and Illness Characteristics
of the first 261 Patients. Journal of Affective Disorders, volume 68, pp. 45-59.

Tondo, Leonardo, Baldessarini, Ross J, Hennen, John, Minnai, Gian Paolo, Salis, Piergiorgio,
Scamonatti, Luciana, Masia, Mercedes, Ghiani, Carmen, and Piero Mannu. 1999."Suicide
attempts in major affective disorder patients with comorbid substance use disorders,"Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry, vol.60 (2), pp. 63-69.

US Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Mental Health. 2017.
First-Generation Versus Second-Generation Antipsychotics in Adults: Comparative
Effectiveness.

Van den Bergh, B.R., Mennes, M., Oosterlaan, J., Stevens, V., Stiers, P., Marcoen, A. and
Lagae, L. 2005. High antenatal maternal anxiety is related to impulsivity during performance
on cognitive tasks in 14-and 15-year-olds. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 29(2),
pp.259-269.


                                                                                          35
Wang, P. S., Lane, M., Olfson, M., Pincus, H. A., Wells, K. B., & Kessler, R. C. 2005.
"Twelve-month use of mental health services in the United States: results from the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication." Archives of general psychiatry, 62(6), 629-640.

World Health Organization. 2011 Global status report on non-communicable diseases
2010. Geneva: WHO.




                                                                                          36
              FIGURE 1­ EVENT STUDY OF LN(EARNINGS) AROUND A DIAGNOSIS
                          BD, DEPRESSION, AND SCHIZOPHRENIA




Note: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence of the parameter d in equation
log(earningsict)= 10k = -10 dk Ci I(t-Y(C)i = k) +1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai
+ c + t + ict
where the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of earnings, Ci is an indicator for either
BD, Depression, or Schizophrenia, Y(C)i indicates the year when individual i is diagnosed
with condition C, and I() is an indicator function. The vector c contains cohort fixed effects,
and t are year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. The sample
is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born between 1946 and 1977, and
with positive earnings.




                                                                                             37
            FIGURE 2­ EVENT STUDY OF P(EARNINGS = 0) AROUND A DIAGNOSIS
                         BD, DEPRESSION, AND SCHIZOPHRENIA




Note: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence of the parameter d in equation
P(earningsict=0)= 10k = -10 dk Ci I(t-Y(C)i = k) +1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai
+ c + t + ict , where the dependent variable is an indicator for having no earnings, Ci is an
indicator for either BD, Depression, or Schizophrenia, Y(C)i indicates the year when
individual i is diagnosed with condition C, and I() is an indicator function. The vector c are
cohort fixed effects, and t are year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born
between 1946 and 1977.




                                                                                           38
      FIGURE 3­ EVENT STUDY OF P(DISABILITY) AROUND A DIAGNOSIS
                  BD, DEPRESSION, AND SCHIZOPHRENIA




Note: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence of the parameter d in equation
P(disabilityict)= 10k = -10 dk Ci I(t-Y(C)i = k) +1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3
Schizophreniai + c + t + ict , where the dependent variable is an indicator for being
on disability, Ci is an indicator for either BD, Depression, or Schizophrenia, Y(C)i
indicates the year when individual i is diagnosed with condition C, and I() is an
indicator function. The vector c are cohort fixed effects, and t are year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. The sample is restricted to
individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born between 1946 and 1977.




                                                                                     39
              FIGURE 4­ EVENT STUDY OF LN(EARNINGS) AROUND A DIAGNOSIS
                          BY UNEMPLOYMENT AND #DIAGNOSES




Note: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence of the parameter d in equation
log(earningsict)= 10k = -10 dk Ci I(t-Y(C)i = k) +1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai
+ c + t + ict
where the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of earnings, Ci is an indicator for any of
BD, Depression, or Schizophrenia, Y(C)i indicates the year when individual i is diagnosed
with any of these conditions, and I() is an indicator function. The vector c contains cohort
fixed effects, and t are year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
In the Unemployment, 1 diagnosis series, we compare healthy individuals with people with
mental health conditions who receive only one diagnosis between 1995 and 2015 and
experience at least one unemployment episode in the two years preceding and following the
diagnosis. In the No unemployment, 1 diagnosis series, we compare healthy individuals with
people with mental health conditions who receive only one diagnosis between 1995 and 2015
and do not experience any unemployment in the two years preceding and following the
diagnosis. In the No unemployment, >1 diagnosis series, we compare healthy individuals
with people with mental health conditions who receive more than one diagnosis between
1995 and 2015 and do not experience any unemployment in the two years preceding and
following the diagnosis. The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of
age, born between 1946 and 1977, with positive earnings.




                                                                                                40
                        FIGURE 5­ EVENT STUDY OF LN(EARNINGS)
                  PEOPLE WITH BD WITH AND WITHOUT ACCESS TO LITHIUM




Note: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence of the parameter d in equation
ln(earningsict)= 10k = -10 ds BDi I(t-Y(BD)i = k) + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai + c +
t + ict, where the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of earnings, BD equals 1 for
individuals who have been diagnosed with this condition at least once between 1995 and
2015, Y(BD)i is the year of the diagnosis, and I() is an indicator function. The vector c
contains cohort fixed effects, and t are year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. Estimates are shown separately for individuals born before and after 1956.
The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born between 1946
and 1977, with positive earnings.




                                                                                               41
                       FIGURE 6­ EVENT STUDY OF P(EARNINGS = 0)
                  PEOPLE WITH BD WITH AND WITHOUT ACCESS TO LITHIUM




Note: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence of the parameter d in equation
P(earningsict=0)= 10k = -10 ds BDi I(t-Y(BD)i = k) + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai + c
+ t + ict, where the dependent variable is an indicator for having no earnings, BD equals 1
for individuals who have been diagnosed with this condition at least once between 1995 and
2015, Y(BD)i is the year of the diagnosis, and I() is an indicator function. The vector c
contains cohort fixed effects, and t are year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. Estimates are shown separately for individuals born before and after 1956.
The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born between 1946
and 1977.




                                                                                               42
                      FIGURE 7­ EVENT STUDY OF P(DISABILITY = 0)
                  PEOPLE WITH BD WITH AND WITHOUT ACCESS TO LITHIUM




Note: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence of the parameter d in equation
P(disabilityict=0)= 10k = -10 ds BDi I(t-Y(BD)i = k) + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai + c
+ t + ict, where the dependent variable is an indicator for being on disability, BD equals 1
for individuals who have been diagnosed with this condition at least once between 1995 and
2015, Y(BD)i is the year of the diagnosis, and I() is an indicator function. The vector c
contains cohort fixed effects, and t are year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. Estimates are shown separately for individuals born before and after 1956.
The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born between 1946
and 1977.




                                                                                               43
      FIGURE 8­ COHORT-SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF ACCESS TO LITHIUM ON LN( EARNINGS)




Note: OLS point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals of the parameter c in the
equation ln(earningsict) = c c BDi x c(i) + 1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai + f(i)
+ c(i) + t + it. The variables BD, Depression, Schizophrenia equal 1 for individuals who
have been diagnosed with these conditions at least once between 1995 and 2015. The vectors
c, f, and t contain cohort, family, and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors are
clustered at the individual level. The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60
years of age, born between 1946 and 1977, with positive earnings.




                                                                                         44
    FIGURE 9­ COHORT-SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF ACCESS TO LITHIUM ON P(ZERO EARNINGS)




Note: OLS point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals of the parameter c in the
equation P(earningsict=0) = c c BDi x c(i) + 1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai +
f(i) + c(i) + t + it, where P(earningsit=0) equals 1 for individuals with zero earnings in year
t. The variables BD, Depression, Schizophrenia equal 1 for individuals who have been
diagnosed with these conditions at least once between 1995 and 2015. The vectors c, f, and
t contain cohort, family, and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors are clustered at
the family level. The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born
between 1946 and 1977.




                                                                                             45
      FIGURE 10­ COHORT-SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF ACCESS TO LITHIUM ON P(DISABILITY)




Note: OLS point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals of the parameter c in the
equation P(disabilityict)= c c BDi x c(i) + 1 BDi + 2 Depressioni + 3 Schizophreniai + f(i)
+ c(i) + t + it, where P(disabilityict) equals 1 for individuals on disability in year t. The
variables BD, Depression, Schizophrenia equal 1 for individuals who have been diagnosed
with these conditions at least once between 1995 and 2015. The vectors c, f, and t contain
cohort, family, and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the family
level. The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born between
1946 and 1977.




                                                                                             46
    FIGURE 11­ COHORT-SPECIFIC EFFECTS OF ACCESS TO LITHIUM ­ TRIPLE DIFFERENCE
                                   PANEL A) LOG EARNINGS




                                   PANEL A) P(EARNINGS=0)




                                    PANEL C) P(DISABILITY)




Note: OLS point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals of the parameter c in the
equation Yict= 1 BDi + 1 BDi x postc + 2 # BD episodesi + 2 # BD episodesi x postc
+  Zit + c + t + it, where the dependent variable is either the natural logarithm of earnings
(panel A), an indicator for zero earnings (panel B), and an indicator for disability (panel C).
The variables BD, Depression, Schizophrenia equal 1 for individuals who have been
diagnosed with these conditions at least once between 1995 and 2015. The vectors c, f, and
t contain cohort, family, and year fixed effects respectively. Standard errors are clustered at
the family level. The sample is restricted to individuals between 20 and 60 years of age, born
between 1946 and 1977.




                                                                                             47
    TABLE 1 ­ COUNT OF PEOPLE WITH DEPRESSION, BIPOLAR DISORDER, AND SCHIZOPHRENIA
                                                          Depressio             Schizophreni
                                                 All                    BD
                                                             n                       a
                                              2,692,47
    All                                           9        97,932     22,694      41,813
          pre-1956                            877,265      27,121      7,705      12,096
                                              1,815,21      70,811    14,989      29,717
          post-1956
                                                  4
   Receiving disability pay (average per                   16,981     6,026       19,327
                                               150,261
   year)
         pre-1956                               70,311      6,244       2,537      5,952
         post-1956                              79,950     10,734       3,489     13,375
   With zero earnings (average per year)       307,237     28,953       8,002     22,137
         pre-1956                              108,656      7,671       2,732      6,191
         post-1956                             198,581     21,281       5,269     15,946
   Average earnings ($)                         52,307     37,643      35,359     24,661
                                                                      (35,319
                                               (83,476)   (33,599)                (27,826)
                                                                          )
          pre-1956                             54,180      42,269      38,076      26,041
                                                                      (41,386
                                              (140,099)   (41,023)                (27,772)
                                                                          )
          post-1956                            51,583      36,292      34,411     24,317
                                                                      (32,887
                                               (45,499)   (30,969)                (27,829)
                                                                          )
Note: Counts of observations for individuals aged 20-60 born in cohorts 1946-1976 in Denmark
between 1995 and 2015, and average earnings measured in 2015 US dollars ($). The variables BD,
Depression, and Schizophrenia equal 1 for individuals who have ever been diagnosed with these
pathologies at least once between 1995 and 2015. Diagnoses data are available for calendar years
1995-2015.




                                                                                             48
           TABLE 2 ­ OLS: MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS AND CAREER OUTCOMES
                      ln(Earnings)            P(Earnings = 0)             P(Disability)
                     (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)

 BD             -0.478*** -0.446*** 0.150*** 0.133*** 0.128***                      0.105***
                  (0.009)      (0.010)     (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Depression     -0.438*** -0.370*** 0.153*** 0.106*** 0.074***                      0.048***
                  (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
 Schizophrenia -1.354*** -1.328*** 0.447*** 0.388*** 0.411***                       0.401***
                  (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
 Cohort FE          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year FE            Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Family FE          No           Yes          No           Yes            No           Yes
 Mean of Dep.        --           --         .134          .105          .059          .047
 Var.
 R-squared         0.045        0.306       0.048         0.342         0.092          0.424
 N             41,619,160 31,404,955 48,071,128 35,077,362 48,071,128               35,077,362
            Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level.
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of earnings (columns 1-2), an indicator
for individuals having zero earnings (columns 3-4), and for receiving disability benefits
(columns 5-6). Earnings are measured in nominal DKK and are the sum of all wages and
income from self-employment. The variables BD, Depression, Schizophrenia equal 1 for
individuals who have been diagnosed with these conditions at least once between 1995 and
2015. Diagnoses data are available for calendar years 1995-2015. All regressions include
cohort and year fixed effects; columns 2, 4, and 6 include family fixed effects. The sample is
restricted to individuals aged 20-60 born in cohorts 1946-1977; columns 1 and 2 refer to
individuals with positive earnings.




                                                                                             49
                         TABLE 3 ­ OLS: MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS AND THE PROBABILITY OF EXTREME EARNINGS
                                Bottom 10%                    Bottom 25%                        Top 25%                       Top 10%
                             (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)               (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)

BD                        0.120***       0.111***       0.152***         0.146***       -0.070***      -0.077***      -0.030***    -0.033***
                           (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.001)      (0.002)
Depression                0.099***       0.086***       0.161***         0.141***       -0.112***      -0.091***      -0.052***    -0.041***
                           (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)
Schizophrenia             0.319***       0.309***       0.333***         0.303***       -0.137***      -0.111***      -0.058***    -0.044***
                           (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.001)      (0.002)
Family FE                    No             Yes             No              Yes             No             Yes            No           Yes
Cohort FE                    Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Year FE                      Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Mean of Dep. Var.            .10            .10             .25             .25             .25            .25            .10          .10
R-squared                   0.024          0.210           0.030           0.277           0.014          0.381          0.009        0.373
N                        41,619,160     31,404,950     41,619,160       31,404,950     41,619,160     31,404,950      41,619,160   31,404,950
                      Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable equals 1 for individuals with earnings in the bottom 10 percent (columns 1-2), bottom 25 percent (columns 3-4),
top 25 percent (columns 6-7), and top 10 percent (columns 7-8) of the earnings distribution. The variables BD, Depression, Schizophrenia equal
1 for individuals who have been diagnosed with these conditions at least once between 1995 and 2015. Diagnoses data are available for calendar
years 1995-2015. All regressions include cohort and year fixed effects; columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 include family fixed effects. Data include all
people with positive earnings aged 20-60 and born in cohorts 1946-1977.




                                                                                                                                              50
TABLE 4 ­ OLS: MENTAL HEALTH CONDI DISORDERS, ACCESS TO TREATMENT, AND CAREER
                                 OUTCOMES
                  ln(Earnings)            P(Earnings=0)                P(Disability)
                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)

BD              -0.560***     -0.662***      0.196***      0.198***   0.218***     0.214***
                  (0.019)       (0.034)       (0.004)       (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.008)
BD x post        0.112***      0.240***     -0.065***     -0.073***   -0.128***   -0.122***
                  (0.021)       (0.036)       (0.005)       (0.009)     (0.005)     (0.008)
Controls            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
Cohort FE           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
Year FE             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
Family FE           No            Yes            No           Yes          No         Yes
Mean of              --            --           .134          .105        .059        .047
Dep. Var.
R-squared          0.045         0.306        0.049        0.344         0.092     0.424
N               41,619,160        31,      48,071,128 35,077,362 48,071,128 35,077,362
                                404,955
             Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level.
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of earnings, defined as the sum of all
wages and income from self-employment (columns 1-2); an indicator for individuals
receiving zero earnings in a given year (columns 3-4); and for individuals on disability
(columns 5-6). The variable BD equals 1 for individuals who have been diagnosed with this
condition at least once between 1995 and 2015. Post equals 1 for individuals who were born
after 1956, and turned 20 after lithium, the main treatment for bipolar disorder, became
available in Denmark in 1976. Controls include indicators for having received at least one
diagnosis of Depression and Schizophrenia. Diagnoses data are available for calendar years
1995-2015. All regressions include cohort and year fixed effects; columns 4-6 include family
fixed effects. The sample is restricted to people aged 20-60 born in cohorts 1946-1977; in
columns 1-2, we further restrict the sample to people with positive earnings.




                                                                                           51
             TABLE 5 ­ OLS: MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS, ACCESS TO TREATMENT, AND THE PROBABILITY OF EXTREME EARNINGS
                                 Bottom 10%                    Bottom 25%                        Top 25%                       Top 10%
                              (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)               (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)

BD                         0.133***        0.149***      0.148***         0.182***       -0.059***      -0.114***      -0.027***    -0.052***
                            (0.004)         (0.008)        (0.005)         (0.010)         (0.005)        (0.010)        (0.003)      (0.008)
BD x post                 -0.017***       -0.042***         0.007        -0.039***       -0.015***       0.040***        -0.004      0.021***
                            (0.005)         (0.008)        (0.006)         (0.011)         (0.005)        (0.011)        (0.003)      (0.008)
Controls                      Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Cohort FE                     Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Year FE                       Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Family FE                     No              Yes            No              No              No             No             No           Yes
Mean of Dep. Var.             .10             .10            .25             .24             .25            .25            .10          .10
R-squared                    0.024           0.210          0.030           0.277           0.014          0.381          0.009        0.373
N                         41,619,160     31,404,955     41,619,160       31,404,955     41,619,160     31,404,955      41,619,160   31,404,955
                       Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable equals 1 for individuals with earnings in the bottom 10 percent (columns 1-2), bottom 25 percent (columns 3-4),
top 25 percent (columns 6-7), and top 10 percent (columns 7-8) of the earnings distribution. The variable BD equals 1 for individuals who have
been diagnosed with this condition at least once between 1995 and 2015. Post equals 1 for individuals who were born after 1956, and turned 20
after lithium, the main treatment for bipolar disorder, became available in Denmark in 1976. Controls include indicators for having received at
least one diagnosis of Depression and Schizophrenia. Diagnoses data are available for calendar years 1995-2015. All regressions include cohort
and year fixed effects; columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 include family fixed effects. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 20-60 born in cohorts
1946-1977, with positive earnings.




                                                                                                                                               52
    TABLE 6 ­­ OLS: MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS, ACCESS TO TREATMENT, AND THE
 PROBABILITY OF EXTREME EARNINGS, FOR PEOPLE WITH CONDITIONS AND THEIR SIBLINGS
                               ln(Earnings)      P(Earnings = 0)   P(Disability)
                                    (1)                (2)              (3)

BD                                     -0.563***              0.187***             0.208***
                                         (0.031)               (0.008)              (0.007)
BD x post                               0.109***             -0.050***            -0.117***
                                         (0.032)               (0.008)              (0.007)
BD sibling                             -0.067***              0.022***             0.022***
                                         (0.017)               (0.006)              (0.005)
BD sibling in post cohort                -0.032*               0.012*               -0.005
                                         (0.018)               (0.006)              (0.005)
Cohort                                     Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Year FE                                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Family FE                                  No                     No                   No
Mean of Dep. Var.                           --                   .105                 .047
R-squared                                 0.063                 0.055                0.101
N                                     31,404,955            35,077,362           35,077,362
             Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level.
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of earnings (column 1), an indicator for zero
earnings (column 2), and for disability (column 3). The variable BD equals 1 for individuals
who have been diagnosed with this condition at least once between 1995 and 2015. Post equals
1 for individuals who were born after 1956, and turned 20 after lithium, the main treatment for
bipolar disorder, became available in Denmark in 1976. BD sibling equals 1 for individuals
with siblings with BD, and BD sibling in post cohort equals 1 for individuals with BD siblings
born in cohorts after 1956. Controls include indicators for having received at least one
diagnosis of Depression and Schizophrenia, the natural logarithm of the unemployment rate,
an indicator for being enrolled in education, and an indicator for part-time work. Diagnoses
data are available for calendar years 1995-2015. All regressions include cohort and year fixed
effects. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 20-60 born in cohorts 1946-1977; in
column 1, the sample is further restricted to include individuals with positive earnings.




                                                                                              53
TABLE 7 ­ OLS: MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS AND THE PROBABILITY OF EXTREME EARNINGS,
                             BY PARENTAL WEALTH
                                           ln(Earnings) P(Earnings=0) P(Disability)
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)

        Parents assets < 25                -0.081***        0.036***        0.011***
                                             (0.009)         (0.003)         (0.002)
        Parents assets >= 75                0.048***       -0.012***        -0.006**
                                             (0.012)         (0.004)         (0.003)
        BD                                 -0.425***        0.137***        0.102***
                                             (0.017)         (0.004)         (0.004)
        BD x Par. assets < 25                 0.042           -0.014       -0.020***
                                             (0.031)         (0.009)         (0.007)
        BD x Par. assets >= 75               0.052*        -0.028***         -0.034s
                                             (0.029)         (0.008)         (0.007)
        Depression                         -0.378***        0.108***        0.045***
                                             (0.007)         (0.002)         (0.002)
        Depression x Par.assets < 25          -0.015        0.013***          -0.004
                                             (0.012)         (0.004)         (0.003)
        Depression x Par.assets >= 75       0.039***       -0.036***       -0.015***
                                             (0.012)         (0.003)         (0.003)
        Schizophrenia                      -1.234***        0.374***        0.381***
                                             (0.020)         (0.004)         (0.004)
        Schizophrenia x Par.assets < 25    -0.101***        -0.014**          -0.007
                                             (0.036)         (0.007)         (0.006)
        Schizophrenia x Par.assets >= 75     0.058*           -0.002        -0.016**
                                             (0.034)         (0.007)         (0.007)
        Cohort                                 Yes             Yes              Yes
        Year FE                                Yes             Yes              Yes
        Family FE                               No              No               No
        Mean of Dep. Var.                        --            .092             .034
        R-squared                             0.293           0.302            0.387
        N                                 19,660,052       21,656,217      21,656,217
             Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level.
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of earnings (column 1), an indicator for zero
earnings (column 2), and for disability (column 3). The variables BD, Depression,
Schizophrenia equal 1 for individuals who have been diagnosed with these conditions at least
once between 1995 and 2015. Diagnoses data are available for calendar years 1995-2015.
The variable Parent < 25th percentile equals 1 for individuals whose parents have median
assets below the 25th percentile. Information of parents' assets is available for years 1985 to
2010 and for 38 percent of the sample. All regressions include cohort and year fixed effects.
The sample is restricted to individuals aged 20-60 born in cohorts 1946-1977; in column 1,
the sample is further restricted to include individuals with positive earnings.




                                                                                             54
      TABLE 8 ­ OLS: MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS, ACCESS TO TREATMENT, AND THE
              PROBABILITY OF EXTREME EARNINGS, BY PARENTAL WEALTH
                                             ln(earnings) P(earnings=0) P(disability)
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)

      BD                                     -0.561***         0.200***        0.246***
                                               (0.133)          (0.033)         (0.032)
      BD x post                                  0.103          -0.057*       -0.152***
                                               (0.134)          (0.034)         (0.032)
      Parents < 25 pctile                    -0.107***         0.063***        0.043***
                                               (0.011)          (0.005)         (0.004)
      BD x Parents < 25 pctile                  -0.179           0.074           0.051
                                               (0.262)          (0.066)         (0.060)
      Post x Parents < 25 pctile             -0.050***          0.009*        -0.019***
                                               (0.011)          (0.005)         (0.004)
      BD x Parents < 25 pctile x post            0.191           -0.070         -0.058
                                               (0.264)          (0.066)         (0.060)
      Parents >= 75 pctile                    0.152***        -0.026***       -0.023***
                                               (0.010)          (0.003)         (0.003)
      BD x Parents >= 75 pctile                  0.119           -0.064        -0.127**
                                               (0.219)          (0.060)         (0.058)
      Post x Parents >= 75 pctile            -0.033***         0.009***        0.013***
                                               (0.010)          (0.003)         (0.003)
      BD x Parents >= 75 pctile x post          -0.047           0.024           0.090
                                               (0.220)          (0.060)         (0.058)
      Cohort                                      Yes             Yes             Yes
      Year FE                                     Yes             Yes             Yes
      Family FE                                   No               No              No
      Mean of Dep. Var.                            --             .089            .032
      R-squared                                  0.086           0.060           0.098
      N                                      19,660,052       21,656,217 21,656,217
             Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level.
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable is the logarithm of earnings (column 1), an indicator for zero
earnings (column 2), and for disability (column 3). The variable BD equals 1 for individuals
who have been diagnosed with this condition at least once between 1995 and 2015. Post
equals 1 for individuals who were born after 1956, and turned 20 after lithium, the main
treatment for bipolar disorder, became available in Denmark in 1976. Controls include
indicators for having received at least one diagnosis of Depression and Schizophrenia, the
natural logarithm of the unemployment rate, an indicator for being enrolled in education, and
an indicator for part-time work. Diagnoses data are available for calendar years 1995-2015.
The variable Parent < 25 (Parents >= 75) equals 1 for individuals whose parents have
median assets below the 25th percentile (above the 75th percentile). Information of parents'
assets is available for years 1985 to 2010 and for 38 percent of the sample. All regressions
include cohort and year fixed effects. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 20-60 born
in cohorts 1946-1977; in column 1, the sample is further restricted to include individuals with
positive earnings.




                                                                                            55
             TABLE 9 ­ INTENSITY OF CONDITIONS. OLS, DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS LN(EARNINGS), P(EARNINGS = 0), P(DISABILITY)
                                              Log(earnings)                        P(earnings = 0)                      P(disability)
                                        (1)                   (2)            (3)                     (4)          (5)                   (6)

BD                                -0.241***           -0.352***            0.096***           0.098***          0.099***           0.095***
                                    (0.030)             (0.058)             (0.007)            (0.014)           (0.007)            (0.013)
BD x post                            0.008            0.201***              -0.010           -0.039***         -0.105***          -0.109***
                                    (0.035)             (0.061)             (0.009)            (0.015)           (0.008)            (0.014)
# BD episodes                     -0.253***           -0.209***            0.071***           0.064***          0.085***           0.076***
                                    (0.022)             (0.036)             (0.004)            (0.008)           (0.004)            (0.007)
# BD episodes x post               0.098***              0.016            -0.041***             -0.019         -0.019***             -0.003
                                    (0.025)             (0.034)             (0.005)            (0.008)           (0.005)            (0.007)
Cohort                                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes                 Yes
Year FE                               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes                 Yes
Family FE                              No                 Yes                  No                 Yes               No                 Yes
Mean of Dep. Var.                      --                  --                 .134                .105             .059                .047
R-squared                            0.045               0.306               0.049               0.342            0.093               0.425
N                                 41,619,160         31,404,955           48,071,128         35,077,362        48,071,128         35,077,362
                     Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of earnings, defined as are the sum of all wages and income from self-employment
(columns 1-2), an indicator for zero earnings (columns 3-4), and an indicator for disability (columns 5-6). The variable BD equals 1 for
individuals who have been diagnosed with this condition at least once between 1995 and 2015. Post equals 1 for individuals who were born after
1956, and turned 20 after lithium, the main treatment for bipolar disorder, became available in Denmark in 1976. The variable # BD episodes
counts the number of separate BD diagnosed received between 1995 and 2015 Controls include indicators for having received at least one
diagnosis of Depression and Schizophrenia, the natural logarithm of the unemployment rate, an indicator for being enrolled in education, and an
indicator for part-time work. Diagnoses data are available for calendar years 1995-2015. All regressions include cohort and year fixed effects;
columns 2, 4, and 6 include family fixed effects. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 20-60 born in cohorts 1946-1977; columns 1-2
further restrict the sample to individuals with positive earnings.




                                                                                                                                               56
