                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   BUSINESS CYCLES AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY:
                   LITERATURE REVIEW AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

                                        Barbara Annicchiarico
                                          Stefano Carattini
                                           Carolyn Fischer
                                            Garth Heutel

                                        Working Paper 29032
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w29032


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2021




We thank the organizers of the NBER's Environmental and Energy Policy and the Economy conference
and editors of the related publication, Tatyana Deryugina, Matthew Kotchen, and James Stock, as
well as Spencer Banzhaf, Baran Doda, and Roberton Williams for very useful comments. We also
thank Kukhee Han for valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Barbara Annicchiarico, Stefano Carattini, Carolyn Fischer, and Garth Heutel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Cycles and Environmental Policy: Literature Review and Policy Implications
Barbara Annicchiarico, Stefano Carattini, Carolyn Fischer, and Garth Heutel
NBER Working Paper No. 29032
July 2021
JEL No. E32,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the relationship between business cycles and the design and effects of environmental
policies, particularly those with economy-wide significance like climate policies. First, we
provide a brief review of the literature related to this topic, from initial explorations using real
business cycle models to New Keynesian extensions, open-economy variations, and issues of
monetary policy and financial regulations. Next, we provide a list of the main findings that
emerge from this literature that are potentially most relevant to policymakers, including the
impacts of policy on volatility and how to design policy to adjust to cycles. Finally, we propose
several important remaining research questions.

Barbara Annicchiarico                            Carolyn Fischer
University of Rome Tor Vergata                   Research Manager, Sustainability
barbara.annicchiarico@uniroma2.it                and Infrastructure
                                                 Development Research Group
Stefano Carattini                                The World Bank
Department of Economics                          1818 H St. N.W., MSN MC 3-308
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies            Washington, DC 20433
Georgia State University                         and University of Ottawa and VU-Amsterdam
Atlanta, GA 30303                                cfischer2@worldbank.org
scarattini@gsu.edu
                                                 Garth Heutel
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
                                                 Georgia State University
                                                 Atlanta, GA 30303
                                                 and NBER
                                                 gheutel@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

       Environmental economists have long strived to identify the "optimal" level of

environmental regulation for many pollutants, including, in recent decades, greenhouse gases.

This "optimal" balance between the economy and the environment is usually defined based on

efficiency, considering both the marginal benefits and marginal costs of regulation. Optimal

pollution pricing has been one of the main activities of environmental economics as a field, an

area where economists have been especially influential in shaping public policy (Hahn 1989;

Fourcade et al. 2015).

       Importantly, the costs and benefits of environmental regulation, as well as their

distribution, may vary over the course of business cycles. Pollution is highly pro-cyclical and

more volatile than GDP (Doda 2014). For example, the United States generated 11% fewer

greenhouse gas emissions between 2007 and 2013, largely due to the Great Recession (Feng et

al. 2015). Recent evidence from the COVID-19 pandemic is even more striking, given the

exceptional circumstances of its related recession. Daily global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions

had already decreased on average by 17% by April 2020 since the beginning of the COVID-19

pandemic (Le Queré et al. 2020), due to the responses by governments, individuals, and firms,

which all contributed to limit economic activity following the outbreak. Overall, global CO2

emissions decreased by about 7% from 2019 to 2020 (Le Quéré et al. 2021). Since pollution

varies with the business cycle, it seems reasonable to conclude that pollution policy ought to

adapt to the business cycle as well, following fluctuations in marginal costs and benefits.

       Some real-world environmental policies do adjust automatically to business cycles. The

European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) has created a Market Stability Reserve

(MSR) to insulate the system from business cycle shocks (Perino et al. 2021). California and


                                                     2
Quebec have auction reserve prices, and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative has adopted an

emissions containment reserve with price-triggered quantity adjustments. However, most real-

world environmental policies ­ whether market-based policies like taxes or cap-and-trade, or

command-and-control policies ­ do not explicitly respond to business cycles and instead

maintain a constant stringency over cycles. Several reasons may explain this phenomenon.

        First, business cycle adaptations may be seen as of second-order importance in

environmental policy, while getting the stringency right on average is considered of first-order

importance. Environmental policies may be on average too lenient, and fixing this may be seen

as more important than making sure policies adjust to business cycles. When policies are too

lenient, the economic rationale for adjusting their stringency to the business cycle may be

weaker.1 Many carbon tax proposals, for example, are designed with embedded tax escalators,

which may allow them to reach, after several years, a level of stringency that is compatible with

the goal of maintaining global temperatures within +1.5-2°C with respect to pre-industrial levels

(see Stiglitz et al. 2017; IMF 2019). In the meantime, tax rates remain below efficient levels, thus

weakening the rationale for business-cycle adjustments. Cap-and-trade programs also struggle

with excessive leniency, at least initially. Lacking full information about the costs of regulation,

and concerned about price volatility, governments tend to err on the side of avoiding potential

high-cost outcomes, and as a result consistently set caps too leniently (Burtraw and Keyes



          1
            Environmental policies may be too lenient for several reasons. First, due to uncertainties arising from
difficulties in estimating costs and benefits properly (e.g. Pindyck 2013), leading standard economic analysis like
integrated assessment models (e.g. Nordhaus 1993) to provide estimates of optimal stringency that may be the
source of important debates (e.g. Stern 2007; Pindyck 2013; Stern and Stiglitz 2021). Second, due to a consistent
tendency of policymakers to overweight or overestimate costs versus benefits (Harrington et al. 2000). Third, due to
similar information asymmetries between experts and citizens, leading them overestimate drawbacks and
underestimate benefits of market-based instruments for environmental policy (Carattini et al. 2018; Dal Bò et al.
2019). Finally, economic efficiency or other economics-based optimization criteria may not be the primary
consideration in policy design.


                                                              3
2018).2 The fact that allowance prices react endogenously to the business cycle can in principle

be a benefit of cap-and-trade schemes.3 Information limitations and political biases can thus pose

challenges to ensuring that the average level of stringency is appropriate, which may prevent

policy from efficiently adapting to cycles.

         A second reason why environmental policy does not adapt to business cycles is a political

economy concern for the potential for the rationale to be abused by regulators, leading to a

persistent weakening of environmental policy. One example is the decisions taken by the Trump

administration during the COVID-19 recession. By March 2020, the Environmental Protection

Agency (EPA) decided to exempt facilities that release toxic chemicals from reporting their

emissions to the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI), which led to an increase in pollution around TRI

facilities (Persico and Johnson 2021). While the decision was motivated mostly by the inability

of facilities to meet TRI requirements due to the direct effects of the COVID-19 pandemic,

additional rollbacks referred explicitly to the recessionary forces generated by the pandemic. 4

These additional rollbacks often reduced stringency to virtually zero, which is hard to justify as a

business cycle adjustment. A case in point is the regulation of methane, where the federal

administration in August 2020 eliminated requirements for oil and gas companies to monitor and



         2
            An example is the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), in which allowance prices
collapsed early on and remained persistently low for nearly a decade (EC 2012). While such low price outcomes
were largely due to an overallocation of permits (Martin et al. 2014), the Great Recession also contributed to depress
prices (Koch et al. 2014).
          3
            Some commentators, however, do not seem to have been able or willing to disentangle the two elements,
overallocation of permits and effect of the business cycle, in their critique of the EU ETS. Fortunately, in a cap-and-
trade system, the appropriate response to either price-depressing element is to tighten the cap, which recent reforms
have done (see Hepburn et al. 2016), but it remains far from clear whether the accompanying reforms are sufficient
to address future shocks (Fischer et al. 2020).
          4
            With the executive order "Accelerating the Nation's Economic Recovery From the COVID-19 Emergency
by Expediting Infrastructure Investments and Other Activities" of June 2020, the Trump administration instructed
agencies to waive long-standing environmental laws given that "Unnecessary regulatory delays will deny our
citizens opportunities for jobs and economic security, keeping millions of Americans out of work and hindering our
economic recovery from the national emergency."


                                                               4
repair methane leaks from pipelines, storage facilities, and wells. These requirements, known as

Oil and Natural Gas New Source Performance Standards, were recently reinstated by the new

administration.

         A final reason is simply that the literature studying this issue is so recent that it has not

yet been able to address the most pressing questions or has not yet been properly communicated

to policymakers. The literature on business cycles and environmental policy effectively started

just about a decade ago with Fischer and Springborn (2011) and is thus relatively recent.5 The

research has not yet addressed all dimensions of the problem nor all questions that policymakers

may have about the implications of tying environmental policy to the business cycle, including

distributional effects.

         Our goal in this paper is threefold. First, we review the literature on environmental policy

and the business cycle, with the goal of summarizing and conveying in a palatable way the

economic rationale for business-cycle adjustments to environmental policy, as well as the effects

of policy on economic volatility. In this respect, our paper updates early synthesis papers,

including Fischer and Heutel (2013). Second, we present an assessment of the main results from

this literature that are most relevant for policymakers today. This includes how different types of

policy can lead to different volatilities of outcomes, and how policymakers can adapt

environmental policy to cycles, ideally ex ante, tying their hands to limit the risk of business-

cycle adjustments being abused. Third, we identify areas for future research that have currently

been underexplored, with the goal of filling the current knowledge gaps that may contribute to

limiting the adoption of business-cycle adjustments in environmental policy. Our general focus is

on the climate externality, due to its importance in the current policy landscape, although many


         5
           Of course, there is a much larger and older literature on business cycles more generally, which is beyond
this scope of this paper to discuss.

                                                              5
of our insights may also carry important implications for other environmental issues. We discuss

the importance of considering other pollutants as well, particularly given the fact that greenhouse

gases are long-lived stock pollutants, while other pollutants like particulate matter are flow

pollutants for which cyclical fluctuations in emissions likely have a larger effect on damages.

        We present four main sets of policy-relevant findings from the literature, described in

detail in section IV. First, we discuss how different policies can impact the volatility of

outcomes over the business cycle, even when those policies themselves do not vary over the

cycle. A main finding here is that policy type matters--a quantity-based instrument such as cap-

and-trade leads to overall less volatility, while a price-based policy such as a carbon tax leads to

more volatility. Second, policy can be designed to vary over the business cycle and these

adjustments affect the economy and welfare. Both the dynamically-efficient carbon tax rate and

the dynamically-efficient carbon cap are procyclical--increasing during expansions and

decreasing during recessions; however, the magnitude of the welfare advantages of these

dynamically-efficient policies over static policies is unclear. Third, policy implications vary

depending on the source of the business cycle, i.e. the type of shock triggering the business-cycle

fluctuation. Almost all of the modeling literature considers aggregate productivity shocks,

although some empirical literature suggests that other shocks may contribute more to emissions

fluctuations. Productivity shocks may also be sector-specific. When productivity shocks are

specific to energy-intensive polluting sectors, a tax may have a welfare advantage over a cap,

though yielding higher volatility. Fourth and finally, we discuss how environmental policy

interacts with other policies or other distortions over the business cycle. Other policies, including

monetary policy, and other distortions, including labor market frictions, can affect the efficient

cyclicality of policy or its effects on volatility.



                                                      6
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the basics of the

environmental dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (E-DSGE) model, the main toolbox to

study business cycles in macroeconomics, and their relationship to the environment. Section III

reports the most important extensions to the basic E-DSGE models. Section IV summarizes what

we see as the main findings of the literature most relevant to policymakers. Section V discusses

the most promising and most urgent avenues for future research.



II. Description of basic E-DSGE model

       In this section we describe the basic dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)

model used in the literature examining environmental policy and business cycles. DSGE models

have been frequently used in the literature for decades to study business cycles (Christiano et al.

2018). Models that extend the basic DSGE model to include some aspects of the environment

have been called environmental DSGE, or E-DSGE, models (Khan et al. 2019). The workhorse

model is based on the real business cycle (RBC) model, where business cycles are fueled by

random autocorrelated productivity shocks (Rebelo 2005). Fischer and Springborn (2011),

Heutel (2012), and Angelopoulos et al. (2013) are three early papers that modify the standard

RBC model by including pollution and pollution policy. Briefly, the model consists of an

aggregate representative agent choosing consumption, labor, and investment to maximize total

discounted utility. Capital evolves dynamically based on investment. Pollution arises from

production and can negatively affect productivity or utility, but the agent's choices can affect the

level of pollution. Given a series of exogenous shocks to productivity, the model can be used to

find the efficient level of investment and pollution that maximizes total discounted utility. The

model can also analyze pollution policies, like pollution taxes or cap-and-trade.



                                                     7
       We first describe a centralized model, where a representative agent acts the same as a

social planner would act. The representative agent chooses consumption  , investment  , and

leisure  in each period  to maximize expected discounted lifetime utility. The single-period

utility function is  ( ,  ). The resource constraint is  +  =  , where  is the level of

output or production. A capital stock evolves according to +1 =  + (1 - ) . Time is

normalized to one each period and allocated between labor ( ) and leisure:  +  = 1.

Production is based on the labor and capital inputs along with a productivity shock:  =

 ( ,  ). The productivity shock  is exogenous and evolves according to an autoregressive

process.

       So far, the model described is the standard RBC model. At this point, the model can be

modified to include pollution and pollution policy, and there is more than one way to do so. As

in Fischer and Springborn (2011), and as is commonly done in computable general equilibrium

models, one would modify the production function to also include a polluting input  , so that

output is  =  ( ,  ,  ). The polluting input is costly, so the resource constraint becomes

 +  +  =  . The polluting input is a choice variable and so can be changed in response to

economic conditions or policies (described below). An alternative way of modeling pollution,

following Heutel (2012) based on the representation in the DICE model (see Nordhaus 1993;

Nordhaus 2017), is to let pollution emissions  be a byproduct of production that can be reduced

through abatement spending  . Emissions are  = ( )( ), where the increasing function 

maps how output creates emissions, holding abatement  fixed, and the decreasing function 

maps how abatement spending reduces emissions, holding output  fixed. The resource

constraint under this specification of pollution is  +  +  =  .




                                                   8
        The relationship between emissions in one period  and the total stock of pollution 

can be given by a stock evolution equation. For example, in Heutel (2012), the pollution stock
                                             
evolves according to +1 =  +  +                     , where  is a pollution depreciation rate and
 
      is the exogenous level of emissions from other economies (e.g., for a global pollutant like

carbon dioxide, this represents emissions from other countries). Another way of incorporating

the stock of pollution is done in Angelopoulos et al. (2013), where the stock variable 

represents environmental quality (a good) rather than the pollution stock (a bad). The evolution

of environmental quality is +1 = (1 -   ) +    -  +  , where  is environmental

quality without any pollution and   is a pollution persistence parameter. Emissions 

negatively affects environmental quality, and abatement spending  positively affects

environmental quality measured by the parameter  .

        We next describe how damages from pollution can be incorporated into the model. There

are two places where pollution damages can enter: pollution can either negatively affect utility

directly, or it can indirectly affect utility by negatively affecting output or productivity. Under

the first specification, following Angelopoulos et al. (2013), we can modify the utility function to

include the level of environmental quality  :  ( ,  ,  ). Under the second specification,

following Heutel (2012), we can modify the production function to include the level of the

pollution stock  :  = (1 - ( )) ( ,  ), where  is a damage function that relates the

level of the pollution stock to a reduction in output. Several integrated assessment models of

climate change, including the DICE model (Nordhaus 1993, 2017, 2018), model carbon pollution

as affecting output rather than utility directly.

        The centralized model is now complete, and the model can be solved as a social planner's

problem, where the damages from pollution are incorporated into the decision-making process. A


                                                         9
social planner trades off the benefits of reducing emissions (reducing pollution damages) with its

costs (abatement costs). The solution represents the first-best response of all economic variables

to exogenous productivity shocks. Solutions can be presented as impulse response functions,

which show how all of the variables optimally respond to a one-unit innovation in the

productivity shock. Or, solutions can be presented as simulations of business cycles, in which an

exogenous series of productivity shocks are drawn and the economy is allowed to optimally

respond. Figures 1 and 2 present results from the first-best dynamic policy simulations, based on

the model in Heutel (2012), showing impulse response functions and business cycle simulations,

respectively.6 The model used here is identical to that used in Heutel (2012), though the

calibration is updated based on Gibson and Heutel (2020).7

        Figure 1 shows impulse response functions for the productivity shock (after a one-time

innovation in period 0) along with three variables related to the environment: single-period

emissions  , the pollution stock  , and abatement spending  . The blue line shows that the

productivity shock value decays exogenously at a constant rate. In response to that productivity

increase, emissions are higher than their steady-state value. During an economic boom, when

output increases (not shown in Figure 1), emissions also are allowed to increase. However,

Figure 1 also shows that abatement spending increases above its steady-state value. While

emissions are increasing during the boom, they are not increasing by as much as they otherwise

would if it were not for the efficient response of the economy in increasing abatement spending.




         6
           These graphs update Figures 4 and 5 in Heutel (2012). This model (like the model in Angelopoulos et al.
2013 but unlike the model in Fischer and Springborn 2011) omits labor and leisure.
         7
           This updated calibration is based both on the most recently-available version of the DICE model's damage
function, and emissions elasticity estimated from monthly emissions and GDP data through 2019. See details in
Gibson and Heutel (2020).

                                                            10
The optimal cyclicality of emissions is thus procyclical, but less procyclical than they would be

absent the dynamically-optimal policy.

       Figure 2 shows business cycle simulations for the centralized model without policy,

drawn from an arbitrary draw of productivity shocks. Capital is procyclical but less volatile and

somewhat lagged from output due to its stock nature. Emissions are strongly procyclical, though

not quite as variable as output is. The pollution stock has such a slow decay rate that these

business-cycle fluctuations have very limited impact on its value (pollution here is calibrated to

carbon dioxide, a stock pollutant that remains in the atmosphere for decades).

       Next, we turn to a decentralized model, in which a representative firm maximizes profits

and a representative consumer maximizes utility. By assuming that the firm ignores the effect

that its pollution has on either productivity or utility, the decentralized model features an

externality, so that the decentralized solution will generally not be first best. Either the consumer

or the firm can be subject to an environmental policy, for example, a tax on emissions.

       The model can also be used to analyze the effect of these policies on various economic

outcomes. Fischer and Springborn (2011) analyze the effect of three environmental policies: an

emissions tax, an emissions cap, and an intensity standard that fixes the ratio of emissions to

output. They generate business cycle simulations and show how various economic variables

respond to the draw of productivity shocks under each of the three policies. We replicate these

simulations here in Figure 3. In response to an exogenous draw of productivity shocks (identical

to the draw in Figure 2), Figure 3 plots the response of emissions (top panel) and output (bottom

panel) under each of the three policies: the intensity standard (), the emissions cap (), and

the emissions tax ().




                                                     11
        The three policies are all calibrated to yield the efficient first-best level in steady state,

but the policy values do not adjust to the business cycle. Consequently the three policies yield

different cyclical properties. Of course, since the cap is fixed over time, it results in emissions

fixed at their steady-state level, while the tax and intensity standard result in emissions that vary

over the business cycle. Output is slightly less volatile under the cap policy than under the other

two policies. This demonstrates that the intensity standard is more accommodating of business

cycles due to its flexibility--by restricting emissions per unit output rather than total emissions,

it includes a built-in cyclical adaptation.

        The decentralized model can also be used to solve for the efficient level of the policy

variables that internalizes the pollution externality and reaches the theoretical first best. Such an

exercise is performed in Heutel (2012), which includes a specification of external damages from

pollution affecting productivity, though unlike Fischer and Springborn (2011), does not include a

labor decision or an intensity standard policy. Results from business cycle simulations of

efficient policy are presented here in Figure 4. For the same draw of shocks simulated in Figures

2 and 3, Figure 4 shows the efficient response of both a tax policy and an emissions cap. Here,

the policy values endogenously respond to the draw of the shocks and the changing economy and

thus are not fixed over time as in Figure 3. Figure 4 shows that both the emissions cap and the

emissions tax are procyclical. But, that means the cyclicality of the stringency of each policy is

different. During an expansion, the efficient emissions tax increases, which is an increase in

stringency, while the efficient emissions cap also increases, which is a decrease in stringency. As

also can be seen from Figure 4, the efficient emissions tax is more procyclical than the efficient

emissions cap.




                                                       12
III. Extensions to the basic model

       The basic E-DSGE RBC model has been extended to include several features and market

failures used in business cycle analysis. In this section we provide a review of this literature. We

first discuss the main extensions of the RBC environmental model with perfectly competitive

markets and flexible prices, where supply shocks are the main source of economic fluctuations.

We then consider the New Keynesian contributions that offer an alternative to the flexible price

framework of the RBC analysis. Finally, we consider other extensions focusing on open

economy issues and credit market imperfections. The explicit consideration of additional market

failures besides environmental damage may lead to important implications for the design of

second-best policies and to non-trivial interactions with short-run stabilization policies.


III.a. RBC extensions

       A first important extension of the business cycle model with environmental regulation is

represented by the modeling of a multisector economy. From a business cycle perspective, the

departure from the one-sector theoretical scheme and the modeling of sectoral interlinkages can

be critical to examine the propagation of shocks of different sources and the impact of pollution

policy. Dissou and Karnizova (2016) develop a model economy with six sectors where

uncertainty comes from sector-specific productivity shocks. They consider three energy sectors

differing in their emission intensity (coal, oil and gas, and electricity), two manufacturing sectors

(low- and high-energy intensive), and a sector providing services. The analysis focuses on

restricting emissions generated as a by-product of the fossil energy sectors. Two environmental

regulations are compared to each other: cap system and carbon tax. The cap system is designed

as an upper limit on the emissions and is introduced into the model as an occasionally binding

constraint.15 When the cap constraint is not binding, the price of the emissions permit is zero.
                                                     13
This feature drives an asymmetry in the response to negative and positive shocks. The extra

revenues generated by environmental policies are then rebated to households as lump-sum

transfers. In response to a more stringent pollution policy the economy adjusts through three

channels: (i) the shift from fossil-fuel to cleaner energy; (ii) the reduction of the use of energy in

production; (iii) the substitution of energy inputs for other production inputs. The model

abstracts from other mechanisms of mitigation, such as abatement technology, and does not

include environmental damage, similarly to Fischer and Springborn (2011).

       With this tool, Dissou and Karnizova (2016) evaluate the performance of price and

quantity policy instruments in the presence of persistent productivity shocks originated in

different sectors, and then use welfare and the volatility of the main macroeconomic variables as

metrics. Their main findings are the following. First, they show that the impact of a carbon

mitigation policy on aggregate variables is lower in a multisector model, where it is possible to

vary the energy mix in response to regulation, than the impact observed in an aggregate model.

Second, consistently with Fischer and Springborn (2011), they find that the cap system leads to

lower volatility of the main macroeconomic variables relative to the carbon tax. However, they

demonstrate that two policy tools lead to statistically different results only for productivity

shocks in the energy sectors. Third, in contrast to previous findings, a tax policy is less costly in

terms of welfare than the cap, but the welfare costs are statistically different only in the case of

energy-related shocks. This result seems quite puzzling, since a tax policy delivers higher

volatility than does the cap. The reason is that, in this model, the occasionally binding constraint

on emissions under the cap delivers an asymmetry in response to shocks of opposite signs. The

cap limits the expansionary effects of positive productivity shocks, reducing not only the

volatility of economic variables, but also their means. The lower volatility improves welfare,



                                                      14
while the negative effects on the mean of variables like consumption worsens welfare. The latter

effect prevails and leads to statistically significant welfare differences between the two

environmental regulations under energy-related shocks.

       Another study related to the baseline RBC E-DSGE model is Khan et al. (2019), which

extends the model to include four types of technology shocks: anticipated and unanticipated

technology shocks, and anticipated and unanticipated investment-specific shocks. Investment-

specific shocks directly affect the marginal efficiency of investments and, as shown by Justiniano

et al. (2010) and Furlanetto and Seneca (2014), are important drivers of business cycle

fluctuations. In addition, their model features investment adjustment costs that are a source of

inertia for investments. These costs reduce the investment volatility generated by the baseline

RBC model and reproduce a hump-shaped response of the main macro variables to shocks, as

observed in the data. Khan et al. (2019) show that emissions are procyclical in response to all

shocks considered, because abatement becomes relatively more expensive during expansions.

When pollution externalities are not fully internalized in the decentralized equilibrium case, the

policy is too weak, and emissions will be even more procyclical than in the social planner's

solution.

       Finally, all the RBC models discussed so far are silent about labor force participation and

the unemployment rate. Work has also begun on the task of introducing labor market frictions in

RBC models with a pollution externality. Gibson and Heutel (2020) integrate the Diamond-

Mortensen-Pissarides search and matching framework of unemployment into the RBC E-DSGE

model of Heutel (2012) and examine the interaction between labor market and environmental

policies. Labor search frictions generate two congestion externalities of opposite signs that under

certain conditions may perfectly offset each other. On the one hand, each unemployed worker



                                                     15
searching for a job reduces the probability of a match of all the other unemployed workers, while

increasing the probability of a match for all hiring firms. On the other hand, firms posting a

vacancy increase the probability of finding a job for unemployed workers, while reducing the

probability of filling a vacancy for all the other firms. When these externalities do not offset each

other, the model generates a level of employment that is above or below the socially efficient

level, in addition to the market failure from emissions.

       In Gibson and Heutel (2020), the calibrated DSGE model delivers a decentralized

equilibrium with inefficiently high pollution and employment. The efficient allocation can then

be achieved by imposing a pollution tax and a tax on vacancy creation. When the vacancy tax is

unavailable, the Ramsey planner has only the pollution tax as a policy instrument to address both

sources of externalities. In the steady state equilibrium, the optimal emission tax rate is found to

be much higher than its first-best counterpart. The cyclical properties are also very different: the

optimal emission tax is only half as volatile as the first best emission tax. These results suggest

that in an economy where the decentralized equilibrium would deliver unemployment, the

Ramsey planner, in the attempt to strike the balance between search and environmental

externalities, would set a lower emission tax in steady state, while responding more vigorously to

business cycle fluctuations.


III.b. New Keynesian extensions

       The E-DSGE RBC model has been enriched by New Keynesian (NK) elements in the

spirit of the so-called New Neoclassical Synthesis.16 At the heart of the baseline NK framework

are three main elements: (i) imperfectly competitive markets, (ii) nominal rigidities (imperfect

price and/or wage adjustment), and (iii) non-neutrality of monetary policy. In RBC models,

monetary policy is essentially unimportant for real activity, while in NK economics the presence

                                                     16
of nominal rigidities makes monetary policy central to the dynamics of real activity and to the

propagation of the business cycle.17

       Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2015) propose an NK E-DSGE model with pollution,

abatement technology, environmental regulations, and pollution damage, as in Heutel (2012).

The model maintains the RBC framework as its underlying structure and features imperfect price

adjustment à la Calvo (1983), while monetary policy is described by an interest-rate rule.18 The

Calvo pricing scheme introduces a further distortion in the decentralized equilibrium since

staggered prices generate price dispersion which, in turn, results in an inefficiency loss in

aggregate production. In this model, the higher price dispersion is, the more polluting inputs are

needed to produce a given level of output. As in Fischer and Springborn (2011), the paper seeks

to understand the role of different environmental policy regimes (cap, tax, and intensity target) as

a further conditioning factor of the business cycle, here driven by technological, fiscal, and

monetary policy shocks.19 However, in this model imperfectly competitive markets and

imperfect price adjustments further condition the performance of pollution policy and the design

of the optimal carbon tax. The key findings of their analysis can be summarized as follows.

Consistent with previous contributions, an emission cap tends to mitigate the impact of the main

macroeconomic variables to shocks. The ability of the cap to dampen business cycle fluctuations

is increasing in the degree of nominal rigidities. These stabilizing properties of the cap are

welfare improving when nominal rigidities are strong, while the differences with the other

environmental policies become negligible under flexible prices. This is because since nominal

rigidities amplify business cycle fluctuations, a regulation that forces a smoothed response of real

variables tends to be preferred. The paper also explores optimal environmental policy in response

to shocks for different levels of price stickiness and for different monetary policy conducts,



                                                     17
although this second aspect is only touched upon in this paper. Consistent with the results of

Heutel (2012) and Angelopoulos et al. (2013), Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2015) show that the

optimal emissions tax is strongly procyclical. However, they also show that the optimal response

of the tax is stronger with a higher degree of nominal rigidities. Again, the distortions induced by

nominal rigidities make the decentralized equilibrium less efficient, requiring a stronger reaction

of the optimal tax policy in response to shocks.

       Jaimes (2020) further explores the role of nominal rigidities by also considering the

implications of sluggish wage adjustments. The baseline NK E-DSGE model with abatement and

environmental externality is extended to include an imperfectly competitive labor market, where

wage setters with market power adjust wages according to a Calvo-pricing scheme as in Erceg et

al. (2000). The model is used to analyze the interdependence between environmental and fiscal

policy in an economy hit by shocks on the abatement technology and on public spending, where

the carbon tax or permit revenue is used to cut consumption or labor income tax rate (see

Goulder 1995 for a primer on the "double dividend" of environmental taxation), rather than

redistributed via lump-sum transfers. The redistribution of environmental policy revenues to

reduce distortionary taxes is shown in Jaimes (2020) to have a stabilizing effect in the face of

uncertainty, while the result regarding the major stabilizing effect of a cap-and-trade under price

rigidities, as already found in Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2015), is robust to different recycling

schemes. By contrast, wage stickiness leads to a higher output volatility, especially under a cap-

and-trade scheme and when prices are flexible. This is because wage rigidities amplify the

impact of uncertainty on employment. On the other hand, in presence of wage stickiness, the use

of revenues raised from emissions pricing system to lower labor taxes has stronger stabilizing

properties than under a carbon tax. The presence of nominal rigidities and the non-neutrality of



                                                    18
monetary policy are two distinctive features of NK models, therefore it is not surprising that

these frameworks are also used to study the potential role of monetary policy under climate

change and explore the interactions of monetary and environmental policies. Although monetary

policy and environmental regulations are two distinct areas of intervention, climate or pollution

control policy may have an impact on monetary policy and a bearing on price stability. For

instance, more ambitious climate actions could induce inflationary pressure through different

channels, such as higher production costs, higher abatement costs, and tax pass-through. In the

presence of economic uncertainty, a cap-and-trade system could lead to higher inflation volatility

as the price of permits would fluctuate with market conditions. On the other hand, monetary

policy may affect the design of the optimal environmental policy in an economy hit by shocks.

These issues have been studied by Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2017), Economides and

Xepapadeas (2018).

       Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2017) propose a simple variant of the baseline NK model

including pollutant emissions, abatement technology and environmental damage to study several

combinations of second-best environmental and monetary policies in response to productivity

shocks. Emissions are found to be more or less procyclical depending on the instruments

available to the planner. With a Ramsey planner having access to both monetary and

environmental policy instruments, emissions tend to be less procyclical than when pollution

policy is set according to a carbon tax. When the Ramsey planner controls the level of emissions

and monetary policy obeys a simple monetary rule, the optimal environmental policy depends

crucially on the monetary policy. If monetary policy is strongly responsive to output, then the

optimal environmental policy will deliver a strong increase in the carbon price in reaction to a

positive shock, delivering countercyclical emissions. Under the assumption that the Ramsey



                                                    19
planner controls only monetary policy, price stability turns out to be optimal only when

environmental regulation is implemented in the form of a carbon tax, provided that the negative

externality of pollution is small, otherwise under a quantity restriction on emissions, or a strong

negative pollution externality, the optimal policy requires deviations from price stability in

response to technology shocks.20

       Economides and Xepapadeas (2018) build an NK model embodying a climate module

and energy produced by the processing of fossil fuels. Energy is a production input, and the

processing of fossil fuels generates pollution, which damages the economy. Productivity shocks

trigger economic fluctuations, while endogenous climate change introduces a new propagation

mechanism limiting the expansionary effects of positive shocks. In this context, monetary policy

should be less reactive to inflation, and therefore less expansionary in response to positive

productivity shocks, the stronger the negative environmental externality. Economides and

Xepapadeas (2018) also explore the effects of the introduction of a carbon tax showing how an

ambitious greening policy may generate large fluctuations in the price levels. In this sense,

Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2017) and Economides and Xepapadeas (2018) are some of the first

studies to integrate monetary and environmental policy features and conclude that ambitious

climate actions may potentially represent a challenge for monetary authorities.21




III.c. Open economy

       Open economy variants of E-DSGE models allow analysis of cross-country spillovers of

pollution policies and the performance of international environmental regulation. It is also

possible to study the response of additional macroeconomic indicators (e.g. trade balance,

exchange rate, measures of competitiveness) to different environmental regulations. In particular,

                                                     20
we focus on the contributions by Annicchiarico and Diluiso (2019), Economides and

Xepapadeas (2019), and Holladay et al. (2019). The first two papers propose open-economy E-

DSGE models that incorporate imperfect competition and nominal rigidities, all features that, as

discussed in the previous section, alter the transmission mechanism of shocks, and provide a role

for monetary policy and the chosen exchange rate regime.22 Holladay et al. (2019) reconsider

the debate on prices-versus-quantities regulations under uncertainty in a small open-economy

RBC model.

       Annicchiarico and Diluiso (2019) use a two-country NK E-DSGE model with

international trade and perfect capital mobility, and show how the cross-border propagation of

asymmetric real and monetary shocks is influenced by the underlying environmental regulations

(carbon tax and international cap and trade). The main channels of international transmission of

the business cycle are the "demand channel" (any change in domestic expenditure implies

changes in the demand for foreign production) and the "competitiveness channel" (changes in

relative prices of domestic and foreign production influence trade flows). The strength of these

channels depends on the underlying environmental regime. The cross-border spillover effects of

business cycle uncertainty from real and monetary shocks are stronger under a carbon tax, where

for shocks hitting only the home country foreign output is relatively more volatile than in other

policy regimes, since both the demand and competitiveness channels are stronger. By contrast,

under a cap-and-trade regime, where countries can exchange emissions permits, the effects of

asymmetric shocks are mitigated and the cross-border spillovers are less strong, while home and

foreign outputs move in opposite directions. An international market of emissions permits further

allows to smooth out the spillover effects of international trade. The degree of openness, the




                                                    21
trade pattern, and the underlying exchange rate regime (i.e. currency union or flexible exchange

rates) affect the conditioning role of environmental regulations in the transmission of shocks.

       Economides and Xepapadeas (2019) show that the underlying exchange rate regime does

not significantly affect the implications of climate change in a small open economy. They use a

NK model calibrated to Greece to investigate the impact of the damage deriving from a

continuous increase in temperature on output and competitiveness. Irrespective of the type of the

exchange rate regime considered, climate change, by reducing total factor productivity, entails

significant output losses, reduction of competitiveness, and a deterioration of the external

balance. In this model, having an autonomous monetary policy does not seem to make any

difference in the face of climate change.

       Holladay et al. (2019) study the properties of pollution taxes, cap-and-trade, and emission

intensity targets in a small open economy RBC model calibrated to Canada. The model features

free trade, but imperfectly mobile capital. Pollution is generated by processing a fossil fuel input

in the production sector, while business cycle fluctuations are triggered by unanticipated shocks

on productivity and on the price of imports. The results in Holladay et al. (2019) suggest that a

cap-and-trade regulation is likely to dampen business cycle fluctuations due to productivity

shocks, consistently with the findings obtained by Fischer and Springborn (2011) in a closed

economy. The extension of the core E-DSGE model to an open economy allows the authors to

examine the impact of business cycles on the trade balance. Holladay et al. (2019) find that a

cap-and-trade regulation mitigates the effects of the business cycle on the trade balance by

reducing imports during a recession and exports during an expansion. In particular, in response

to a shock on the price of imports the cap-and-trade system would work as a barrier to trade

limiting the expansion of demand for imports in response to a decline in foreign prices.



                                                     22
III.d. Credit market imperfections, financial regulation, and unconventional monetary policy

       Early studies in the E-DSGE literature explore the behavior and the effects of different

pollution policies on macroeconomic aggregates in response to standard macroeconomic shocks

and to shocks coming from the energy sector. However, following the Great Recession,

increasing attention has been devoted by the macroeconomic literature to financial shocks and to

the implications of imperfectly functioning financial markets in the propagation of business cycle

shocks, for instance, with the studies by Gertler and Karadi (2011), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015),

or Cúrdia and Woodford (2016).

       Recently, several authors have started to study the effects of credit market imperfections

in environmental macroeconomic models of the business cycle, focusing on the additional policy

trade-offs that inevitably emerge when other market failures are factored in, as shown in van den

Bijgaart and Smulders (2018), which we discuss below. Particular attention has been paid to the

macro-financial consequences of climate change and the low-carbon transition, and to the

implications for monetary policy and financial regulators. The potential for important

interactions between climate change and financial markets, including for macroeconomic

stability, raised to prominence following an influential speech by then Bank of England's

governor Mark Carney (Carney 2015), which highlighted three sources of systemic risk. First,

physical risk, related with the impact of climate damages on assets' financial valuations. Second,

transition risk, related with the revaluation of carbon-intensive assets during the transition to a

cleaner economy. Third, liability risks, related to the exposure of some firms to legal action

concerning their role in opposing climate action.



                                                     23
       In this section, we focus mostly on transition risks. As markets move toward a low-

carbon economy, transition risk arises when unanticipated policy measures, new technologies or

sudden changes in public sentiment lead to abrupt changes in market valuation and risk of

stranded assets. A sudden slump in the value of carbon-related assets could be a source of

uncertainty, leading to higher default risks in the carbon-intensive sectors, precipitate a fire-sale

of assets across the economy, and trigger procyclical market dynamics generating fall in output

and investment. Two main empirical observations support concerns about transition risk. First,

evidence suggesting that carbon-intensive stocks make up a substantial portion of a standard

financial institution's portfolio (e.g. Battiston et al. 2017). Second, evidence pointing to the

imperfect ability of financial markets to price in transition, with stock markets reacting mostly to

short-term changes in the probability of ambitious climate policy being implemented (Ramelli et

al. 2018, Carattini and Sen 2019, Barnett 2020, Sen and von Schickfus 2020).

       The management of transition risk represents a challenge for central banks and regulatory

authorities. Following Carney's speech, several other central banks and prudential authorities

expressed concerns, in particular about transition risk, including in France, the Netherlands, and

the United States (Vermeulen et al. 2018; Banque de France 2019; Rudebusch 2021). As a result,

several jurisdictions have started implementing climate-related stress tests, while both the United

Kingdom and the United States mandate carbon disclosure for large firms or large polluters,

under the Streamlined Energy and Carbon Reporting regulations and the Greenhouse Gas

Reporting Program, respectively. In the United States, Senator Elizabeth Warren's Climate Risk

Disclosure Act would require all public companies to disclose critical information about their

exposure to climate-related risks.




                                                      24
       Currently, the academic and policy debate revolves around the need to extend the

mandate of both central banks and financial regulatory authorities to address climate change.

       In this respect, there is potentially the need to design new "green" tools ranging from

green-biased financial regulations, aimed at favoring green investments and/or discouraging

brown investments, to uncoventional monetary policy such as the so-called "green quantitative

easing", that is defined as a central bank`s purchase of assets issued to finance environmentally

friendly projects (see Campiglio et al. 2018 and D'Orazio and Popoyan 2019). The intent of this

policy is that of reducing the cost of borrowing for green projects. On these more specific

aspects, this section discusses first the contributions of Comerford and Spiganti (2017) and Punzi

(2018), and then those of Benmir and Roman (2020), Diluiso et al. (2020), Ferrari and Nispi

Landi (2020), and Carattini et al. (2021).

       Van den Bijgaart and Smulders (2018) study second-best optimal environmental policy

responses to technology and financial shocks in a model with two market failures, credit

constraints and an environmental externality. The analysis is conducted in a simple two-period

partial equilibrium business cycle model with heterogeneous firms that may invest in pollution-

saving technologies. The level of investments in clean technologies is sub-optimal because of

credit market imperfections. In this context, more ambitious environmental policies undermine

the borrowing capacity of firms through the negative effects these policies have on profits. The

environmental regulator faces a trade-off between limiting emissions and relaxing credit

constraints, and this trade-off changes along the business cycle. The degree of procyclicality of

the optimal pollution tax then crucially depends on the effects of regulation on firm's access to

credit and on the strength of credit market imperfections. When the economy is in a recession,

credit constraints are more binding and the best policy response requires a reduction of the



                                                    25
pollution tax so as to alleviate hardship for business. E-DSGE models incorporating a financial

sector can provide a different perspective to the study of the potential role of `green' financial

regulations for banks and other financial intermediaries in reducing the risk of financial

instability from stranded assets and in supporting green investments.

       Comerford and Spiganti (2017) construct a model economy with a credit amplification

mechanism à la Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), where credit market imperfections arise from

collateral constraints on borrowing, and study the effects of the implementation of a climate

policy on the value of brown assets. In this model, ambitious climate actions may cause a sudden

fall in the value of these assets and precipitate a fire-sale of assets across the economy, triggering

a recession. Policies tailored to mitigate the impact of stranded assets upon investors' balance

sheets, such as investment subsidies, debt take-over, or government guarantee, can be welfare-

enhancing and support a faster recovery.

       Punzi (2018) develops an E-DSGE model of the NK type with a formalized banking

sector similar to that of Kollmann et al. (2011) to study the effects of total factor productivity,

monetary, and credit shocks in a two-sector economy (green firms and non-green firms) and

provide a first attempt to investigate the role of different macroprudential measures to support

green financing. She finds that only differentiated capital requirements can help to sustain green

investments, while lowering the volatility of business cycle fluctuations.

       Next, we discuss four recent papers that all combine an E-DSGE model with financial

frictions à la Gertler and Karadi (2011). In this setup, an agency problem limits the amount of

funds banks can raise from households.23 First, Benmir and Roman (2020) incorporate this into a

two-sector (green and dirty) NK-DSGE model. Their results suggest that, by rendering dirty and

green assets imperfect substitutes and by favoring a rebalancing of intermediaries' portfolio



                                                      26
toward green assets, macroprudential regulation could be designed to favor the expansion of the

green sector with a minimal welfare cost. This paper also examines the effects of green biased

quantitative easing policies, showing that these unconventional monetary policies can be used as

short-term countercyclical tool, rather than as an instrument to favor the structural change toward

a greener economy.

       Diluiso et al. (2020) build up a three-sector NK-DSGE model with heterogeneous energy

production sectors (a low-carbon energy sector and a fossil energy sector), financial frictions in

the spirit of Gertler and Karadi (2011) and a climate module. Policy and financial shocks hitting

the fossil energy sector weaken banks' balance sheets and propagate in the economy through a

financial accelerator mechanism. Diluiso et al. (2020) show that the transition risks are limited

for orderly and credible mitigation plans, while tax-subsidy schemes designed to encourage the

decarbonization of banks' balance sheets may significantly reduce the transition risks.

       In Diluiso et al. (2020) unconventional monetary policies, such as green quantitative

easing programs, prove to be effective in stabilizing the economy in response to a crisis

generated by the stranding of fossil assets and do not seem to compromise the objective of price

stability.24 However, the effectiveness of green-biased quantitative easing programs in reviving

the economy is not signficantly different from that of market-neutral programs.

       These results in Diluiso et al. (2020) are consistent with those obtained by Ferrari and

Nispi Landi (2020), who also propose a two-sector NK-DSGE model with green and carbon

assets and financial frictions as in Gertler and Karadi (2011). This paper elucidates the potential

effects and the scope of temporary green quantitative easing policy shocks, and shows that the

imperfect substitutability between green and brown assets is a necessary condition for the

effectiveness of non-neutral asset purchasing programs in greening the economy, although the



                                                    27
welfare gains of these policies seem limited. When brown and green assets are perfect substitutes

their returns must be the same in equilibrium. In this case, green quantitative easing policies are

still expansionary, because they ease the credit constraint on banks and improve lending

conditions. However, banks exploit arbitrage opportunities and expand their assets holdings also

in the brown sector, frustrating any attempt to green the economy through this policy. As a result

of the same intuition, green and neutral asset purchasing programs behave similarly in

stimulating the economy after an adverse financial shock, as shown by Diluiso et al. (2020).

       Finally, Carattini et al. (2021) also develop an E-DSGE model that features financial

frictions à la Gertler and Karadi (2011). While the other papers that do this focus primarily on

the transition risk of introducing carbon policy, Carattini et al. (2021) consider both the transition

risk, in particular from the abrupt implementation of ambitious climate policy (Carney's "hard

landing"), as well as the long-run and business cycle implications of the relationship between the

climate externality and the financial market frictions. They consider both a carbon tax to address

the climate externality and macroprudential policies, in the form of taxes or subsidies on banks'

assets, to address the financial frictions. Over the business cycle, the first-best level of both

policies varies, and the Ramsey planner dynamically optimizes both policies. If one policy is

constrained or absent, then the second-best solution is where the remaining policy adjusts as best

it can to the business cycle. Despite current debates, in Europe as well as in the United States, on

whether central banks should also make tackling climate change part of their mandate, Carattini

et al. (2021) find that macroprudential policies alone, without an accompanying climate policy,

are not very effective at reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Macroprudential policies can,

however, limit the risk of a recession with the abrupt implementation of carbon taxes, thus

clearing the way for ambitious policies.



                                                      28
IV. Policy-relevant findings from the literature

       In this section we provide a brief overview of the main findings from the literature that

are most relevant to policymakers, who may seek either to design policies to accommodate

business cycles or to assess the impacts of business cycles on policy effectiveness or pollution.

The first two subsections describe positive findings from the literature about the effect of policy

on economic volatility and the design of policy over the business cycle. The last two subsections

discuss caveats to these findings, pointing out that the source of fluctuations matters and that

other macroeconomic market failures or distortions interact with environmental policy.


IV.a. Policy effects on volatility

       Emissions are a byproduct of production and are thus naturally pro-cyclical. Empirical

evidence indicates that emissions are even more volatile than GDP, indicating they arise from

sectors more vulnerable to business-cycle variations (Doda 2014). The flip side of this

relationship is that policies to control emissions will also influence the response of other

macroeconomic factors to exogenous shocks.

       A cap on emissions has a built-in dampening effect on the business cycle. A positive

productivity shock will expand output and demand for emissions, but the cap will require further

efforts to limit polluting inputs or abate emissions, manifesting in an increase in the emissions

price. With a negative productivity shock, the cap becomes less constraining; emissions prices

fall with demand, and less abatement effort is required in a downturn. Since one means of

reducing emissions is reducing output, less of this output-related abatement is needed in a

downturn. As a result, an emissions cap limits volatility of other macroeconomic variables. This

effect becomes even more pronounced when prices are more difficult to adjust, since these

rigidities tend to exacerbate business cycles (Annicchiarico and Di Dio 2015). However, the
                                                     29
stabilizing properties of a cap are mitigated when wages are sticky, since the effects of

uncertainty on employment are greater (Jaimes 2020). On the other hand, the pro-cyclical

response of emissions prices under cap-and-trade system could exacerbate inflation volatility, so

monetary policy interactions matter too (Annicchiarico and Di Dio 2017).

       An emissions tax, by contrast, fixes the price of emissions and allows the quantity of

emissions to respond. Investment and production decisions take the emissions price into account,

but a positive productivity shock will cause output and emissions to expand. A tax does little to

deter this response to the business cycle, and may even exacerbate volatility by making

investment more sensitive to productivity shocks (Fischer and Springborn 2011). A carbon tax is

also likely to allow greater transmission of business cycles across borders (Annicchiarico and

Diluiso 2019).

       An emissions intensity standard ­ fixing emissions per unit of output ­ offers a road in

between a tax or a cap. A positive productivity shock increases demand for emissions, but an

increase in output also loosens the emissions constraint, which is set per unit of output. As a

result, the emissions price rises, but to a lesser extent than with a fixed cap. The output-based

allocation of emissions allowances implicit in intensity targets also provides a general incentive

boost to output, leading to higher levels of investment and output than a cap or tax. However, in

terms of volatility, an intensity target does little to change how the macroeconomy responds to

business cycles, compared to no policy (Fischer and Springborn 2011).

       The above comparisons are largely based on stark policy choices. In practice, many

emissions trading systems adopt provisions with banking and borrowing that will allow

emissions price responses to macroeconomic shocks to be spread over time (e.g. Kollenberg and

Taschini 2019). Recognizing that the economy is composed of many sectors with different



                                                     30
emissions intensities, the influence of climate policy on macroeconomic volatility may depend

on the source of business cycle variation. For example, shocks related to the energy sector are

more likely to interact with climate policies than other productivity shocks (Dissou and

Karnizova 2016).

        Besides the pollution policies discussed above, macroprudential financial regulations,

designed to align environmental and financial stability objectives, are also shown to influence the

transmission of the business cycle. Green-biased regulations may bring down the volatility of

business cycle fluctuations, while favoring green investments and reducing the exposure of

financial intermediaries to assets at risk of stranding (Punzi 2018, Benmir and Roman 2020,

Diluiso et al. 2020, Carattini et al. 2021).


IV.b. Dynamically optimal policies and welfare

        Allowing policy variables to vary along with the business cycle gives more flexibility for

the policy to address market imperfections and improve welfare. Some policies, like

unemployment insurance, are clearly designed so that their intensity or stringency responds to

business cycles. For an environmental policy like a pollution tax or cap-and-trade system, the

goal would be to design it so that the stringency of the policy (the tax rate, or the level of the cap)

can vary in ways that keep emissions prices better aligned with marginal environmental damages

over the business cycle. However, in practice, for adaptive policies to do more good than harm

relative to fixed policies, not only must the adjustments be well-targeted, but the efficiency

advantages from the policy's variance over the cycle must outweigh any costs that might be

incurred by allowing it to vary. These costs could include administrative costs of the cyclical

adjustments, costs arising from households' or firms' uncertainties about policy values, increased

trading frictions or transaction costs, or even higher political economy barriers to

                                                      31
implementation. We return below to the question of how policymakers can introduce simple

rules requiring limited information to mimic "optimal" cyclical adjustments.

         Designing a policy like a tax so that its values in each period efficiently respond to

business cycle conditions is often called the Ramsey problem (Chari et al. 1994). Heutel (2012)

solves the Ramsey problem for both an emissions tax and cap-and-trade system, calibrated to the

US economy and carbon dioxide emissions. As we showed here in Figure 4 (using an updated

calibration of that earlier model), both the Ramsey-optimal carbon tax and the Ramsey-optimal

carbon emissions cap are procyclical, increasing during expansions and decreasing during

recessions. This implies that a carbon tax becomes more stringent during expansions and less

stringent during recessions, while a cap-and-trade system becomes less stringent during

expansions and more stringent during recessions.8 This pattern may provide a political economy

advantage for taxes over cap-and-trade, given that tax relief can be communicated to the public

during recessions, rather than a cap adjustment that would increase prices. However, under this

calibration the Ramsey-optimal carbon tax is more volatile than the Ramsey-optimal cap, which

may be a disadvantage of it.9

         To consider specifically how to design policy to adjust to the business cycle, Heutel

(2012) provides something close to "rules-of-thumb" based on GDP. Ideally, as mentioned in our

introductory paragraphs, business-cycle adjustments should be a policy feature that is introduced

from the start and operates according to a clear and transparent rule. Rules-based adjustments

would allow timely responses, avoiding the delay of passing new legislation or promulgating


         8
            The efficient carbon tax is procyclical despite the fact that the pollution stock is almost entirely
unchanged over the business cycle. This is because damages from pollution (calibrated from DICE) are expressed as
a fraction of gross output. Over the business cycle, that fraction does not change much since the pollution stock does
not change much, but gross output changes, and so therefore the marginal damages from pollution change, justifying
the procyclical efficient tax.
          9
            Gibson and Heutel (2020) and Carattini et al. (2021) also solve for Ramsey-efficient carbon taxes in
response to RBC shocks, with other market failures in their DSGE models.

                                                              32
amendments to regulations. They also would tie the hands of policymakers and avoid arbitrary

decisions once a shock materializes. If the regulator can set the policy stringency as a function of

lagged GDP (or its deviation from trend), then what is the function mapping GDP into the

efficient policy? Heutel (2012) finds that the efficient carbon tax rate increases by about 142% of

the deviation of output; for example, if output is 10% higher than trend in a particular quarter,

then the efficient carbon tax rate is 14.2% higher than trend in the following quarter. For the

efficient emissions cap, the response is 66% of the deviation of output; if output is 10% higher

than trend in a particular quarter, then the efficient carbon cap is 6.6% higher than trend in the

following quarter.10 In addition to or instead of GDP, regulators may use leading indicators to

forecast shocks. In the United States, for instance, prominent leading indicators are the

Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) and the Consumer Confidence Index (CCI).11

         How important are the business-cycle adjustments for welfare? Lintunen and Vilmi

(2013) compare the Ramsey-optimal emissions tax with a constant tax (they do not consider cap-

and-trade) and find slight differences in emissions but negligible overall economic effects.

Heutel (2012) notes that the welfare comparison can depend on the shock values (see following

subsection). Both papers are calibrated to greenhouse gas pollutants for which the accumulated

stock matters rather than the flow of emissions in any period. For flow pollutants, business cycle

policy adjustments may have larger welfare impacts than for stock pollutants, as we discuss in

section V.d below. Likewise, the question of whether a tax or a cap is more efficient in response




          10
             Karp and Traeger (2021) consider a similar exercise, where the cap in a cap-and-trade scheme can
endogenously adjust to macroeconomic and technology shocks, though not in a DSGE context.
          11
             Additional indicators that may be relevant for this exercise and could be examined in future research
include jobless claims and unemployment rates, yield curves, for instance for the 10-year Treasury bond, or stock
market returns. It is an open normative question whether environmental policy should be tied to GDP, rather than
jobs or the unemployment rate of the most disadvantaged members of society.

                                                             33
to business cycles can also depend on shock values, and the answer may differ for stock vs. flow

pollutants.


IV.c. Source of shocks

       Most of the papers that we have reviewed here use a real business cycle (RBC) model,

where cycles are fueled by exogenous shocks to aggregate productivity. Whether or not

productivity shocks are in fact a predominant driver of real-world business cycles is a question

up for debate in the broader macroeconomic literature.12 More specifically, two recent papers

investigate the source of emissions fluctuations over the business cycle, and both find that other

types of shocks besides productivity shocks--such as shocks to energy efficiency, specific

technologies, or non-environmental policies--are important drivers.

       Khan et al. (2019) empirically study the drivers of emissions variation in the US,

including monetary and government spending shocks as additional sources of uncertainty.

They consider six different shocks ­ anticipated and unanticipated neutral technology (TFP)

shocks, anticipated and unanticipated investment-specific technology shocks, government

spending policy shocks, and monetary policy shocks ­ and find empirically that the largest

impact on pollution among these shocks comes from the anticipated investment-specific

technology shock. Jo and Karnizova (2021) provide a similar analysis, including shocks to

energy efficiency that can cause a negative correlation between output and emissions. Jo and

Karnizova (2021) identify shocks that can cause emissions and output to be negatively rather

than positively correlated with each other, and they find that these types of shocks explain almost

half of the overall volatility of emissions. They argue that shocks to energy efficiency are the



       12
            For example, see Christiano et al. (2003), Galí and Rabanal (2004), and Angeletos et al. (2020).

                                                              34
primary example of these negative-correlation shocks. Since other types of shocks may have

different implications for the relationship between business cycles and emissions and, as Jo and

Karnizova (2021) suggest, some shocks cause emissions and output to move in opposite

directions, then it is likely that the optimal response of policy to these shocks is different than the

optimal response to productivity shocks. Unfortunately, as of today, the literature has little to say

about how policy can respond to these types of shocks, so more research is needed to shed light

on this question.

       In the context of E-DSGE models, some initial indication of the importance of the source

of shocks is given by Dissou and Karnizova (2016), who study sector-specific productivity

shocks. Their main finding is that under productivity shocks localized to energy sectors, a carbon

tax outperforms a cap in welfare terms, although it leads to higher volatility of macroeconomic

aggregates. However, for shocks to sectors other than energy-intensive sectors, a tax and a cap

(even in the absence of intertemporal considerations like banking) have statistically equivalent

welfare implications. This result indicates that including flexibility mechanisms may be more

important for quantity-based policies, especially when energy sector volatility is a primary issue.


IV.d. Interaction with other policies or distortions

       Policies targeting pollutants that are widespread throughout the economy, such as carbon

dioxide emissions, are likely to give rise to equally pervasive effects on macroeconomic

responses to other policies and market distortions. Carbon prices and regulations influence a

range of household and producer behavior, which may have non-trivial implications for the

frequency and severity of business cycles.

       Climate change is not the only policy issue of macroeconomic importance. Policymakers

must grapple with market power and barriers to competition, frictions in labor markets that result

                                                       35
in excess unemployment, regulations or behavioral practices that impede the adjustment of prices

and wages, and financial market imperfections that may elevate the cost of borrowing and limit

the amount of credit. The literature has pointed out that simultaneously addressing environmental

issues and other market failures is particularly challenging in the presence of different sources of

uncertainty. From this perspective, the literature on environmental policy and business cycles has

drawn attention toward the interactions between environmental regulations and other policies,

especially those aimed at stabilizing the economy over the business cycle, such as monetary

policy, financial regulations, and labor market policies.

       The underlying monetary policy affects optimal environmental policy design in response

to exogenous shocks. Depending on the degree to which monetary policy reacts to the level of

economic activity and stabilizes the economy, the optimal carbon price may be more or less

procyclical, relative to what one would expect without monetary accommodation (see

Annicchiarico and Di Dio 2015, 2017). The interaction also goes both ways: the stronger the

negative environmental externality, the less accommodative--and so the more stringent--the

optimal monetary policy should be to avoid excess expansion and emissions. In addition, an

ambitious greening policy may produce large fluctuations in consumer prices. In this sense,

unanticipated and abrupt climate actions may potentially represent a challenge for monetary

stability (e.g. Economides and Xepapadeas 2018; Carattini et al. 2021).

       Some unconventional monetary policies aim at changing the composition of central

banks' balance sheets toward green assets. Early studies on the effects of such green-biased

quantitative easing programs point to a very limited scope of these policies in greening the

economy, as well as little difference in their effectiveness in reviving the economy following an

adverse shock as compared to market-neutral quantitative easing programs (see Benmir and



                                                    36
Roman 2020, Diluiso et al. 2020 and Nispi Landi and Ferrari 2020). However, emerging

analyses of the effects of the introduction of non-neutral financial regulatory schemes, such as

green-supporting and/or brown-penalizing regulations (see D'Orazio and Popoyan 2019),

suggest that by inducing a portfolio reallocation of financial intermediaries toward green

investments, these schemes encourage the greening process and reduce the exposure of banks to

climate-sensitive assets, mitigating the financial effects of stranded assets (see Punzi 2018,

Benmir and Roman 2020, Diluiso et al. 2020, Carattini et al. 2021).

       Finally, labor market frictions--such as the costs of searching for employment, relocating

for a job, or finding suitable employees--also affect environmental policy over the business

cycle. Such frictions are often represented as congestion problems: adding an unemployed

worker to the pool of job seekers reduces everyone else's probability of finding a job, but raises

the probability for hiring firms of finding a good match. Similarly, more job vacancies make it

harder for firms but easier for unemployed workers to find a match. Depending on how these

balance out, the level of employment may be inefficiently high (too many vacancies) or low (too

many job seekers). Economic efficiency then requires combining a pollution policy (e.g., carbon

tax) with a labor market policy (e.g. a tax or subsidy on job creation), so as to jointly address the

environmental externality and labor market imperfections. However, when the labor market

instrument is unavailable, the optimal design of the emission tax is more challenging: the optimal

carbon tax will be less or more procyclical depending on whether the market delivers an

inefficiently high or low employment level. Gibson and Heutel (2020) find in their preferred

calibration that the procyclicality of the efficient carbon tax is only half as high once labor

market frictions are accounted for. The existence of labor frictions and unemployment would




                                                     37
then provide a further rationale, based on equity as well as efficiency, for designing a state-

contingent environmental policy.



V. Remaining questions

       A number of important questions related to environmental policies and business cycles

remain to be addressed. In this section, we categorize some promising directions for future

research.


V.a. Heterogeneous agents and distribution of impacts

       Over the recent decades, building on the work of Hopenhayn (1992) and Aiyagari (1994),

DSGE models have gone beyond the representative firm and household assumptions to

incorporate micro-level heterogeneity. This incorporation has broadened the range of problems

that can be studied in business cycle analysis. The attention is no longer on the study of

aggregate dynamics, rather on the analysis of the evolution of the distribution of heterogeneous

agents in response to aggregate and/or idiosyncratic shocks.13

       On the production side, firms can differ in terms of size, efficiency, products, production

processes, access to credit, and innovation ability. The entry and exit of heterogeneous firms

shape the aggregate fluctuations in economic activity and the associated creation and destruction

of jobs. Firms can also differ in their abatement capacity, can be more or less polluting, or can

differ in their innovation in clean technologies. In this context, aggregate dynamics and the

performance of pollution policies will also be influenced by composition effects, due to the

reallocation of market shares among heterogeneous firms. The underlying environmental


       13
            See e.g. Heathcote et al. (2009), Clementi and Palazzo (2016), and Kaplan et al. (2018).


                                                                38
regulation is likely to affect firm dynamics and eventually aggregate productivity, GDP, and

employment. On the other hand, the changing composition of the production structure in

response to shocks may affect policy effectiveness and optimal design.

       Households, meanwhile, can differ in terms of age, wealth, skills, income, occupation,

portfolio composition, access to credit, and expectations. All these dimensions matter for many

of households' economic decisions and can be relevant for the propagation mechanisms of

shocks and for the impact of policies falling in various domains. Incorporating heterogeneous

households in an environmental business cycle model may open up, for instance, questions about

the impact of pollution policies on inequality and on wealth reallocation.

       The literature to date has largely avoided issues of equity, but existing results have

important implications for the two main observations that follow. First, the models demonstrate

that efficient emissions are less pro-cyclical than they would be in laissez faire. The efficient

level of climate policy's stringency (e.g., the carbon tax rate) is lower in recessions than in

expansions. This conclusion, however, neglects the distributional implications of policy,

including carbon tax revenues. Redistributing revenues in a lump-sum way, as "carbon

dividends," would be progressive (Cronin et al. 2018). The federal carbon tax of Canada, for

instance, makes about 70% of Canadians financially better off, disproportionately improving the

livelihood of low-income households (PBO 2019). It is not obvious, then, how reducing a carbon

tax in times of recession, and thus the size of carbon dividends to households, would affect

equity, especially when accounting for the fact that utility from dividends may decrease with

income, so that a disproportionate impact on low-income households would disproportionally

impact overall utility, even assuming a homogeneous effect of the recession on households. Such

a research question could be addressed by introducing heterogeneous households, for instance to



                                                      39
reflect income distribution, and several ways of redistributing tax revenues or revenues from

auctioning permits. Such ways may also include the possibility of shifting part of the dividends

over time, i.e. from good times to bad times, although this solution would also need to be defined

ex ante to avoid any arbitrariness and ensure that citizens' trust in the government is not eroded.

improving the livelihood of low-income households (PBO 2019). It is not obvious, then, how

reducing a carbon tax in times of recession, and thus the size of carbon dividends to households,

would affect equity, especially when accounting for the fact that utility from dividends may

decrease with income, so that a disproportionate impact on low-income households would

disproportionally impact overall utility, even assuming a homogeneous effect of the recession on

households. Such a research question could be addressed by introducing heterogeneous

households, for instance to reflect income distribution, and several ways of redistributing tax

revenues or revenues from auctioning permits.

       Second, the efficient level of regulation, which accounts for the business cycle, implies

both lower emissions and lower employment than the unregulated equilibrium (Gibson and

Heutel 2020). If labor market frictions imply that vacancies are too high, then the enviromental

policy creates an additional efficiency benefit by reducing the labor market distortion. However,

accounting for distributional effects on who is employed and who is not in a recession may lead

to different policy implications, in particular if low-income households, who derive a higher

utility from their salary, would be more affected by layoffs driven by recessionary forces. The

standard framework could thus be extended to include distributional effects in job creation and

destruction, as well as interactions with other policies, including policies aimed at fostering

economic recovery (e.g. stimulus packages) or redirecting the economy toward cleaner

production modes (e.g. Green New Deal). Also in this case, part of the revenues could be banked



                                                     40
during good times to fund Green New Deals in bad times, with the abovementioned condition

about embedding such mechanism in the design of the policy since the outset to avoid

arbitrariness still applying.


V.b. Interaction between environmental and other public policies

         Environmental policies are not the only ones that respond to market changes over the

business cycle. Many topics related to the interaction between environmental and other policies

remain either unexplored or still in early stages. Prime targets for further research on

environmental policy interactions are fiscal policy, trade policy, monetary policy, and financial

regulation.

         Fiscal policy leads that list, because tax policies and government spending tend to be

counter-cyclical themselves (at least at the federal level in the US). Furthermore, environmental

priorities are increasingly being incorporated into fiscal responses: At present, many post-

pandemic recovery plans around the world include green stimulus packages to both restart the

economy and favor the transition to a cleaner and more sustainable path, including the Recovery

Plan for Europe, the American Rescue Plan, and the proposed American Jobs Plan. Such fiscal

responses are likely to influence the optimal adjustment of stringency of carbon pricing

regulations, for example. These issues could be addressed by modeling the public sector in more

detail, accounting for the composition of public spending (capital spending and current spending)

and for different tax instruments.14

         Trade policy can be intertwined with climate policy, with important business cycle

implications. The most obvious example is represented by carbon border adjustments, which are


         14
             As an example, the design of the optimal dynamic carbon tax should be made in conjunction with otherpre-
existing tax instruments, as recently shown by Barrage (2020).

                                                               41
currently receiving serious consideration from the European Commission in the context of the

Green Deal, at least for trialing in selected sectors covered by the EU ETS. Besides the direct

effects that the introduction of such a policy may have on border prices and trade flows, one may

expect it to have an influence on the international propagation of the business cycle. The study of

this issue requires the use of fully fledged open economy models in which countries are

interlinked with each other and where the different steps of the production process are located

across different countries. Further, the fact that different countries may be on different points of

the business cycle may or may not justify deviations from an equal carbon price for domestic and

foreign production. The same logic would apply to a global carbon tax or system of harmonized

carbon taxes, which have both attracted substantial attention in recent times by scholars (Hoel

1992; Thalmann 2013; Weitzman 2014; Nordhaus 2015; Cramton et al. 2017; Stiglitz et al. 2017;

Weitzman 2017; Carattini et al. 2019; IMF 2019) and policymakers, with for instance the

International Monetary Fund pushing for a minimum carbon price among large emitters covering

about 80% of global greenhouse gas emissions. In this case, the reference price (and escalator)

may include some room for idiosyncratic business cycle adjustments, so that countries can adjust

to the business cycle without leaving a carbon pricing coalition. Of course, it is also important in

this case that the business cycle argument is not abused by domestic or foreign vested interests.

       Regarding the implications for monetary policy, future research should address the

challenges posed by physical and transition risks to different monetary policy regimes and study

how different carbon pricing policies are likely to affect inflation dynamics. Central banks and

financial regulatory authorities are increasingly interested in climate-related issues (e.g. Carney

2015, Vermeulen et al. 2018, Rudebusch 2021). The debate revolves around the need to enrich

their mandate by opening the door to climate challenges in the conduct of monetary policy and in



                                                     42
the design of the financial regulatory framework (see Campiglio et al. 2018, D'Orazio and

Popoyan 2019). Hence, future research should also explore more in depth the possibility of

incorporating climate objectives in the mandate of central banks. This would mainly imply

giving up market neutrality in asset buying and would enlarge the area of activity of central

banks and their tools.

       Concerning financial regulation, the literature on climate-related financial system risks is

still nascent; further studies could contribute to move the frontier further and shed additional

light on how to design a macroprudential regulatory framework able to favor green investments,

reduce climate-related financial risk, and possibly also preserve financial stability. Numerous

green macroprudential tools have been proposed (e.g., brown-penalizing and green-supporting

capital requirements, green-biased liquidity regulation, differentiated reserves requirements),

calling for further research investigating their potential ability to align environmental and

financial objectives.


V.c. Suboptimal policy stringency and non-pricing policies

       The E-DSGE literature tends to assume that environmental policy's stringency can be set

to balance marginal costs and benefits in its steady-state, from which it should fluctuate

"optimally" in response to productivity shocks. As discussed in the introduction to this paper,

important constraints can prevent environmental policies from reaching their optimal level, much

less adjusting with the business cycle.

       In the case of climate change in particular, while economists have yet to agree on the

"optimal" level of carbon pricing--for instance exactly how high the social cost of carbon is--a

general consensus has formed that it should be well above current levels (Howard and Sylvan

2015). Carbon pricing remains the favorite policy tool of economists to tackle climate change

                                                     43
(see, e.g., Goulder and Parry 2008; Aldy et al. 2010; Baranzini et al. 2017; Stiglitz et al. 2017).

In the decade since 2010, when it covered about 5% of global greenhouse gas emissions, carbon

pricing has expanded rapidly and currently covers about 22.5% of global greenhouse gas

emissions; however, only for a few schemes do they exceed $50 per ton of CO2 (World Bank

2020).

         Hence, an important question that the literature has arguably yet to tackle is whether, or

to what extent, environmental policies that are set at a "suboptimally" low level of stringency

should also adjust to the business cycle. In this context, three possible scenarios merit

investigation: 1) a scenario in which the policy does not adjust to the business cycle; 2) a

scenario in which the policy does adjust to the business cycle; and 3) a scenario in which the

policy adjusts, upward, during economic booms, but does not adjust downward during

recessions. Further, the uncertainty surrounding climate damages may call for more price

certainty than would otherwise be the case. Business cycle adjustments may also be embedded in

a price trajectory that accounts for learning as in Bayesian models (Kelly and Kolstad 1999;

Kelly and Tan 2015).

         Additional attention should be paid to the design of environmental policies--particularly

banking and borrowing provisions in cap-and-trade systems--and how they respond to business

cycles. Pizer and Prest (2020) show in a micro model that when governments optimally adjust

policies to shocks, quantity regulation with intertemporal allowance trading can have advantages

over price regulation, due to the intertemporal transmission of expectations into prices. Lintunen

and Kuusela (2018) incorporate such expectations into a business-cycle model, with a regulator

that sets the periodic cap so that the number of banked allowances together with the new ones

equals the desired cap level. Expected future permit prices create an effective floor for current



                                                     44
prices, allowing the regulator room to increase the emission cap when needed to avoid the risk of

undesirably high prices. The result of active allowance supply management is less volatile permit

prices and less buildup of banked allowances in a downturn than without banking.

        Pizer and Prest (2020) caution that if governments set policy inefficiently or firms

imperfectly anticipate policy changes, taxes have advantages again. In this respect, Aldy and

Armitage (2020) study how cap-and-trade systems lead to price uncertainty, since shocks can

affect how a given cap is priced. When the investment in pollution abatement is irreversible,

excessive volatility in the allowance prices can increase the effective cost of achieving a given

mitigation target. On the other hand, this price uncertainty can also have a dampening effect on

irreversible investments in new capital goods. These issues should be explored in macro models.

More generally, most of the literature to date has made stark policy comparisons between taxes

and caps, but in practice many design features--such as free allocation, alternative compliance

options, and international linking, as well as certain built-in adjustment mechanisms like price

floors, safety valves, and quantity-based triggers--are increasingly included and may have

macroeconomic implications.

       Another aspect of suboptimal policy design recognizes that a great number of

environmental policies do not price carbon explicitly or even implicitly. Clean energy standards

or market share mandates for renewable generation, biofuels, or zero-emission vehicles are

common tools in transition policy portfolios. While they may impose an implicit tax on sources

that do not qualify as clean, they do not distinguish among the carbon intensity of nonqualifying

sources. Similarly, mandatory phase-outs of coal-fired generation or internal combustion engine

vehicles do not differentiate among the carbon profiles of non-prohibited sources. However,

these types of target-based approaches do impose constraints on the economy, and the shadow



                                                    45
values of those constraints will respond to business cycles. The Green New Deal proposal

framework in the US (H.Res.109; 116th Congress), for instance, does not even mention carbon

pricing. Incorporating non-pricing mechanisms--and especially multiple and overlapping ones--

into macroeconomic models is challenging, but a worthy area for future research. Finally, the

issue of enforcement or imperfect monitoring may be importantly related to business cycles. For

example, as state revenues fluctuate, the resources devoted to enforcement may also fluctuate,

and how optimal policy or optimal enforcement responds to those fluctuations remains to be

explored. That is, it is possible that the cyclicality of enforcement affects the cyclicality of

emissions, beyond what is usually considered in analyses of optimal tax rates or caps.


V.d. Non-GHG pollutants

       Most of the literature has focused on climate policy rather than policies for other

environmental issues and pollutants. This view is understandable, since the broader

environmental policy literature is increasingly focused on climate change and greenhouse gases.

Hence, the focus of our paper is also mostly on climate change.

       However, the relationship between business cycles and environmental policy may be

equally or more important for non-GHG pollutants. Most GHGs, for instance such as carbon

dioxide, are long-lived stock pollutants that stay in the atmosphere for decades. Business-cycle-

level fluctuations in emissions have little effect on the aggregate stock of atmospheric carbon,

which is what affects climate change. This can be seen in Figure 2--over the business cycle the

pollution stock () stays nearly constant though quarterly emissions () vary considerably. For

this reason, the marginal benefits of climate mitigation stay relatively stable.

       Many other pollutants are primarily flow pollutants, remaining in the environment and

affecting the economy only for a short period. For these pollutants, business-cycle fluctuations in

                                                      46
emissions can have serious effects on their damages. For example, ozone damages can vary

considerably even over the course of a single day (Adler and Severnini 2020). As we discussed

in section IV.b., this may mean that the welfare benefit of policies that dynamically adjust to

business cycles is higher for non-greenhouse-gas policy, since the cyclical adjustments in the

policy values are able to respond to the cyclicality of damages. E-DSGE models solving for

optimal policy or evaluating the effects of policy over the business cycle should study flow

pollutants like ozone or sulfur dioxide. Furthermore, even for analyses of climate policy, the co-

benefits of reduced emissions of flow pollutants represent a substantial fraction of the social cost

of carbon (Parry et al. 2015), meaning that incorporation of these benefits in business cycle

models is crucial. Finally, regulation of pollutants other than greenhouse gases may be more

likely to be closer to what economists tend to consider the appropriate level of stringency (e.g.

Shapiro and Walker 2020).

       However, it is not certain that business cycle considerations are always more important

for non-GHG flow pollutants than for GHG stock pollutants. Because a stock pollutant

accumulates, the effect on damages of a cyclical increase in emissions (from a business cycle

expansionary period) will last longer, as will the effect from a cyclical decrease in emissions. If

policy fails to account for these cycles, then this variation in damages will extend over a longer

period than it would under flow pollutants. It is thus an open empirical question as to whether or

not cycles are more important in policy design for stock and flow pollutants, and so studying this

question is crucial.



VI. Conclusion

       To explore the relationship between business cycles and environmental policy, we have

reviewed the growing literature using dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models to

                                                     47
study the effects of policy over business cycles and the response of optimal policy to cyclical

fluctuations. The majority of this literature focused on price-based climate policies, including

carbon taxes and cap-and-trade, with additional economic features like new-Keynesian price

rigidities. We highlight several important findings from this literature that are most relevant to

policymakers, who may seek to craft policy to respond to business cycles. We also offer

suggestions for important policy-relevant questions that remain unanswered, to guide the future

of the literature.




                                                     48
References

Adler, David, and Edson R. Severnini. Timing Matters: Shifting Economic Activity and Intra-
     Day Variation in Ambient Ozone Concentrations. IZA-Institute of Labor Economics, 2020.
Aiyagari, S. Rao. "Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving." The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 109, no. 3 (1994): 659-684.
Aldy, Joseph E., and Sarah Armitage. "The cost-effectiveness implications of carbon price
     certainty." In AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 110, pp. 113-18. 2020.
Aldy, Joseph E., Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W. H. Parry, and William A. Pizer.
     "Designing Climate Mitigation Policy." Journal of Economic Literature 48, no. 4 (2010):
     903­34.
Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. "Business-cycle
     anatomy." American Economic Review 110, no. 10 (2020): 3030-70.
Angelopoulos, Konstantinos, George Economides, and Apostolis Philippopoulos. "First-and
       second-best allocations under economic and environmental uncertainty." International
       Tax and Public Finance 20, no. 3 (2013): 360-380.
Annicchiarico, Barbara, and Fabio Di Dio. "Environmental policy and macroeconomic dynamics
       in a new Keynesian model." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management no.
       69 (2015): 1-21.
Annicchiarico, Barbara, and Fabio Di Dio. "GHG emissions control and monetary policy."
       Environmental and Resource Economics 67 no. 4 (2017): 823-851.
Annicchiarico, Barbara, and Francesca Diluiso. "International transmission of the business cycle
       and environmental policy." Resource and Energy Economics no. 58 (2019): 101112.
Banque de France. "Greening the Financial System: The New Frontier." Financial Stability
       Review. Banque de France, 2019.
Baranzini, Andrea, Jeroen C. J. M. van den Bergh, Stefano Carattini, Richard B. Howarth,
       Emilio Padilla, and Jordi Roca. "Carbon Pricing in Climate Policy: Seven Reasons,
       Complementary Instruments, and Political Economy Considerations." Wiley
       Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 8, no. 4 (2017).
Barnett, Michael. "The Estimated Impacts of Climate Policy Risk," 2020.
Barrage, Lint. "Optimal dynamic carbon taxes in a climate­economy model with distortionary
       fiscal policy." The Review of Economic Studies 87, no. 1 (2020): 1-39.

                                                  49
Battiston, Stefano, Antoine Mandel, Irene Monasterolo, Franziska Schütze, and Gabriele
     Visentin. "A climate stress-test of the financial system." Nature Climate Change 7, no. 4
     (2017): 283-288.
Benmir, Ghassane, and Josselin Roman. "Policy interactions and the transition to clean
     technology." Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment,
     Working Paper, no. 368, (2020).
Burtraw, D. and A. Keyes. "Recognizing Gravity as a Strong Force in Atmosphere Emissions
       Markets." 47 Agric. & Resource Econ. Rev. 201 (2018).
Campiglio, Emanuele, Yannis Dafermos, Pierre Monnin, Josh Ryan-Collins, Guido Schotten,
       and Misa Tanaka. "Climate change challenges for central banks and financial regulators."
       Nature Climate Change 8, no. 6 (2018): 462-468.
Carattini, Stefano, Maria Carvalho, and Sam Fankhauser. "Overcoming Public Resistance to
       Carbon Taxes." Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 9, no. 5 (2018): e531.
Carattini, Stefano, Garth Heutel, and Givi Melkadze. "Climate Policy, Financial Frictions, and
       Transition Risk." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #28525 (2021).
Carattini, Stefano, Steffen Kallbekken, and Anton Orlov. "How to Win Public Support for a
       Global Carbon Tax." Nature 565, no. 7739 (2019): 289­91.
Carattini, Stefano, and Suphi Sen. "Carbon Taxes and Stranded Assets: Evidence from
       Washington State." CESifo Working Paper Series. CESifo Group Munich, 2019.
Carney, Mark. "Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon - Climate Change and Financial Stability."
       London: Bank of England, 2015.
Chari, Varadarajan V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Patrick J. Kehoe. "Optimal fiscal policy in a
       business cycle model." Journal of Polítical Economy 102, no. 4 (1994): 617-652.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. "On DSGE
       models." Journal of Economic Perspectives 32, no. 3 (2018): 113-40.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson. What happens after a
       technology shock?. No. w9819. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2003.
Clementi, Gian Luca, and Berardino Palazzo. "Entry, exit, firm dynamics, and aggregate
       fluctuations." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8, no. 3 (2016): 1-41.
Comerford, David, and Alessandro Spiganti. "The carbon bubble: climate policy in a fire-sale
       model of deleveraging." Meeting Papers 734, Society for Economic Dynamics (2017).

                                                   50
Cramton, Peter, David JC MacKay, Axel Ockenfels, and Steven Stoft, eds. Global Carbon
       Pricing: The Path to Climate Cooperation. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2017.
Cronin, Julie Anne, Don Fullerton, and Steven Sexton. "Vertical and Horizontal Redistributions
       from a Carbon Tax and Rebate." Journal of the Association of Environmental and
       Resource Economists 6, no. S1 (2018): S169­208.
Dafermos, Yannis, Maria Nikolaidi, and Giorgos Galanis. "Climate change, financial stability
       and monetary policy." Ecological Economics 152 (2018): 219-234.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pedro Dal Bó, and Erik Eyster. "The Demand for Bad Policy When Voters
       Underappreciate Equilibrium Effects." Review of Economic Studies 85, no. 2 (2018):
       964­98.
Del Negro, Marco, Michele Lenza, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. What's up with
       the Phillips Curve?. No. w27003. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
Diluiso, Francesca, Barbara Annicchiarico, Matthias Kalkuhl, and Jan Christoph Minx. "Climate
     Actions and Stranded Assets: The Role of Financial Regulation and Monetary Policy."
     CESifo WP no. 8486 (2020).
Dissou, Yazid, and Lilia Karnizova. "Emissions cap or emissions tax? A multi-sector business
     cycle analysis." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 79 (2016): 169-
     188.
Doda, Baran. "Evidence on business cycles and CO2 emissions." Journal of Macroeconomics, 40
     (2014): 214-227.
D'Orazio, Paola, and Lilit Popoyan. "Fostering green investments and tackling climate-related
     financial risks: Which role for macroprudential policies?" Ecological Economics 160
     (2019): 25-37
Economides, George, and Anastasios Xepapadeas. "Monetary policy under climate change."
     Bank of Greece Working Paper no. 247 (2018).
Economides, George, and Anastasios Xepapadeas. "The effects of climate change on a small
     open economy." Bank of Greece Working Paper 267 (2019).
European Commission (EC). 2012. Report From the Commission to the European Parliament
     and the Council: The state of the European carbon market in 2012. Brussels, 14.11.2012
     COM(2012) 652 final.



                                                  51
Feng, Kuishuang, Steven J. Davis, Laixiang Sun, and Klaus Hubacek. "Drivers of the US CO2
     Emissions 1997­2013." Nature Communications 6, no. 1 (2015): 7714.
Ferrari, Alessandro, and Valerio Nispi Landi. "Whatever it takes to save the planet? Central
     banks and unconventional green policy." ECB WP no. 2500 (2020).
Fischer, Carolyn, and Garth Heutel. "Environmental macroeconomics: Environmental policy,
     business cycles, and directed technical change." Annual Review of Resource Economics 5,
     no. 1 (2013): 197-210.
Fischer, C., L. Reins, D. Burtraw, D. Langlet, A. Lofgren, M. Mehling, S. Weishaar, L.
       Zetterberg, H. van Asselt, and K. Kulovesi. The Legal and Economic Case for an Auction
       Reserve Price in the EU Emissions Trading System. Columbia Journal of European Law
       26 (1) (Spring 2020): 1­35.
Fischer, Carolyn, and Michael Springborn. "Emissions targets and the real business cycle:
       Intensity targets versus caps or taxes." Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management 62, no. 3 (2011): 352-366.
Fourcade, Marion, Etienne Ollion, and Yann Algan. "The Superiority of Economists." Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 29, no. 1 (2015): 89­114.
Galí, Jordi, and Pau Rabanal. "Technology shocks and aggregate fluctuations: How well does the
     real business cycle model fit postwar US data?." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 19
     (2004): 225-288.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. "A model of unconventional monetary policy." Journal of
     Monetary Economics 58, no. 1 (2011): 17-34.
Gibson, John, and Garth Heutel. Pollution and Labor Market Search Externalities Over the
     Business Cycle. No. w27445. National Bureau of Economic Research, (2020).
Goulder, Lawrence H. "Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend: A Reader's Guide."
     International Tax and Public Finance 2, no. 2 (1995): 157­83.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Ian W. H. Parry. "Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy."
     Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 2, no. 2 (2008): 152­74.
Hahn, Robert W. "Economic Prescriptions for Environmental Problems: How the Patient
     Followed the Doctor's Orders." Journal of Economic Perspectives 3, no. 2 (1989): 95­114.
Harrington, Winston, Richard D. Morgenstern, and Peter Nelson. "On the Accuracy of
     Regulatory Cost Estimates." 19 J. POL'Y ANALYSIS & MGMT. 297 (2000).

                                                   52
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. "Quantitative
       macroeconomics with heterogeneous households." Annual Review of Economics 1, no. 1
       (2009): 319-354.
Hepburn, Cameron, Karsten Neuhoff, William Acworth, Dallas Burtraw, and Frank Jotzo. "The
       Economics of the EU ETS Market Stability Reserve." Journal of Environmental
       Economics and Management,, 80 (2016): 1­5.
Heutel, Garth. "How should environmental policy respond to business cycles? Optimal policy
       under persistent productivity shocks." Review of Economic Dynamics 15, no. 2 (2012):
       244-264.
Hoel, Michael. "Carbon Taxes: An International Tax or Harmonized Domestic Taxes?"
    European Economic Review 36, no. 2­3 (1992): 400­406.Holladay, J. Scott, Mohammed
    Mohsin, and Shreekar Pradhan. "Environmental Policy Instrument Choice and International
    Trade." Environmental and Resource Economics 74, no. 4 (2019): 1585-1617.
Hopenhayn, Hugo A. "Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium." Econometrica
     60, no. 5 (1992): 1127-1150.
Howard, Peter H., and Derek Sylvan. "The Economic Climate: Establishing Consensus on the
     Economics of Climate Change." 2015 AAEA & WAEA Joint Annual Meeting, July 26-28,
     San Francisco, California. 2015 AAEA & WAEA Joint Annual Meeting, July 26-28, San
     Francisco, California. Agricultural and Applied Economics Association, 2015.
IMF. "Fiscal Monitor: How to Mitigate Climate Change." Washington, DC: IMF, 2019.
Jaimes, Richard. "The dynamic effects of environmental and fiscal policy shocks." University of
     Tilburg, mimeo (2020).
Jo, Soojin, and Lilia Karnizova. "Energy Efficiency and CO2 Emission Fluctuations." Working
     Paper, (2021).
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. "Monetary policy according to
       HANK." American Economic Review 108, no. 3 (2018): 697-743.
Karp, Larry, and Christian Traeger. "Smart Caps." Centre for Economic Policy Research
       Discussion Paper 15941 (2021).
Kelly, David L., and Charles D. Kolstad. "Bayesian Learning, Growth, and Pollution." Journal
       of Economic Dynamics and Control 23, no. 4 (1999): 491­518.



                                                   53
Kelly, David L., and Zhuo Tan. "Learning and Climate Feedbacks: Optimal Climate Insurance
       and Fat Tails." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 72 (2015): 98­
       122.
Khan, Hashmat, Konstantinos Metaxoglou, Christopher R. Knittel, and Maya Papineau. "Carbon
       emissions and business cycles." Journal of Macroeconomics 60 (2019): 1-19.
Koch, Nicolas, Sabine Fuss, Godefroy Grosjean, Ottmar Edenhofer. 2014. Causes of the EU ETS
     price drop: Recession, CDM, renewable policies or a bit of everything? --New evidence,
     Energy Policy 73: 676-685.
Kollenberg, Sascha, and Luca Taschini. "Dynamic supply adjustment and banking under
     uncertainty in an emission trading scheme: The market stability reserve." European
     Economic Review 118 (2019): 213-226.
Le Quéré, Corinne, Robert B. Jackson, Matthew W. Jones, Adam J. P. Smith, Sam Abernethy,
    Robbie M. Andrew, Anthony J. De-Gol, et al. "Temporary Reduction in Daily Global CO2
    Emissions during the COVID-19 Forced Confinement." Nature Climate Change 10, no. 7
    (2020): 647­53.
Le Quéré, Corinne, Glen P. Peters, Pierre Friedlingstein, Robbie M. Andrew, Josep G. Canadell,
    Steven J. Davis, Robert B. Jackson, and Matthew W. Jones. "Fossil CO2 Emissions in the
    Post-COVID-19 Era." Nature Climate Change 11, no. 3 (2021): 197­99.
Lintunen, Jussi, and Olli-Pekka Kuusela. "Business Cycles and Emission Trading with

    Banking." European Economic Review 101 (2018): 397­417.

Lintunen, Jussi, and Lauri Vilmi. "On optimal emission control­Taxes, substitution and business
     cycles." Bank of Finland Research Discussion Paper 24 (2013).
Martin, Ralf, Mirabelle Muûls, Laure B. de Preux, and Ulrich J. Wagner. "Industry
     Compensation under Relocation Risk: A Firm-Level Analysis of the EU Emissions
     Trading Scheme." American Economic Review 104, no. 8 (2014): 2482­2508.
Michel, Philippe, and Gilles Rotillon. "Disutility of pollution and endogenous growth."
     Environmental and Resource Economics 6, no. 3 (1995): 279-300.
NFGS "Adapting Central Bank Operations to a Hotter World ­ Reviewing Some Options",
     Network for Greening the Financial System, 2021.




                                                   54
Nordhaus, William. "Optimal Greenhouse-Gas Reductions and Tax Policy in the `Dice' Model."
     American Economic Review 83, no. 2 (1993): 313­17.
Nordhaus, William. "Climate Clubs: Overcoming Free-Riding in International Climate Policy."
     American Economic Review 105, no. 4 (2015): 1339­70.
Nordhaus, William "Revisiting the Social Cost of Carbon." Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences 114, no. 7 (2017): 1518­23.
Nordhaus, William. "Evolution of modeling of the economics of global warming: Changes in the
     DICE model, 1992­2017." Climatic Change 148, no. 4 (2018): 623-640.
Parry, Ian, Chandara Veung, and Dirk Heine. "How Much Carbon Pricing Is in Countries' Own
    Interests? The Critical Role of Co-Benefits." Climate Change Economics 06, no. 04 (2015):
    1550019.
PBO. "Fiscal and Distributional Analysis of the Federal Carbon Pricing System." Office of the
Parliamentary Budget Officer, 2019.
Perino, Grischa, Michael Pahle, Fabian Pause, Simon QuminQuminQumin, Hannah Scheuing,
       and Maximilian Willner. "EU ETS stability mechanism needs new design." Chaire
       Économie du Climat Policy Brief 2021-1 (2021).
Persico, Claudia L., and Kathryn R. Johnson. 2021. "The Effects of Increased Pollution on
       COVID-19 Cases and Deaths." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
       102431.
Pindyck, Robert S. "Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?" Journal of
       Economic Literature 51, no. 3 (2013): 860­72.
Pizer, William A. and Brian C. Prest. "Prices versus Quantities with Policy Updating." Journal
       of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 7 (3) (2020): 483­518.
Punzi, Maria T. "Role of bank lending in financing green projects: A dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium approach." In Sachs, J., Woo, W. T., Yoshino, N., and Taghizadeh-Hesary,
     F., editors, Handbook of Green Finance: Energy Security and Sustainable
     Development,Sustainable Development. Springer, (2019).
Ramelli, Stefano, Alexander F Wagner, Richard J Zeckhauser, and Alexandre Ziegler. "Investor
       Rewards to Climate Responsibility: Evidence from the 2016 Climate Policy Shock."
       Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.



                                                  55
Rebelo, Sergio. "Real Business Cycle Models: Past, Present and Future." Scandinavian Journal
         of Economics 107, no. 2 (2005): 217-238.
Rudebusch. Glenn D "Climate Change Is a Source of Financial Risk." FRBSF Economic Letter,
2021.
Sen, Suphi, and Marie-Theres von Schickfus. "Climate Policy, Stranded Assets, and Investors'
         Expectations." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 100 (2020):
         102277.
Shapiro, Joseph S., and Reed Walker. "Is Air Pollution Regulation Too Stringent?" National
         Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.Stern, Nicholas. The Economics of Climate Change:
         The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Stern, Nicholas, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "The Social Cost of Carbon, Risk, Distribution, Market
         Failures: An Alternative Approach." No. w28472. National Bureau of Economic
         Research, 2021.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Nicholas Stern, Maosheng Duan, Ottmar Edenhofer, Gaël Giraud, Geoffrey
         Heal, Emilio Lèbre la Rovere, et al. "Report of the High-Level Commission on Carbon
         Prices." Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition, 2017.
Thalmann, Philippe. "Global Environmental Taxes." In Handbook of Research on
         Environmental Taxation, edited by Janet E. Milne and Mikael Skou Andersen.
         Cheltenham, UK ; Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Pub, 2013.
van den Bijgaart, Inge M., and Sjak Smulders. "Does a recession call for less stringent
        environmental policy? A partial-equilibrium second-best analysis." Environmental and
        Resource Economics 70, no. 4 (2018): 807-834.
Vermeulen, Robert, Edo Schets, Melanie Lohuis, Barbara Kolbl, David-Jan Jansen, and Willem
         Heeringa. "An Energy Transition Risk Stress Test for the Financial System of the
         Netherlands." DNB Occasional Studies. DNB Occasional Studies. Netherlands Central
         Bank, Research Department, 2018.
Weitzman, Martin L. "Can Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price Help to Internalize the Global
         Warming Externality?" Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
         Economists 1, no. 1/2 (2014): 29­49.
Weitzman, Martin L. "Voting on Prices vs. Voting on Quantities in a World Climate Assembly."
         Research in Economics 71, no. 2 (2017): 199­211.

                                                    56
World Bank. "State and Trends of Carbon Pricing--2020." Washington, DC, 2020.




                                               57
Figures

Figure 1--Impulse Response Functions ­ Centralized Efficient Model




Note: The productivity shock  increases exogenously in period 0, and all other variables
respond endogenously. The y-axis units are the percentage deviation from each variable's steady-
state value. The simulations are from the E-DSGE model in Heutel (2012) with updated
calibration as described in the text.




                                                  58
Figure 2--Business Cycle Simulation ­ Centralized Efficient Model




Note: Productivity shocks (not graphed here) are exogenously generated, and all other variables
respond endogenously. The y axis units are the percentage deviation from each variable's steady-
state value. The simulations are from the E-DSGE model in Heutel (2012) with updated
calibration as described in the text.




                                                  59
Figure 3--Business Cycle Simulation ­ Effects of Policies Set ex ante




Note: Productivity shocks (not graphed here, identical to those in Figure 2) are exogenously
generated, and all other variables respond endogenously. The top panel plots emissions, and the
bottom panel plots output, both in percentage deviation from each variable's steady-state value.
"IT," "Cap," and "Tax" denote the intensity standard, the emissions cap, and the emissions tax,
respectively.


                                                   60
Figure 4--Business Cycle Simulations--Efficient Policy




Note: Productivity shocks (not graphed here, identical to those in Figure 2) are exogenously
generated, and all other variables respond endogenously. The y-axis units are the percentage
deviation from each variable's steady-state value. The simulations are from the E-DSGE model
in Heutel (2012) with updated calibration as described in the text.




                                                 61
62
