                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FINANCIAL DOLLARIZATION IN EMERGING MARKETS:
             EFFICIENT RISK SHARING OR PRESCRIPTION FOR DISASTER?

                                         Lawrence Christiano
                                            Hüsnü Dalgic
                                          Armen Nurbekyan

                                         Working Paper 29034
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w29034


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2021




Dalgic's participation was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) through CRC TR 224 (Project C02). ¸Nurbekyan participated while employed by the
Central Bank of Armenia as Head of Macroeconomic Directorate. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29034.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Lawrence Christiano, Hüsnü Dalgic, and Armen Nurbekyan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Dollarization in Emerging Markets: Efficient Risk Sharing or Prescription for Disaster?
Lawrence Christiano, Hüsnü Dalgic, and Armen Nurbekyan
NBER Working Paper No. 29034
July 2021
JEL No. F3,F4,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper pushes back against two views about the effects of dollarization. First, there is a view
that the dollar is a device by which rich countries provide business cycle insurance to emerging
market (EME) countries. We find that the dollar is important for risk sharing, but the evidence
suggests that it is primarily a device to shift business cycle risk across different people within
individual EMEs and within rich countries rather than across countries. Second, there is a
widespread view that dollarization raises the risk of systemic banking and other crises. Although
we identify sources of fragility in some aspects of dollarization, the common view that financial
dollarization is a source of fragility is over-stated. Our insurance view about financial
dollarization and the lack of risks to financial stability emerges from a study of a large cross-
country dataset, as well as case studies for Peru and Armenia. We develop a simple model which
formalizes the insurance view, which is consistent with the key cross-country facts on interest
rate differentials, deposit dollarization and exchange rate depreciations in recessions.

Lawrence Christiano                              Armen Nurbekyan
Department of Economics                          Central Bank of Armenia
Northwestern University                          Yerevan
2001 Sheridan Road                               Armenia
Evanston, IL 60208                               anurbekyan@gmail.com
and NBER
l-christiano@northwestern.edu

Hüsnü Dalgic
University of Mannheim
dalgic@uni-mannheim.de




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29034
1       Introduction
The recent literature focuses on dollar-denominated financial instruments as a source of risk
sharing across countries.1 We argue here that those instruments may also be an important
mechanism for risk sharing among di erent agents within countries. Using data from 16
EMEs, we find that within-country risk sharing associated with dollar financial instruments
is greater than risk sharing between residents and the rest of the world.
    The notion that dollar financial assets contribute to risk sharing within emerging markets
(EME) is motivated by three observations:

  (a) In countries where the share of deposits denominated in dollars (`deposit dollarization')
      is high, the premium on the domestic interest rate over the exchange rate-adjusted
      dollar interest rate is also high.2 Since this premium is the price paid for holding
      dollar deposits, we infer that a principle source of cross-country variation in deposit
      dollarization reflects cross-country variations in the demand for dollar deposits.

 (b) In countries where deposit dollarization is high, the exchange rate tends to depreciate
     most in a recession (see Dalgic (2018)). This suggests that the reason for the observed
     cross country variation in the demand for dollar deposits is cross-country variation in
     the usefulness of the dollar as a hedge against business cycle income risk.

  (c) Non-financial firm dollar borrowing is reasonably similar in magnitude to dollar de-
      posits.

To us, these three observations suggest a particular narrative. Households who denominate
their deposits in dollars are purchasing business cycle insurance from the households who
own the firms which borrow in dollars. The `price' paid by the depositors for this insurance
is the premium on the local interest rate. The payo from the insurance is the spike in
the dollar return that occurs when the local currency depreciates in a recession. We report
empirical evidence on the above three observations. The last section describes a model which
formalizes our narrative.
    1
      This is a theme that has been advocated particularly forcefully in Gourinchas et al. (2010); Obstfeld et
al. (2010); Bernanke (2017).
    2
      By `dollar' assets we mean foreign assets from the perspective of EME's. Although in most EME's these
assets are in fact denominated in US dollars, in many cases they are in Euros or, for example, in Swiss Francs.
Our definition of `deposits' follows the convention on Central Bank websites: they include demand deposits
and time deposits. Evidence from Peru suggests that deposits are a major form of non-equity financial assets
for residents in an EME. Data from Peru indicate that deposits are by far the largest part of non-equity
claims by residents on local financial firms. Other claims by domestic residents include bank-issued bonds
and commercial paper, but these are a small portion of borrowing by banks from local residents in Peru. We
are grateful to Paul Castillo for this information about Peru.




                                                      1
    Before turning to the model, we must address the widespread view that financial dollar-
ization imposes a significant cost on EMEs. Under that view, financial dollarization increases
vulnerability to financial crisis and makes investment and employment sub-optimally volatile
in response to exchange rate fluctuations. If this view were correct, then financial dollariza-
tion may on net be welfare-reducing for an EME even if there were some insurance features
associated with it. However, we find that the widespread view about the dangers of financial
dollarization receives little support in the data. According to our results, the most important
variables for forecasting crises in EMEs are the VIX and the total dollar debt borrowed by
domestic residents from foreigners. A country's level of deposit dollarization does not signif-
icantly improve forecasts of crises once the latter two variables are included. Also, financial
dollarization does not appear to create significant over-reaction to exchange rate movements.
    It may at first seem puzzling that credit dollarization created by deposit dollarization is
not systematically related to crises. For this reason we examine, as a case study, firm-level
datasets for Peru and Armenia. These datasets provide information about the assets and
liabilities of individual firms, broken down by currency.3 Both data sets include periods of
significant domestic currency depreciation. So, if balance sheet e ects of depreciations were
important for non-financial firms, that should have been evident in these datasets. That the
e ects turned out to be small complements similar findings in other research discussed in
Section 5. Our data suggest that deposit dollarization does not raise the risk of financial
crises because the currency mismatch it creates is in the hands of low-leveraged firms that
can handle exchange rate fluctuations.
    The preceding analysis leaves open the possibility that while dollarization does not in-
crease the likelihood of crisis, it might nevertheless lead to excess volatility in employment
and investment. The firm-level data in Armenia and Peru, as well as the results in Bleakley
and Cowan (2008), suggest that the contribution of financial dollarization to volatility is
minimal.
    Our empirical results are based mostly on data from the 2000s, a period in which macro-
prudential regulation was taken very seriously. We infer that most of these regulations have
been very e ective. We conclude that, as long as sensible macro prudential regulations are
in place, financial dollarization is less risky than is widely supposed.
    We formalize the narrative suggested by findings (a)-(c), in the form of a two-period,
small open economy model. Our findings that balance sheet e ects appear not to play a
first-order role leads us to adopt a model which does not include the possibility of financial
crisis. Our narrative divides domestic residents into two groups: (i) worker-households who
make deposits in the first period and finance second period consumption using second period
income from labor and deposits; and (ii) household-firms that invest in the first period and
  3
      We thank Paul Castillo at the Central Bank of Peru for helping us to access these data.




                                                      2
earn income and consume in the second period. For simplicity, we refer to worker-households
as households and firm-households as firms.
    Firms and households naturally find themselves on opposite sides of domestic financial
markets. In period 1 households supply their savings in the form of deposits, and firms borrow
those savings to finance an investment that bears fruit in the second period. Both types of
household maximize a mean/variance utility function in second period consumption. Given
our assumption about utility, agents' period 1 financial decisions transparently decompose
into speculative and hedging motives. The speculative motive captures an agent's desire to
choose a portfolio that has a high expected return. Under the hedging motive, the agent is
concerned with choosing a portfolio that has a high payo in future states of the world in
which the agent's other sources of income are low.
    Our model has several shocks. However, the principle ones in our narrative are shocks
(e.g., an export demand shock) which cause the exchange rate to depreciate when domestic
incomes are low in period 2. Hedging considerations motivate households to hold their
deposits in an asset (a dollar asset ) that pays o in terms of foreign goods. Firms' hedging
motive, by contrast, makes them want to borrow using an asset (a peso asset ) that pays
o in terms of domestic goods.4 Financial markets in e ect allow these two types of agents
to engage in an insurance arrangement. Households receive insurance by saving in dollar
deposits.5 Other things the same, this requires that firms take dollar loans even though
they do not naturally want to do so because dollar loans are a bad hedge for them. Market
clearing encourages firms to borrow in dollars anyway and they are compensated for doing
so by a relatively low average interest rate on dollar assets. That low interest rate is in e ect
their reward for providing income insurance to households. The relatively low return that
households receive on dollar deposits is the price that they pay for the insurance.
    In our data, we observe variation in deposit dollarization across countries. We use our
model to interpret this as reflecting that di erent countries face somewhat di erent patterns
   4
      It is sometimes argued that being an exporter provides a firm that borrows in dollars with a `natural
hedge' against depreciations. For such a firm, when there is a depreciation its debt in peso terms goes up,
but this is partially o set (`hedged') by a jump in the peso value of what it sells. In our model this logic
depends on which shock is responsible for the depreciation. If the depreciation is caused by a negative shock
to foreign demand, then the peso value of what the exporter sells to foreigners falls in our model. As a
result, being an exporter is not a hedge against the exchange rate risk in a dollar loan when the primary
shock driving exchange rates is to export demand.
    5
      Our model only includes debt and loan markets in local currency and dollars. In the Online Technical
Appendix, we show that this environment is isomorphic to an alternative environment in which dollar debt
and loan contracts are not traded in EMEs. Instead, residents and foreign financiers participate in fully
collateralized long and short forward contracts in dollars while deposit and debt contracts are denominated
in local currency only. We do not emphasize the forward contract interpretation of our model because the
evidence suggests that derivative contracts are not generally used in EMEs. Using data from Colombia,
Alfaro et al. (2021) show that large firms do tend to use derivative instruments to hedge short term trade
credit, but they do not hedge FX debt which tends to be longer term.




                                                     3
of shocks.
    To verify that our narrative is coherent and does not have hidden counterfactual implica-
tions, we introduce additional structure. A reduced form demand curve summarizes foreign
demand for the domestic tradable good. To capture the incentives and willingness of foreign-
ers to to trade financial assets with domestic residents we introduce foreign financiers.6 In
part, we need to model foreign financiers to ensure that our narrative can plausibly address
why foreigners do not enter domestic financial markets to profit from, and thereby elimi-
nate, the premium on peso loans.7 In our model, foreign financiers are also mean-variance
households, and providing peso loans in the domestic financial market is a bad hedge for
them. The reason has to do with the primary shock in our model that makes the currency
depreciate in a recession. That shock is a disturbance to foreign demand for the period 2
domestically produced tradable good. We interpret that shock as a negative shock to foreign
Gross Domestic Product, which is positively correlated with the income of foreign financiers.
For this reason, peso loans, though they have a high yield, are a bad hedge for foreigners. In
e ect, foreigners are averse to lending in local currency markets for the same hedging reason
that households are. In our model the level of risk aversion is the same across foreigners
and both types of domestic agent. If our financiers did not have a hedging motive, then
our model would only be able to explain the high observed local interest rate premia with
the assumption that foreigners are extremely risk averse, compared to domestic residents.
We are not aware of evidence to support such an assumption, so we conclude that for our
narrative to be compelling it is important that local currency assets be a bad hedge for
financiers. This view is consistent with a theme that permeates the recent literature on the
Global Financial Cycle.8 The literature documents substantial comovement of asset prices
and other variables between EMEs and rich countries.
    In short, our narrative treats financial markets as a mechanism by which risk is allocated
among agents. Our emphasis is on the risk sharing between agents within an emerging market
economy, though we must also incorporate risk sharing between domestic and foreign agents.
The framework borrows heavily from Dalgic (2018). The framework also resembles the one
in Chari and Christiano (2019). The latter focuses on the role of commodity futures markets
as devices for providing insurance both between users and producers of commodities (they
   6
     For a discussion of foreign financiers, see Gabaix and Maggiori (Section I, 2015).
   7
     Formally, our analysis limits foreigners to providing finance by purchasing debt assets from domestic
financial firms. In practice, foreign finance also enters emerging market economies via foreign direct invest-
ment. Including foreign direct investment would be a straightforward extension of our model, but would
complicate the analysis. Since our empirical analysis does not require examining foreign direct investment
we decided that including foreign direct investment in the model would obscure its purpose: to provide a
simple, coherent economic interpretation of our empirical findings.
   8
     See, inter alia, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Lustig et al. (2011), Hassan (2013), Bruno and Shin
(2015)), Maggiori (2017), Farhi and Maggiori (2018), Gopinath and Stein (2018), Bahaj and Reis (2020),
Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020), Gourinchas et al. (2017) and Maggiori et al. (forthcoming).




                                                      4
resemble our households and firms) and outsiders (those resemble our foreign financiers).
    The first section below defines the concept of deposit dollarization, and the international
data set that we have constructed on that variable. Section 3 presents a key empirical
observation that motivates the analysis of this paper: deposit dollarization is greatest in
countries where the local currency depreciates most in a recession. We argue that the
resulting currency mismatch is largely held by domestic firms. As a result, they are the
primary suppliers of the insurance that dollar deposits provide to households. Section 4
examines the evidence that would show a connection between deposit dollarization and
financial crises if such a connection were pronounced. Looking at that evidence, we find that
there is little statistical relation between deposit dollarization and financial crises (both their
incidence as well as their cost if they occur). Section 5 reports our analysis of the Armenian
and Peruvian datasets. Section 6 presents our model and Section 7 provides concluding
remarks. Details are available in an online Technical Appendix.


2       Some Concepts and Deposit Dollarization Data
Let i denote the risk-free domestic nominal return earned by domestic residents on a local
currency bank deposits. Let iú denote the return, in domestic nominal terms, earned by
domestic residents on a risk-free foreign currency bank deposit. In particular, let e denote
the beginning-of-period t nominal exchange rate (local currency, per unit of foreign currency).
Then, the domestic return on a foreign currency deposit that has one-period gross nominal
return, R$ , in terms of domestic currency, is

                                             iú © R$ (eÕ /e) ,

where eÕ is the exchange rate at the beginning of the next period. Evidently, if R$ is risk-free
then iú is risky because of the uncertainty about eÕ .
   We define deposit dollarization for country i and year t, as

                             value of dollar deposits held by domestic residents
                   ,,i,t =                                                       ,                     (1)
                                  total deposits held by domestic residents

where both the numerator and denominator are expressed in local currency units. Our anal-
ysis is based on a database that we have constructed which extends the database constructed
in Levy-Yeyati (2006). We extend his data to 2018 and expand coverage from 124 to 140
countries.9
    9
   In practice, `deposits' are defined as demand deposits plus term deposits. In EMEs, deposits held by
domestic residents are by far the major component of non-equity bank liabilities to domestic residents. For
example, using data from the website of the Reserve Bank of Peru, we found that in December 2019, soles




                                                    5
    A summary of our data is provided in Figure 1. The figure describes the median and
first and third quartiles for deposit dollarization in the cross-section of countries for which
data are available.10

                                  Figure 1: Deposit Dollarization Data




   A key result from the figure is that though deposit dollarization shows a small tendency
to decline in the 2000s, the median remains near 20 percent. The upper quartile shows
that there remains a substantial group of countries with significant dollarization. The figure
indicates that we have the most coverage for the 2000s.


3      Key Result
We show that, across countries, deposit dollarization is greatest where the local currency
depreciates most in a recession. We show that none of the resulting currency mismatch
is held by banks and that roughly all of it is held in the form of dollar loans to domestic
deposits of Peruvian residents were 159,467 million soles (of which, 18,370 million soles are government
deposits). In the same month, resident dollar deposits were $31,549 million (government deposits were $613
million). The exchange rate in that month was 3.37 soles per dollar. So, total deposits in that month were
265,787 million soles. Other bank liabilities to residents were 14,253 million soles and $1,037 million. So,
total deposit liabilities held by residents were 94 percent of total liabilities to residents. Using these data, we
have that ,, in equation (1) is 0.40 in Peru for December 2019. We obtained banking data from the website
of the Turkish Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency. That website provides information about bank
deposit liabilities by currency and residency. This allows us to compute ,, (this is 0.55 in December, 2020).
  10
     The results in Figure 1 includes data for 10 countries that discourage deposit dollarization. These
countries are discussed in Subsection 3.1 below (see in particular the countries with blue labels in Figure 2).




                                                        6
non-financial firms. We argue dollar assets are used primarily to shift risk among households
in a given EME country, rather than among households across di erent countries.


3.1     The Insurance Hypothesis
A key result of our paper appears in Figure 2. Each of the 134 country observations in Figure
2 is indicated by the corresponding World Bank country code.11 The vertical axis depicts
the correlation, over the available sample for a particular country, between its real GDP and
the domestic good value of foreign currency, S/P, where P is the domestic consumer price
index.12 The horizontal axis corresponds to the country's average deposit dollarization rate
defined in equation (1). For each country the sample used to compute its correlation and
dollarization statistic are the same. In almost all cases, the sample is 2000-2018.13 The codes
for 125 countries are in black while the codes for 9 are in blue.14 The blue codes correspond
to countries that, according to Nicolo et al. (2003), restrict residents from holding domestic
dollarized deposits in 2000. The dashed line is the least squares line through the data with
black codes. If the blue-coded data are included, the least squares line changes by only a
small amount.
    To verify the robustness of the negative relationship in Figure 2, we constructed an
alternative version of the figure. In that version, the variables on the vertical and horizontal
axes are replaced with their residual after regressing on a set of control variables. The
controls include average inflation in the 1990s, as well as the average of several variables
in the 2000s: a measure of inequality (Gini coe cient); a World Bank measure of quality
of institutions; fuel as a share of exports; central bank reserves as a fraction of GDP; and
external debt as a share of GDP. The results, in terms of the slope of the regression line
  11
     We do not include results for 6 countries because we are missing at least one of GDP, CPI and the
exchange rate for these. The countries are Anguilla, Antigua, Latvia, Montserrat, Qatar, and Zimbabwe.
  12
     Both GDP and S/P are logged and first di erenced.
  13
     We do not have all the data for 2000-2018 for each of the 134 countries accounted for in Figure 2. The
binding constraint for a few countries on data availability is the deposit dollarization rate. But, as we can
see in Figure 1, we have data for virtually each country in the case of the sample, 2000-2018. In the few
countries for which data for the full sample are not available, we simply use the available data compute those
countries' statistics reported in Figure 2.
  14
     The nine countries are: Barbados (BRB), Dominica (DMA), Guatemala (GTM), Kosovo (KSV), Mexico
(MEX), Malaysia (MYS), Slovakia (SVK), Pakistan(PAK), and Thailand (THA). Being included in this list
of countries does not imply that the holding of dollar deposits is entirely forbidden. It may simply be that
the rules on holding dollar deposits are very restrictive. For example in Mexico residents may hold dollar
deposits, but only if they live within 20 kilometers of the US border. In Malaysia, residents may also hold
dollar deposits, but only if they intend to use them to pay dollar debt or things like educational expenses.
In Thailand, limits on dollar deposits were lifted in 2008, but we decided to leave Thailand in the list of
blue countries anyway. Two countries that Nicolo et al. (2003) characterize as restrictive are Ukraine and
Kazakhstan. We nevertheless include these among the black countries because they have credit dollarization
in excess of 20%. We infer that the restrictions against dollarized deposits in those countries must not be
very severe.




                                                      7
and the R2 , are essentially the same as reported in Figure 3. For the details, see Technical
Appendix Section A.1. We infer that the negative relationship in Figure 2 is not an artifact
of a country's institutions or its experience with past inflation, or the other variables in our
controls.

Figure 2: Countries in which the Currency Depreciates More in a Recession Have Greater
Deposit Dollarization




Notes: (i) statistic on vertical axis is correlation between the log di erence (in annual data) of real GDP and the log di erence
of S/P, where S denotes foreign currency per unit of domestic currency and P denotes the domestic consumer price index; (ii)
deposit dollarization is defined in equation 1; (iii) codes in the figure correspond to World Bank Country codes; (iv) the sample
for all but a few exceptions is 2000-2018 (see Figure 1) and the exceptional cases are missing a some observations in the early
2000s; the country codes indicated in blue indicate countries that restrict deposit dollarization according to Nicolo et al. (2003).



    One interpretation of the negative association in Figure 2 is that deposit dollarization
drives the correlation on the vertical axis via a balance sheet channel. Countries whose banks
have a large amount of dollar liabilities also make a large amount of dollar loans. This can
be seen in Figure 3, which displays the average over the 2000s of these variables, scaled by
total bank liabilities, in a cross-section of countries.15 According to the balance sheet channel,
other things the same, an exchange rate depreciation in a country with a high amount of
dollar loans results in lower output as borrowers with unhedged dollar debt are forced to
cut back on investment and employment. The expectation, under this hypothesis, is that if
regulations to restrict deposit dollarization were exogenously imposed in some country, then
  15
    In Subsection 3.2.1 below, we argue that there is virtually no currency mismatch in banks. Note that
the slope in Figure 3, though positive, is less than unity. Evidently, banks with higher dollar deposits back
them in part by dollar assets other than loans.




                                                                 8
exchange rate depreciations should be associated with smaller recessions in that country.
Thus, the correlation on the vertical axis of Figure 2 would be expected to be higher for
that country. But, Figure 2 indicates that that correlation is in fact lower than it is in other
countries with low dollarization and no restrictions.16 Perhaps this puzzle can be resolved
based on a failure of the exogeneity assumption.17 Still, Sections 4 and 5 below present more
evidence against the balance sheet hypothesis. There, we show that deposit dollarization
has no predictive power for financial crises or for the severity of a crisis when it happens.
Also, firm-level data suggest that in the wake of a currency depreciation, the response of
investment is not very di erent for firms with and without substantial currency mismatch
on their balance sheets.
    An alternative interpretation of the negative association in Figure 2 receives more support
in our analysis. Under that interpretation, it is the correlation on the vertical axis of Figure
that drives deposit dollarization. The idea is that in countries where the exchange rate
depreciates most in recessions, households hold a larger fraction of their saving in dollars
as a hedge against business cycle income risk. There are various reasons why a country's
currency might depreciate in recessions. For example, fluctuations in GDP may be dominated
by volatility in the demand for exports. Or, government policy might be inflationary in
recessions. A related possibility is that financial disturbances originating in the US (the
2008 financial crisis, or simply a monetary policy tightening) can create a recession in the
rest of the world and for safe-haven reasons lead to an appreciation of the dollar (see, for
example, Gourinchas et al. (2010)). We refer to the hedging interpretation of Figure 2 as
the insurance hypothesis.
    Under the insurance hypothesis the cross-country variation in dollar deposits is driven by
demand, and so the price of dollar deposits is expected to covary positively with quantity.
Specifically, for emerging market economies (EMEs) in which deposit dollarization is high,
the supply of dollars in local lending markets is high relative to the supply of local currency.
At the same time, hedging considerations for borrowers in those markets makes them averse
to borrowing in dollars. So, clearing in dollar and local currency loan markets requires that
the price of holding dollar deposits, i  iú , is high.
  16
     Consider countries with deposit dollarization less than the median of roughly 20 percent. Among the
countries without regulatory restrictions on deposit dollarization, the mean correlation is 0.133. The mean
correlation among countries without regulatory restrictions, the mean correlation is 0.031.
  17
     One would have to argue that countries in which restrictions on deposit dollarization were implemented
would otherwise have had extremely low correlation between GDP and S/P.




                                                    9
                               Figure 3: Dollar Loans Versus Dollars Liabilities




Notes: Data obtained from International Monetary Fund database, Financial Soundness Indicators. Each country is indicated
by its World Bank code and the data represent, for each country, averages over the period, 2000-2018. The numerator
variables on the y and x-axes are `Foreign currency denominated loans' and `Foreign currency denominated liabilities',
respectively. Both variables are expressed as a fraction of `Total liabilities'. The dashed line is the least squares line fit to the
data, where B denotes the slope and R2 denotes the R2 . The three stars on B indicates significance at the 1 percent level.



    We investigate the implication of the insurance hypothesis that the price of dollar de-
posits, i  iú , is high in countries where deposit dollarization is high. We use the data on
i  iú constructed by the indirect method in Dalgic (2018) for the 33 countries in our database
for which there are futures markets in currencies. The i  iú data were constructed using
the return on a US government security as a measure of the nominal risk-free dollar return.
Using the assumption of covered interest parity, Dalgic (2018) combined the dollar interest
rate with spot exchange rates and futures rates to compute i  iú .18 The average for each
country of i  iú over the 2000s are displayed for each of our 33 countries in Figure 4. The
first panel contains the scatter plot of i  iú against deposit dollarization. The second panel
displays the scatter of i  iú against the correlation between S/P and GDP. The latter is the
same correlation appearing on the vertical axis in Figure 2.
    For 10 of the 33 countries we were also able to obtain direct observations on local currency
and dollar deposit rates from Central Bank websites. The spread, i  iú , in these countries
appears in the panels of Figure 4 in blue. In one country, Armenia, we do not have the
  18
    Our data are annual and we work with averages of i  iú in the 2000s, so we do not expect the much-
discussed deviations from covered interest parity observed at relatively high frequencies to substantially
distort our results (see, for example, Du et al. (2018) and Verdelhan (2018)).




                                                                10
futures market-based measure of the local interest rate and so only the blue measure appears.
Generally the blue and the black measures are close to each other. Egypt and Turkey are two
exceptions. In any case, the least squares (dashed) line drawn through the data is roughly
una ected by whether we use the blue or black variables. This protects us from some, though
not all, sources of distortion in our measure of i  iú .

Figure 4: Interest Rate Spreads vs Dollarization and the Correlation between GDP and
Exchange Rate

        10                                                                10




         8                                                                 8




         6                                                                 6




         4                                                                 4




         2                                                                 2




         0                                                                 0




        -2                                                                -2
             0   0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5   0.6    0.7               -0.8   -0.6   -0.4   -0.2   0      0.2    0.4    0.6




Notes: Data on the horizontal axis correspond to 100  ,,, where ,, is defined in equation (1). For the observations marked in
blue, local deposit rates (local and foreign currency) were obtained from Central Bank websites. In the case of observations
marked in black, the local deposit rate was inferred using covered interest parity, local and future's market exchange rates
(monthly rates taken from Datastream) as well as dollar risk free rates. In some cases, both measures of the domestic interest
rate are available . The line in the figure is the least squares that uses actual local dollar rates when available (blue) and uses
derivative-based rates otherwise (black). The least squares line based on the black observations only is not included because it
is virtually indistinguishable from the line reported. Data covers the period 2004-2017.


    Our direct and indirect measures of i  iú each have their own potential problems. A
problem with direct observations is that, according to anecdotal evidence, deposit maturities
and income tax treatments of the earnings on dollar versus domestic deposits vary across
countries. Unfortunately, we are not aware of systematic data on either issue. The indirect
inference approach does not su er from the maturity problem, but obviously has the same
tax problems as the direct method. We would prefer to have i  iú after taxes.
    A potential distortion for both measures of i  iú is the impact on interest rate spreads
of di erential reserve requirements on domestic versus dollar bank deposits. Federico et al.
(2014) provide a dataset on reserve requirements by local versus foreign currency deposits
in banks. In their sample of 52 countries the average di erence in reserve requirements for
most countries is small. Exceptions are Peru (26), Honduras (23), Serbia (18) and Uruguay
(13), where numbers in parentheses are the di erence in the percent reserve requirements.19
We are cautiously optimistic that di erences in reserve requirements across countries do not
substantially a ect our analysis of interest rate spreads.20
  19
     There are five other countries were the di erences are in single digits and in all other countries the
di erence is zero.
  20
     Federico et al. (2014) discuss the cyclical movements in reserve requirements. These cyclical movements
may not a ect our analysis which only focuses on first moments of i  iú .




                                                               11
    We now turn to the two panels Figure 4 to evaluate the price implications of the insurance
hypothesis. The first panel is consistent with that hypothesis' implication that i  iú is
typically higher in countries with deposit dollarization.21 The second panel is consistent
with with the idea that the demand for dollarized deposits is driven by the correlation
between the domestic goods value of a dollar, S/P, and GDP.
    In this paper, our focus is on domestic dollarization as a determinant of average excess
currency returns. The other main determinants of average excess currency returns found in
the literature are country size (Hassan (2013)), trade network centrality (Richmond (2019)),
external debt (Della Corte et al. (2016)), US Dollar debt (Wiriadinata (2019)). Dalgic and
Ozhan (2021) show that the covariance between GDP movements and exchange rate changes
is a significant determinant of average excess returns even after controlling for size, centrality
and external debt. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) show that the covariance between US durable
consumption and exchange rate movements is a significant determinant of currency returns,
in countries where the exchange rate tends to depreciate during US recessions, US investors
require a risk premium to invest.


3.2    Who Supplies Insurance to the Households?
When exchange rates depreciate during a recession, households with dollar deposits in e ect
receive a transfer, in terms of local currency. Where does that transfer come from? In
principle, banks, firms, government and/or foreigners could be the source of this transfer.
Evidence from a large IMF database on bank stability indicators suggest that banks have
very little currency mismatch in the 2000s, so they do not appear to be the source of insurance
payments to households after a depreciation. We have access to a smaller data set for 16
EMEs which do not strongly discourage dollar deposits according to the index in Nicolo et
al. (2003). We show that in those countries, dollar borrowing from banks in many cases
exceeds the net amount of dollars deposited by residents. This suggests that, to a first
approximation, firms are the source of the insurance payments that households with dollar
bank deposits receive when the currency depreciates. This is consistent with the idea that
financial dollarization plays an important role in risk allocation among di erent residents
within EMEs. In the third section below we make use of a dataset recently produced by
Benetrix et al. (2020), which decomposes cross-country financial flows by currency. This data,
in conjunction with our deposit dollarization data, allows us to decompose inter- versus intra-
national insurance flows. In the data for the two countries that overlap with our dataset, we
find that the within country insurance flows are much larger than the cross- country flows.
  21
    To gain a better understanding of the magnitude of i  iú , Subsection A.2 in the Online Appendix
expresses i  iú as a tax on depositors.




                                                12
3.2.1    It is not the Banks

The evidence suggests that there is little currency mismatch in banks, indicating that they
are not the ones providing the insurance to households. This is consistent with the view
that bank regulators, particularly in the 2000's, have worked to ensure that banks do not
have significant currency mismatch on their balance sheets. A relevant statistic is compiled
by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). We perform stress tests on the banking system
in each of the 115 countries covered by the IMF dataset, by asking what exchange rate
depreciation (or, in some cases, appreciation) would be required to wipe out bank equity.
We find that, for the overwhelming majority, 93, there is no possible depreciation that would
have this e ect. For the other countries, the depreciation would have to be truly extreme.22
We conclude that, especially in emerging markets, there is not a serious currency mismatch
in banks.23 So, it appears that the owners of banks are not the ones providing insurance
services to bank depositors.

3.2.2    If it is not the banks, then who?

The results reported in Figure 5 summarize information about borrowing and lending for
16 EMEs which do not discourage dollar deposits according to the index in Nicolo et al.
(2003).24 In all panels of Figure 5, except Panel (5f), the solid line is the median in the
cross-section of countries for the indicated year and the specified statistic. The upper and
lower dashed lines indicate the boundaries of the upper and lower 25% quartiles. Panel
(5f) indicates the number of countries for which we have observations, for each year. The
dashed line indicates the number of countries for which the firm and household components
of deposits are available, for each year. This line is only relevant for the results in Panel (5a).
The solid line indicates the number of countries in the cross-section for each year. The solid
line is relevant for all panels apart from Panel (5a). Panel (5f) indicates that we have data
for a relatively small fraction of our countries before 2010. Also, the number of countries
whose data allow us to di erentiate between household and firm deposits is always less than
16.25
  22
      For details, see Section B in the Online Technical Appendix.
  23
      It is well known, and internalized in the Basel III reforms (see, for example,
https://www.bis.org/basel_framework/ ), that term mismatch raises the possibility of a rollover cri-
sis. This can suddenly convert a system which appears to have no currency mismatch into one in which
currency mismatch is severe. We address this concern in Section 4 below.
   24
      The countries are Albania, Armenia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Egypt, Honduras, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Lithua-
nia, Mozambique, Peru, Romania, Russia, Turkey, Uganda and Ukraine. Summary statistics are reported in
Table C3 in Section C of the Online Appendix. Column (1) of Table C3 shows that our 16 countries have
somewhat higher deposit dollarization rates than the average in our sample.
   25
      With one exception, the deposit and bank credit were obtained from central bank websites. The excep-
tional case is Peru, where the household versus deposit data where kindly provided to us by Paul Castillo.
We obtained data on the stock of debt issued by nonfinancial firms in international debt markets from the




                                                   13
     Panel (5a) shows that in the median country, most of the deposits (around 60 percent)
are held by households.26 The lower quartile is close to 50 percent, so that in a small number
of countries firms hold more deposits than households (Peru is such a country). Panel 5b
reports total firm borrowing (local banks and international debt markets) as a share of total
dollar deposits, where the share increased from 25% to 100% for the median country between
2000-2018.27 From this figure we see that this scaled measure of firm dollar borrowing has
been rising steadily over time. It is interesting to note from Panel (5e) that, for the median
country, more than 90 percent of firm dollar borrowing is from local banks and relatively
little is from international financial markets. This is not the case for all the countries in
our sample. The decline in the lower quartile reflects the fact that (see, for example, Shin
(2018)) firms in some countries have substantially increased their borrowing in international
markets since the 2010s.28
     Also, in some countries, households borrow dollars back from banks. An example of
this is the widely-noted borrowing after 2005 in Eastern European countries of mortgages in
foreign currencies (mainly Swiss francs). Panel (5c) displays the sum of household and firm
borrowing, as a ratio to total deposits. Note the bulge in the upper quartile. This reflects
the Eastern European household borrowing just mentioned. Importantly for us, the mean
of the ratio in Panel (5c) converges to unity in the 2010s. This suggests that household
deposits net of household dollar bank credit is on average equal to firm dollar borrowing.
BIS website, https://stats.bis.org/ . For the reasons given in Shin (2013) and Coppola et al. (2021), we use
the data based on nationality.
   26
      We do not know how the other 40 percent breaks down among firms and government. We also do
not have information about possible misclassification. For example, it may be that the deposits of small
businesses are classified as `business deposits', even though those deposits are intermingled with the deposit
balances of the household that owns the business.
   27
      We do not include foreign direct investment and other portfolio equity investment firm dollar borrowing,
b . These do appear on the liability side of non-financial firm balance sheets, but their rate of return is
 ú

not stipulated in dollar terms. These liabilities are not of direct interest to us because our focus is on the
insurance implications of international financial instruments whose rate of return is fixed in dollars.
   28
      Our results are qualitatively consistent with those in Shin (2018), who stresses the shift from local bank
borrowing to bond market borrowing. But there are quantitative di erences which reflect our unit analysis
and data sources. In our analysis the unit of observation is a country and we do not di erentiate by size.
When we recompute the solid line in Panel (5e), taking the ratio of sums rather than the median of ratios,
we obtain results that resemble more closely the lower quartile in Panel (5e). In particular, we find that
the share of dollar borrowing from domestic banks relative to total dollar borrowing in our sample of 16
countries is 96% in 2009 and fluctuates around 75% after 2013 (for our sample of countries, see Table C3 in
Online Appendix Section C). The levels of these numbers are higher than the levels reported in Shin (2018).
Still, they are consistent with his observation that the share of dollar borrowing by non-financial firms from
domestic banks has fallen. Indeed, the percentage point fall in our data is roughly twice what it is in Shin
(2018)'s data. The set of countries we consider is di erent from Shin (2018) because we are interested in
countries that distinguish between household and firm deposits. Also, our data on non-financial firm dollar
borrowing includes borrowing from domestic banks as well as BIS-reported bond issues by domestic residents
in international markets. Shin (2018)'s data also includes borrowing from foreign banks. We do not include
data on dollar borrowing from foreign banks, unless they are registered in the domestic economy.




                                                      14
That is, in the median country, non-financial firms are the source of the insurance enjoyed
by households when they hold dollar deposits.

         Figure 5: Local Firms Appear to Provide the Insurance to Dollar Depositors
                          Household dollar bank deposits                                     Firm dollar debt from all sources
              (a) ,,t =     Total dollar bank deposits                                 (b)      Total dollar bank deposits




              Household and firm dollar loans from all sources                Government (including central bank) dollar liabilities net of dollar assets
        (c)             Total dollar bank deposits                      (d)                         Total dollar bank deposits




                    (e)      firm dollars from banks
                          firm dollars from all sources                                      (f) Number of Observations




Note: Sub-figures (a)-(e): Black line is median, across all 16 countries listed in Footnote 24, of the indicated statistic, for the
indicated year. Upper dashed line is upper 25th percentile and lower dashed line is lower 25th percentile. Data were obtained
from Central Bank websites. Sub-figure (5f): The dashed line indicates the number of countries for we have data on the
composition of deposits in terms of households and firms. The solid line indicates the number of countries for which we have
all the other data. In Sub-Figure (a), ,,t is the average across all countries, i, of ,,i,t for each t, where ,,i,t is defined in
equation (1).




                                                                 15
    Finally, consider Panel (5d), which indicates that EME governments began to accumu-
late a substantial amount of dollar assets beginning in the early 2000s.29 For the median
country, the amount of the dollar accumulation by the government is about 1/2 of total
dollar deposits. We interpret this accumulation as insurance obtained from foreigners on
behalf of all residents, including households and the people that own the firms. How to
allocate these insurance benefits across the two types of households is beyond the scope of
this paper. Instead, we focus on the insurance obtained by households when they choose the
currency composition of their deposits. This represents a lower bound on the insurance that
they receive because it abstracts from any insurance received via the fiscal authorities.


3.3     Decomposing International Versus Intra-national Insurance
        Flows
The evidence in the previous section suggests that at least a substantial portion of the
insurance obtained by residents who hold dollars is provided by other residents in the same
country. In this section we discuss a decomposition that allows us to quantify all insurance
flows associated with dollar borrowing and lending in a particular country. Market clearing
requires that the quantity of dollar assets created in the financial market of a particular
country must be equal to the quantity of dollar liabilities created in that financial market.
That is,
                                      t + dt   = bú
                                                  t + bt .                                (2)
                                           ú,f         ú,f
                                    dú

Here, d and b denotes assets and liabilities, respectively, denominated in local currency.
Also, a * indicates that the financial instrument has a dollar denominated return so that
in units of the domestic currency the return depends on the future realized exchange rate.
In addition, variables without the superscript denote domestic non-financial residents and
variables with superscript, f, denotes foreign residents. We exclude the dollars borrowed
and lent by domestic financial institutions because the results in section (3.2.1) suggest that
these cancel. Below, we explain how government enters the picture. Equation (2) is the
market clearing condition for trade in dollar financial assets between domestic and foreign
residents.
    After rearranging the terms in equation (2), we obtain:
                                             Ë           È
                              t , bt ] + min d
                        min [dú    ú          ú,f ú,f
                                                 ,b       t  dt | = bt + bt .
                                                      + |bú   ú      ú    ú,f


  29
     By `government' we mean the consolidated net assets accumulated by the fiscal and monetary authorities.
To some extent, the increase in dollar (net) foreign assets may reflect the observation in Du and Schreger
(2016a) that many governments have shifted the denomination of their international borrowing from dollars
to local currency.




                                                    16
The first and second terms represent the quantity of financial trade between residents and
non-residents, respectively. The third term denotes the quantity of financial trade between
domestic and foreign residents. Suppose, for example that dú t < bt . In this case, the quantity
                                                                    ú

of insurance obtained by households is fully provided by private firms.30 In this case, bú   ú
                                                                                         t  dt >
0 is the component of insurance provided by domestic residents to foreigners. The object on
the right of the equality is a measure of the total amount of financial trade. Dividing, we
have
                                                within foreign insurance
                 within country insurance                                      across country insurance
                           ¸       °                    Ë ¸         °
                                                                    È                    ¸     °
                     min [dú
                           t , bt ]
                                ú                 min dú ,f ú,f
                                                        t , bt                       |bú     ú
                                                                                       t  dt |
                                            +                              +                              = 1.   (3)
                       t + bt                        t + bt                           t + bt
                             ú,f                           ú,f                             ú,f
                      bú                            bú                               bú
In this way we have an additive decomposition of insurance flows.
    We include government trade in assets and liabilities by netting these out of the foreign
asset flows. We denote the dollar assets in the consolidated balance sheet of the fiscal and
                              t . We denote the corresponding liabilities by bt . We interpret
central bank authorities by dg, ú                                              g,ú

dú,f in equation (3) as dú,f  bg, t . Also, we interpret b
                                   ú                       ú,f
                                                               as bú,f  dg,
                                                                         t . This interpretation
                                                                            ú

does not a ect the validity of equation (3).31
    Data on the currency composition of international financial flows (i.e., dú  t
                                                                                   ,f
                                                                                      and bú
                                                                                           t ) in
                                                                                             ,f

and out of EMEs are limited. We obtained time series data for Turkey and Peru from
Benetrix et al. (2020) and the results of the decomposition are displayed in Figure (6).32
Equation (3) implies that the data should add to unity at each date. In practice, the data
come from di erent sources or they may be incomplete, and so the identity need not hold.
However, the figures indicate that the identity holds approximately for Peru and Turkey,
which is consistent with the notion that there is little measurement error in the data. The
key result in the figure is that within-category flows are much larger than across-category
  30
      There are two channels by which this can occur. The most straightforward is that the households deposit
the dollars in a bank and the firms then come to the bank to borrow those dollars. An alternative is that
local banks use the dollar deposits to purchase foreign assets and then domestic firms borrow the dollars by
issuing dollar bonds in international markets. From the point of view of who receives the insurance payments
and who makes them, the two scenarios are the same.
   31
      We suspect that most of the dollar debt in bg,
                                                  t
                                                    ú
                                                      is issued by the fiscal authorities. Similarly, we suspect
that most of the dollar assets in dt are owned by the monetary authority. We do not know how much of
                                    g,ú

the monetary authorities' dollar assets are the dollar liabilities issued by the fiscal authorities. If we had
data on these objects, we would delete them from both dg,   t
                                                              ú
                                                                and bg,
                                                                     t . The principle objects that interest us
                                                                       ú

are the first and third terms in (3) and these are not a ected by the considerations discussed here.
  32


The data from Benetrix et al. (2020) cover 19 EMEs. We did not use their data on Brazil, India and
Mexico because those countries sharply limit the amount of deposit dollarization that is allowed. In the
case of Hungary, our data sources are incomplete because the sum of the three components in equation (3)
is substantially less than unity. In the case of the other countries we have not yet acquired their deposit
dollarization data.




                                                              17
flows, especially after 2010 in the case of Turkey.

                                      Figure 6: Decomposition of Insurance Flows




Note: These data correspond to the three terms on the left of the equality in equation (3). They represent the share of dollar
financial flows between residents of the indicated country (`Within Domestic'), between foreigners (`Within Foreigner') and
between residents and foreigners (`Across'). As explained in the text, dú
                                                                        t
                                                                          ,f
                                                                             and bú
                                                                                  t
                                                                                    ,f
                                                                                       are the obtained from Benetrix et al. (2020),
net of government dollar liabilities and assets, respectively. Government liabilities The government data were obtained from
the BIS (dollar bonds issued by the fiscal authorities in international credit markets were The other data have been described
in previous sections.



                                 Figure 7: Intra-national vs International Positions
                                         min(bú
                                              t ,dt )
                                                  ú
                                                                                                             |bú  ú
                           (a) Intra,      GDPt                                                (b) Inter,      t dt |
                                                                                                              GDPt




Notes: Please refer to section 3.2.2 for details of the data. dú
                                                               t and bt refer to dollar deposits and loans respectively. For each country the annual
                                                                      ú
data are averaged over the 2000s. Solid line plots the median across 16 EMEs whereas dashed lines are 25 and 75 percentiles.




    Our primary interest is in the within-country resident category versus the across-country
category. For this, we do not require the Benetrix et al. (2020) data. We display information
                                                                          t , dt )/GDPt versus
about the time series data on a measure of intra-national insurance, min(bú    ú


                            t  dt |/GDPt for our 16 countries in Figure 7. The solid line
inter-national insurance, |bú     ú

indicates the median across countries for each year. The dashed lines indicate the 75th
and 25th percentiles.33 The key result is that the across-country insurance flows are small
   33
   The bulge in the upper percentile in Figure 7b primarily reflects the much-discussed jump in East
European foreign currency mortgage borrowing.




                                                                        18
compared to the within-country flows. The median cross-country flows are on average 55
percent of within-country flows.


4     Banking Crises and Dollarization
The results of the previous section sketched a relatively benign picture of deposit dollar-
ization: it is a insurance arrangement, mainly between di erent people inside individual
countries. However, there is a persistent view that deposit dollarization is dangerous, by
increasing the vulnerability of banks to a systemic crisis. We showed that banks hold little
currency mismatch on their balance sheets, so deposit dollarization does not appear to pose a
direct risk to banks. Nevertheless, there are at least two ways in which deposit dollarization
can raise the risk of a systemic banking crisis. The first way is if the recipients of dollar
loans from banks themselves have substantial currency mismatch. This is not necessarily
a problem if firms have natural hedges and if firms which borrow dollars have su ciently
low leverage that they can absorb balance-sheet shocks. There is a second way that deposit
dollarization could risk a banking crisis even if banks appear to have no currency mismatch
on their balance sheets. If there is substantial maturity mismatch, then a crisis could within
a matter of days convert a situation in which there is little currency mismatch into one in
which there is substantial mismatch. This could happen by if creditors suddenly become
unwilling to roll over short term dollar liabilities and force banks into fire-selling their illiq-
uid dollar liabilities. So, even though banks appear to have no currency mismatch, it is
still an interesting empirical question whether there is evidence of an association between
dollarization and the incidence of financial instability.
     We ask two questions. First, does deposit dollarization raise the probability of a sys-
temic banking crisis? The data appears to show that there is no relation between deposit
dollarization and crisis. Second, we ask what are the losses, in terms of foregone output, of a
crisis once it happens? We find that there is no relation between the severity of a crisis and
deposit dollarization. We begin by examining the relevant unconditional moments in the
data. We then bring in conditioning variables and use various econometric methods, which
di er according to the amount of structure that is imposed. Our conclusion is that the
empirical evidence provides no evidence that there is a link between financial dollarization
and vulnerability to systemic banking crisis.
     Interestingly, we do find variables that help to forecast crises. Consistent with the results
in Forbes and Warnock (2012), we find that the VIX helps. We also find that the level of
external dollar debt helps to forecast crisis. This finding is also consistent with results in
the literature. For example Mendoza and Terrones (2008) shows that in EMEs, rapid credit
expansion is likely to be financed by capital inflows, i.e., external debt. Gourinchas and
Obstfeld (2012) find that rapid credit expansion predicts banking crises in emerging markets.
Finally, Caballero (2016) finds that large capital inflows into EMEs predict banking crises.
    In sum, while our results are consistent with existing findings that too much borrowing
raises the risk of crisis, the currency denomination of debt does not, per se, increase that
probability. Of course, our results are drawn from a sample in which most countries are
governed by sensible prudential rules. For example, regulators take care that there are not
large currency mismatches in banks.
    That large external debt is associated with crisis is not surprising. We expect that
countries, like people, that borrow a lot have a higher chance of getting into trouble. While
a lot of borrowing entails risks, the denomination of deposits and credit in a country governed
by sensible prudential rules does not appear to be risky.


4.1    Bivariate Analysis
We examine data on crises from two sources. Data on systemic banking crises are taken
from Laeven and Valencia (2018), while data on sudden stops are taken from Eichengreen
and Gupta (2018).
   The data on systemic banking crises from Laeven and Valencia (2018) cover the period,
1980-2017, and include 151 systemic banking crises. According to the criteria in Laeven and
Valencia (2018), a country experiences a banking crises if it meets two conditions:

   · significant banking policy intervention measures were taken in response to significant
     losses in the banking system,

   · the banking system exhibits significant losses, resulting in a share of nonperforming
     loans above 20 percent of total loans, or bank closures of at least 20 percent of banking
     system assets.

See Laeven and Valencia (2018) for additional details on how they operationalized the above
conditions.
    Our data on dollarization come from Levy-Yeyati (2006) as well as from individual central
banks and cover the period, 1980-2017. The intersection of the Laeven and Valencia (2018)
dataset with our deposit dollarization data includes 81 banking crises. Figure 8 plots the
fraction of years a country is in a banking crisis against the average deposit dollarization in
that country over the same years.




                                              20
Figure 8: Probability of Laeven and Valencia (2018) Banking Crises, Output Loss and
Deposit Dollarization




    We also investigate the relationship between the magnitude of the loss in output and
deposit dollarization. We take Laeven and Valencia (2018)'s measure of the output loss, in
terms of GDP, associated with the crisis.34 Figure 8 indicates that the cost of a sudden stop
is not significantly related to the level of deposit dollarization.The key take-away from Figure
8 is: (i) there does not appear to be a strong relationship between deposit dollarization and
the frequency of banking crises; and (ii) if a crisis occurs, the resulting loss in output does
not appear to be related to a country's level of deposit dollarization.


4.2     Multivariate Analysis
Although suggestive, examining the simple covariance between deposit dollarization and
financial crises could hide important causal links between the two variables. To see this, it is
useful to distinguish between two channels by which an exchange rate depreciation can a ect
the probability of a crisis. One is the expenditure switching channel, whereby an exchange
depreciation leads to an expansion in output by encouraging domestic and foreign residents
to buy more domestic goods. The expansion improves balance sheets generally and thus
reduces the probability of a banking crisis. The second channel, the balance sheet channel,
was discussed in Section 3.1. This channel may be important if substantial dollar deposits
lead to currency mismatch. In this case, there are direct and indirect channels whereby a
depreciation could hurt bank balance sheets. There is a variety of ways in which lack of
correlation between deposit dollarization and banking crisis could in principle hide causality
from deposit dollarization to crisis. For example, suppose that the balance sheet channel
  34
     Laeven and Valencia (2018) measure the output loss as follows. To compute the output loss in a particular
crisis year, say year t, they compute the HP filter of the log, real GDP data from t  20 (or, first available
observation) to t  1. They extrapolate the HP trend into years t to t + 3. The loss is measured as the sum
of the deviations between log GDP and its HP extrapolated trend in periods t to t + 3.




                                                     21
is important, so that when deposit dollarization is high a substantial depreciation would
destabilize the banking system. If government policy in countries where deposit dollarization
is high responded to high dollarization by vigorously using monetary and other policies to
prevent substantial depreciation, then we might well see no relationship between deposit
dollarization and the probability of a banking crisis. We examined this possibility by pooling
all our data on deposit dollarization and exchange rate depreciation. We then compare the
distribution of exchange rate depreciations, depending on whether deposit dollarization was
high or low in the previous year. We found that for countries with high deposit dollarization
rates, the density of depreciations is skewed slightly to the right. That is, if anything,
countries with high deposit dollarization are a little more likely to see a high depreciation
in the next year (for details, see Section D in the Online Appendix). We infer two things
from this analysis. First, the lack of association between dollarization and financial crisis
suggested by Figure 8 does not appear to be an artifact of monetary policy. Second, there
is a simple interpretation of the results which is consistent with the insurance hypothesis.
Namely, households increase the share of their deposits held in dollars when they anticipate
an exchange depreciation.
    A related concern about our inference from Figure 8 stems from the obvious noisiness
of the bivariate relationship between dollarization and crises. Although the slope of the
least squares line is not significantly di erent from zero, it is also not significantly di erent
from a big positive or negative number. We bring other data into the analysis to see if the
additional information helps us to more precisely identify any relationship between deposit
dollarization and crisis. The variables that we bring into the analysis are motivated by the
balance sheet channel. Our first exercise examines three variables: deposit dollarization,
frequency of crises and exchange rates. We ask whether the likelihood of crisis is di erent
across high- and low-dollarized economies for a given exchange rate depreciation. We find
that the level of dollarization does not a ect the likelihood of crisis after a depreciation. To
ensure robustness to specification error, this analysis is relatively unstructured and inference
is based on the bootstrap (see Online Appendix Section G). We then incorporate many more
variables, but at the same time we increase the degree of econometric structure by using
logit regression.
    Our basic finding is robust across all econometric exercises. They all confirm the impres-
sion conveyed by Figure 8 that there is little relationship between deposit dollarization and
the frequency or cost of financial crisis.

4.2.1   Evidence Based on Logit Regressions

The previous discussion is based on relatively unstructured econometric methods to draw
inference about the relationship between deposit dollarization and crises. In this section,
we do the analysis with logit regression. Although this approach places more structure on
the analysis (hence, raises the possibility of specification error), it also allows us to consider
a larger number of conditioning variables. Our findings for deposit dollarization in this
subsection mirrors what we found in the previous two subsections. Because we consider
more variables in this section, we are able to evaluate aspects of financial dollarization more
generally and our results match the literature in pointing to risks from aspects of financial
dollarization other than dollarized deposits. Still, the conclusion of this section is that deposit
dollarization does not contribute to the likelihood of a systemic banking crisis.

Logit Methodology and Data Used in the Analysis Our logit results are reported in
Table 1. Let pi,t denote the probability that year t is the first year of a Laeven and Valencia
(2018) systemic banking crisis for country i. We adopt the assumption in standard logit
analysis, that the log odds, pi,t / (1  pi,t ) of a crisis is a linear function of a set of year t  1
variables on country i, xi,t . It has been pointed out (see, e.g., Bussiere and Fratzscher (2006)
and Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012)) that the period t  1 state of the economy may not
contain enough information to determine the probability of a crisis in period t. For example,
if some variables are high in the previous period (say foreign debt), but this is not part of
a longer-run pattern, this may not signal an imminent crisis. But, if the high value of the
variable in the previous period is part of a longer-term buildup, then perhaps it does signal
a crisis. To accommodate this kind of possibility, subsection H.2 in the Online Appendix
includes results which incorporate more lags. The results reported below are robust to this
modification.35
    Our observed data are yi,t oe {0, 1} where 1 indicates a Laeven and Valencia (2018)
systemic banking crisis in period t, country i. We model the binomial variable, yi,t , as follows:

                                            yi,t = p (xi,t ; -- ) + Ái,t ,

where pi,t (xi,t ; -- ) = E [yi,t |xi,t ; -- ] and we adopt the following functional form:

                                                                   1
                                           p (xi,t ; -- ) =                  .                                  (4)
                                                              1 + exi,t --
                                                                       T




Here, the column vector, xi,t , includes period t  1 variables, the superscript, T, denotes
  35
     See Bussiere and Fratzscher (2006), who propose an alternative approach based on a multinomial dis-
tribution. They and Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) apply the approach in a setting much like ours. The
di erence between our approach and theirs is we ask `given period t data, what the probability that a crisis
starts in period t + 1?', while they ask `given period t data what is the probability of crisis that a crisis starts
in some period, t + 1, ..., t + k, where k may be bigger than 1?' The model that we estimate can also answer
the Bussiere and Fratzscher (2006) type of question, conditional on a forecast of the state of the economy in
t + 1, ...., t + k  1.




                                                         23
transposition and -- is a column vector of parameters to be estimated. The j th element of --
denotes the semi-elasticity of the odds of a crisis with a change in the j th element of xi,t .36
Note that by construction, 0 Æ pi,t (xi,t ; -- ) Æ 1. By the orthogonality property of conditional
expectations we have that Ái,t is orthogonal to each element in the vector, xi,t , when -- is set
at its true value, --0 . That is, 37

                                          E [yi,t  p (xi,t ; --0 )] xi,t = 0.                                        (5)

Our setting is a special case of the Generalized Method of Moments environment considered
by Hansen (1982). We estimate --0 by choosing the value of -- , --     ^, having the property that
the sample analog of equation (5) is satisfied. The number of equations in (5) is equal to
the number of elements in -- , so that the estimator is exactly identified. For the purpose of
inference, we allow for heteroscedasticity in Ái,t , as well as correlations over i for given t and
over t for given i. 38
     We include the following variables in xi,t , in addition to a constant. First, there is ei,t1 ,
the log di erence of the previous year's exchange rate, relative to its value in the prior year.
Also, Dollar (20)i,t1 is a dummy variable which is unity if deposit dollarization exceeds 20
percent (i.e., ,,i,t1 > 0.20) in the preceding year.39 This dollar dummy is an indicator of
`high deposit dollarization'. In Online Appendix Subsection H.4 we show that the results
are robust to adopting a 10 percent cuto rather than the 20 percent cuto adopted here.
We also include the cross-product of the exchange rate change and the dollar dummy. The
sum of the coe cients on ei,t1 and the cross-product term captures the balance e ect: a
depreciation in an economy with high deposit dollarization creates balance sheet e ects that
destabilize the bank system.
     The specification of our logit regression also allows us to consider another channel by with
deposit dollarization could destabilize the banking system. Suppose currency mismatch is in
the hands of firms which have the capacity to absorb exchange rate fluctuations, so that the
standard balance sheet channel is not operative. If there is substantial maturity mismatch
between dollar liabilities and dollar assets then, as noted in the introduction to this section,
banks which have no currency mismatch could suddenly have a great deal of mismatch if
creditors refuse to roll over their short term dollar deposits and banks are forced to sell
illiquid dollar assets. If this roll over problem occurred with domestic currency assets and
  36
      It is straightforward to verify that, given equation (4), the log-odds of a banking crisis is
ln (pi,t / (1  pi,t )) = xT
                          i,t -- .
   37
      Here, we use the assumption that p (xi,t ; --0 ) = E [yi,t |xi,t ] . In addition, we use the orthogonality property
of expectation, E {(y  E [y |x]) x} = 0.
   38
      See Thompson (2011) and Cameron et al. (2012) further discussion. We use STATA to do the calcula-
tions. The logit code, logit2.ado, was written by Petersen (2009).
   39
      See equation (1) for the definition of ,,i,t .




                                                          24
liabilities, the central bank could always solve the problem by providing liquidity. But, a
central bank with only a modest amount of foreign reserves could not play a lender of last
resort role in case creditors refuse to roll over dollar deposits. To capture this channel, we
also construct a dummy variable, `Low Reserves'. This variable is unity for country i and
year t if country i's central bank has a lower dollar reserves to GDP ratio than the median
value of that ratio in the cross-section of countries in year t. We also include the interaction
of Low Reserves for i and t  1 with Dollar (20)i,t1 . The coe cient on this interaction
term is a measure of this alternative balance sheet channel which operates through maturity
mismatch and can be expected to matter most when the central bank is low on reserves.
    In addition, we consider the variable, F L/F A.40 Here, F L denotes dollar liabilities by
non-central bank financial institutions to foreigners. Also, F A denotes dollar claims on
foreigners by the same institutions. Our time series on F L/F A is displayed in Figure 9.




                                            Figure 9: FL/FA
Blue line indicates data availability (right scale). Solid line indicates the median, dashed lines are 25% and
75% percentiles. Source: Levy-Yeyati (2006) (before 2001), IMF IFS (after 2001).


     The number of countries for which we have data jumps in the 2000s to between 90 and
100. Among the 140 countries for which we have deposit dollarization data, there are a
little over 40 for which we do not have data on F L/F A in the 2000s. Our measure `High
F L/F A' is a dummy, which is unity if F L/F A > 1 and zero otherwise. According to Figure
9, more than 25% of the countries have high F L/F A. One reason that high F L/F A might
be a source of fragility for the banking system is based on the rollover logic described above,
  40
     For the observations before 2000, we used the FL/FA observations used by Levy-Yeyati (2006), which
the author kindly provided to us. Levy-Yeyati (2006) reports that these data were obtained from the IMF.
The later observations on FL and FA were obtained from the International Monetary Fund's data base,
`International Financial Statistics (currently, the pre-2000 data on FL and FA appear not to be reported
in the IFS). FL (FA) is defined as liabilities to (claims on) non-residents by other depository corporations.
`Other depository corporations' include commercial banks and excludes the central bank. Specifically, FL
(FA) corresponds to the IMF variable, "Monetary and Financial Accounts, Other Financial Corporations,
Net foreign Assets, Liabilities to (Claims on) Non-residents, Domestic Currency".




                                                     25
which is particularly relevant when assets and liabilities are in dollars.
    Our analysis in Subsection 3.2.1 suggests that when F L  F A > 0, then the banks hold
F L  F A in the form of dollar claims on domestic residents. High F L/F A would indicate
vulnerability to crisis if the bank assets corresponding to F L  F A are relatively illiquid and
of longer maturity than the liabilities in F L. 41 Of course, if a country's central bank held
a lot of dollar assets then in principle it could play a lender of last resort role to prevent
a rollover crisis in the banking system when F L/F A > 1. This is why we also include the
interaction of the Low Reserves dummy with the High F L/F A dummy.
    We include the current value of the VIX, the index of financial market volatility produced
by the Chicago Board Options Exchange.42 This is motivated by the findings in Forbes and
Warnock (2012) and Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020), which suggest that the VIX is an
indicator of global risk appetite. We also include the ratio of central bank foreign reserves to
GDP.43 A priori, one expects this to reduce the probability of a crisis. For example, knowing
that a central bank with large amounts of foreign reserves could step in and provide banks
with liquidity in the event of a run, foreigners might be less tempted to refuse to roll over
F L. Real GDP growth is included44 , as well as the cross-product of the F L/F A and deposit
dollarization indices. We include `External Debt', which corresponds to interest payments
by all residents on foreign debt, divided by GDP.45 In principle, a high external debt could
raise the probability of a banking crisis by a variety of mechanisms. For example, it could
do so if borrowers' assets have longer maturity than their external debt and foreigners refuse
to roll over. Or, external debt could raise the probability of a crisis by damaging balance
sheets in the event of a depreciation.
    Since the analysis investigates the odds of entering the first year of a crisis, we leave out
observations on the second and later years of crises in cases that countries have crises that
last for more than one year. Table 1 reports tstatistics for the null hypothesis that the
true parameter is zero in parentheses beneath point estimates.
  41
      We have not done a systematic analysis of the relative maturity of liabilities in F L versus the assets,
F L  F A. We were able to obtain data on one country, Peru. Pre-2000's data on Peru are consistent with
the idea that the short term (less than two years) component of F L is high. But, that component began to
fall in the 2000s and is now substantially less than 50%. In particular, data for Peru show that the fraction
of dollar borrowing by banks that is short term was above 90% from 1992 until late 1999 (there was a dip
to around 80% from mid-1996 to mid-1997). The fraction of short term borrowing then fell steadily and has
been fluctuating in a 13% to 30% range in recent years. This suggests that, at least in the case of Peru, the
chances of a rollover crisis with F L are small. We are grateful to Paul Castillo for providing us with these
numbers.
   42
      The data are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis' website, Fred.
   43
      The foreign reserves and GDP data were taken from the IMF's International Financial Statistics
database, International Financial Statistics.
   44
      Source: IMFInternational Financial Statistics
   45
      Source: World Bank, International Debt Statistics. The variable used is Interest Payments On External
Debt (% Of GNI) https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?source=14&series=DT.INT.DECT.GN.ZS.




                                                     26
    The first three columns of Table 1 include all data covering the period 1995-2017. We
indicate N, the number of country, year observations in the data set. The last three columns
of the table do not include advanced countries and emerging economies in the Eurozone.46
We also report an R2 diagnostic for our logit regressions at the bottom of each column.47

Results of Logit Regressions Consider the first column of Table 1, which has the flavor
of the findings in Levy-Yeyati (2006). The results in that column suggest that an exchange
rate depreciation is less likely to lead to a systemic crisis if deposit dollarization is low (i.e.,
Dollar (20)i,t1 = 0). Levy-Yeyati (2006) interprets the significance of the coe cient on the
cross product, ei,t1  Dollar (20)i,t1 , as reflecting that high financial dollarization causes
the balance sheet channel associated with an exchange rate change to dominate the expen-
diture switching channel. However, that the significance the cross-product coe cient is not
robust to the introduction of other relevant variables. For example, in column (2) we include
the F L/F A dummy and the significance of the coe cient on ei,t1  Dollar (20)i,t1 goes
away. Levy-Yeyati (2006) also includes the F L/F A dummy in his analysis, so column (2)
shows that that analysis is not robust the introduction of post-2003 data. Similarly, compar-
ing columns (1) (which uses all our data) and (4) (only EME's), we see that the significance
of the coe cient on ei,t1  Dollar (20)i,t1 also ceases to be significant if we only look at
EME's. In the Online Appendix Section H.8 we display additional evidence on the lack of
robustness in Levy-Yeyati (2006)'s findings that the coe cient on ei,t1  Dollar (20)i,t1
is statistically significant.48 So, deposit dollarization does not play a significant role in the
probability of a systemic banking crisis.
    Note that the VIX plays a significant role in all our results. When it comes to EME's
(our principal interest) the only two variables that matter significantly for a banking crisis
are the VIX and the country's external debt (see column (6)).49 We only include external
debt in our analysis of EME's because our data source does not include non-EME data.
    Turning to High F L/F A note that columns (2) and (5) imply that that variable is
  46
     The advanced economies that are deleted are Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Singapore,
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom.
  47
     Specifically, we report the pseudo-R2 provided by STATA, 1  var (Ái,t ) /var (yi,t ) , evaluated at the
estimated values of the logit parameter estimates.
  48
     Levy-Yeyati (2006) kindly shared his computer codes and data with us. The lack of robustness of his
results is not just due to our use of data from the 2000s. Using Levy-Yeyati (2006)'s own data, we find that
the significance of the coe cient on ei,t1  Dollar (20)i,t1 is not robust to small changes in the cuto
used to define "high deposit dollarization" and to allowing for correlation in Ái,t for fixed i across t.
  49
     In Subsection H.1 in the Online Appendix we explore alternative measures of uncertainty, but find that
the VIX has the biggest tstatistic. Two alternative measures of uncertainty that are almost as useful as
the VIX are "financial stress" (see Puttmann (2018)) and "exchange rate market volatility" (see Baker et al.
(2019)). The Online Appendix also considers the "global financial factor" (see Miranda-Agrippino and Rey
(2020)) which turns out not to be significant.




                                                    27
statistically significant. As explained above, there are good economic reasons why F L/F A >
1 might be a source of vulnerability to crisis. High F L/F A could trigger a classic rollover
crisis in the banking system when the central bank cannot act as a lender of last resort
in dollars. This suggests that the interaction of the Low Reserves dummy with F L/F A
should have a positive and significant coe cient. In fact, column (3), (5), (6) show that the
coe cient is negative and not significant. So, the positive coe cient on F L/F A appears to
be a puzzle, at least for the classic liquidity crises.50 An alternative interpretation of the
results is suggested by the findings in column (6). When we include External Debt in the
equation, then F L/F A ceases to be significant. Taken together, the evidence suggests that
the statistical significance of F L/F A only reflects its role as an indicator of external debt,
and not that F L/F A per se is necessarily important.
    In sum, we find that financial crises are forecastable to some extent, with variables like
the VIX and external debt.51 However, our forecasting exercise provides no support to the
idea that there is an association between deposit dollarization and financial crises.

4.2.2    Dollarization and the Severity of Banking Crises

Previous subsections show that there is little evidence that deposit dollarization a ects the
likelihood of a crisis. Here, we ask a di erent question: "conditional on a crisis occurring,
is the economic cost greater for an economy with high deposit dollarization?". We answer
this question using the ordinary least squares results reported in Table 2. In each regression
the left-hand variable is the quantity of GDP lost that can be attributed to the crisis, as
measured in Laeven and Valencia (2018).52 The cost of a crisis includes lost output in
subsequent years for crises that last more than one year.53 The number of observations, N,
at the bottom of the table is relatively small, reflecting the small number of crises in our
  50
     The result is a puzzle for sunspot crises (`classic liquidity crises') in which banks are solvent but nev-
ertheless susceptible to liquidity problems, as in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015). The liquidity problem could
make solvent banks insolvent in case short-term creditors to domestic banks refuse to roll over their dollar
loans and banks are forced to sell long-term assets at fire-sale prices. A central bank with su cient dollar
reserves could prevent such a crisis by lending banks dollars using the banks' long-term illiquid dollar assets
as collateral. Understanding this in advance, a model like that in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015) predicts that
dollar creditors would have no reason to refuse to roll over in the first place. It is from this perspective that
the statistical insignificance of the coe cient on the interaction term between the Low Reserves dummy and
F L/F A is puzzling. However, suppose news arrives suggesting that banks dollar assets are of lower quality
than initially believed. In this case, the assets are not good collateral and perhaps even a government with
ample reserves might not be in a position to help. By this logic the significant coe cient on F L/F A and
non-significant coe cient on the interaction term on reserves may not be a puzzle after all.
  51
     Subsection (H.10) in the Online Appendix uses standard metrics to show that the model in column (6)
of Table 1 represents an `acceptable' forecasting model for crises. Consistent with the results in the table,
those metrics show that the crucial variables for forecasting crises are the VIX and external debt, while
deposit dollarization is not related to crises.
  52
     For the measure of the amount of output loss in a crisis, see the discussion in Section 4.1.
  53
     Scarring e ects which continue after the crisis is over are not included in the cost measure.




                                                       28
data. The country-specific right hand variables in Table 2 include only observations on the
year before the first year of a crisis. We do this to mitigate endogeneity problems. The
only variable that is not country-specific is the VIX, and we include its contemporaneous
value on the right side of the regression. The right hand variables in Table 2 are similar to
the right hand variables in Table 1 for the sake of symmetry. As in the logit regressions,
we permit heteroscedasticity in the error terms, as well as autocorrelation and cross-country
correlations (see Petersen (2009)).

                                Table 1: Probability of Systemic Banking Crisis
                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
             Crisis
             Dollar (20)                       -0.435     -0.281     -0.149      0.234      -0.107      -0.603
                                               (-0.75)    (-0.41)    (-0.22)     (0.52)     (-0.15)     (-0.76)

               er                              -0.923*    -3.367     -3.464      0.279      -0.0461     -0.662
                                               (-1.84)    (-0.97)    (-0.98)     (0.50)     (-0.02)     (-0.19)

             Dollar(20)* er                   1.652**     2.509       2.819      0.392      -0.931      -2.024
                                               (2.29)     (0.53)      (0.59)     (0.55)     (-0.29)     (-0.39)

             High FL/FA                                  1.599**      1.636*                1.732*      1.544
                                                          (2.34)      (1.74)                (1.83)      (1.45)

             VIX                              0.166**    0.160***   0.159***    0.0751*    0.126***    0.120***
                                               (2.47)     (2.96)     (2.90)      (1.78)     (2.89)      (2.86)

             Reserves/GDP                                -3.738**    -4.587                 -4.349      -2.464
                                                          (-2.19)    (-1.43)                (-1.23)     (-0.94)

             Real GDP Growth                              0.0391      0.0409                0.0334      0.0637
                                                          (0.48)      (0.49)                (0.39)      (0.84)

             High FL/FA * Low Reserves                               -0.0813                -0.708      -1.067
                                                                     (-0.13)                (-0.69)     (-0.93)

             Dollar(20) * Low Reserves                               -0.319                 0.0639      0.861
                                                                     (-0.40)                (0.06)      (0.89)

             External Debt                                                                             0.340***
                                                                                                        (4.93)

             Constant                         -7.535*** -8.262*** -8.134*** -5.994*** -7.348*** -7.901***
                                                (-5.06)   (-5.24)   (-5.43)   (-5.31)   (-6.03)   (-6.65)
             N                                   2262      1543      1543      1919      1464      1204
             Years                            1995-2017 1995-2017 1995-2017 1995-2017 1995-2017 1995-2017
             Countries                            All       All       All     EMEs      EMEs      EMEs
             Pseudo R2                          0.0487    0.0758    0.0783   0.00382    0.0294    0.0505
             t statistics in parentheses
             * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: `left hand variable'   is Laeven and Valencia (2018) banking crisis indicator; for list of countries see footnote 46.


   The critical result in the table is that the coe cient on deposit dollarization has the
`wrong' sign, but in any case is never significantly di erent from zero. Note that the adjusted
R2 is negative in column 4 and 6, consistent with the finding that none of the variables in
the associated regression is significant, as well as the fact that N is small. Notably, the VIX




                                                              29
is never significant for EMEs, despite the fact that it plays an important role in determining
the probability of a crisis (see Table 1). Still, it is interesting that the coe cient on the VIX
is always negative, and in one case, when we include advanced economies, it is significant.
This is (modest) evidence that when the VIX is high then the output loss from a crisis is
small. One interpretation of this is based on the fact that the VIX is the only variable that
is common across countries. This may suggest that when the trigger of a crisis is external
to a country, then the resulting output loss is less severe than when the cause is internal.
    Column 5 adds FL/FA, central bank reserves and real GDP growth in the year before a
crisis. As in Table 1, reserves are not significant. Real GDP growth is significant, suggesting
that the cost of crisis is greater if it hits an economy that is already weakening for other
reasons. Table 1 indicates that slow GDP growth per se does not raise the probability of a
crisis. However, since the cost of a crisis is greater if it hits a slow-growing economy, risk
aversion may dictate that policymakers prepare for crisis when GDP growth is low.
    The significance of FL/FA in column 5 draws attention to a possible cost of financial
dollarization. The significance of F L/F A deserves further study. As discussed above, the
evidence in Table 1 on F L/F A as a predictor of crises is somewhat mixed. But, Table 2
suggests that once a crisis is underway, the cost of that crisis is greater if F L/F A is high
at the time that the crisis begins. Risk aversion would dictate that policy pay attention to
F L/F A whether it increases the probability of a crisis or simply makes a crisis worse once
it happens.
    For our purposes the main takeaway from Tables 1 and 2 is that deposit dollarization
does not increase a country's vulnerability to financial crisis and if one occurs, it does not
a ect its severity. Our results for F L/F A and external debt do indicate that policy pay
attention to dollar borrowing by domestic residents from foreigners.


5     Impact of Financial Dollarization on Transmission of
      Shocks
Even if deposit dollarization does not increase the probability of crisis or raise the cost of
crisis once it occurs, it may still have harmful e ects in other ways. In particular, given
the relative absence of currency mismatch in banks, deposit dollarization forces currency
mismatch onto non-financial firms. For example, when the exchange rate depreciates the
banking system may remain stable, but firms with heavy dollar liabilities may be forced to
ine ciently pass up on good investment and employment opportunities. This is a balance
sheet channel associated with a depreciation that is similar to the analogous channel for
banks discussed in Section 4.2. In line with other evidence in the literature, our empirical
results support the idea that, with sensible prudential policy in place, the balance sheet
channel is relatively weak. Sales and GDP appear to be the main drivers of nonfinancial firm
investment, not exchange rate fluctuations per se. An exchange rate depreciation could also
impact investment activity by an investment price channel which raises the local currency
price of critical imported investment goods. This expenditure switching-type channel has
nothing directly to do with the financial dollarization issues considered in this paper.

                                    Table 2: Output Loss in Banking Crises

                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)       (6)
   Dollar (20)                       -16.07        -27.24       -4.827        -22.72      -21.12     37.46
                                     (-1.25)      (-1.70)       (-0.20)       (-1.01)    (-1.05)    (0.38)
       er                            -51.62         14.54        95.26        -131.7       86.66     324.7
                                     (-0.77)       (0.25)       (0.77)        (-1.23)     (0.93)    (0.43)
   Dollar(20)* er                     42.69         74.05       -15.77         119.8      -18.14    -505.4
                                     (0.66)        (0.92)       (-0.12)       (1.14)     (-0.13)   (-0.95)
   VIX                               -1.300       -2.972*       -2.753        -1.748      -2.835    -2.999
                                     (-0.94)      (-2.08)       (-1.67)       (-0.96)    (-1.61)   (-0.59)
   High FL/FA                                     27.96**        51.46                   30.25**     102.1
                                                   (2.40)       (1.65)                    (2.81)    (0.68)
   Reserves/GDP                                     67.54        75.29                    107.0      16.54
                                                   (0.45)       (0.43)                    (0.68)    (0.06)
   Real GDP Growth                                 -2.005       -2.279                  -2.738**    -1.278
                                                  (-1.61)       (-1.36)                  (-2.87)   (-0.46)
   High FL/FA * Dollar (20)                                     -29.93                              -93.54
                                                                (-0.74)                            (-0.60)
   External Debt                                                                                   -0.0470
                                                                                                   (-0.01)
   Constant                          72.99*       102.3**    79.01            91.36      90.13**     54.25
                                     (1.77)        (2.92)    (1.55)           (1.71)      (2.40)    (0.28)
   N                                   41            18        18               25          15        13
   Years                           1995-2017     1995-2017 1995-2017        1995-2017   1995-2017 1995-2017
   Countries                          All           All       All             EMEs        EMEs      EMEs
   Adj R2                           0.00162        0.360     0.327           -0.0247      0.287     -0.172
  t statistics in parentheses
  * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: left hand variable is GDP growth; for list of countries see footnote 46.


      In any case, the evidence for an investment price channel is also weak.55 The point
       54

estimates are not significant and they are even have the wrong sign.56
  54
      There may also be an indirect e ect, to the extent that imported inputs require foreign finance. That
e ect may in fact imply that looser regulations on financial dollarization are desired. If domestic residents
can denominate their saving in dollars, this could make importers less dependent on (possibly fickle) foreign
finance for dollars. So, we view that indirect channel between financial dollarization and the investment
price channel as ambiguous.
   55
      Alfaro et al. (2018) note heterogenous impact of RER depreciations on the performance of exporting
firms. In particular, exporting firms which are more dependent on imported intermediate inputs, do not
benefit from RER depreciations. So, our evidence against the investment price channel may reflect lack of
power. However, we stress that there is no direct relationship between the investment price channel and
financial dollarization and if there is an indirect e ect, that appears to be ambiguous (see footnote 54).
   56
      See the discussion of the results for the exchange rate depreciation, ER, in Table I14 in Subsection




                                                              31
    Our analysis is based on two firm-level datasets for Peru and one dataset for Armenia.57
The first Peruvian dataset has annual observations for 118 firms over the period, 1999-2014.
In any one year, this unbalanced panel includes data for 80-100 firms and was constructed
for the research reported in Ramírez-Rondán (2019). This dataset is attractive because it
has a relatively large number of observations, it includes information about whether or not
a firm is an exporter, and it includes the assets and liabilities of the firms by currency of
denomination. Moreover, the firms in the dataset account for most of the dollar borrowing
by Peruvian nonfinancial firms. This dataset indicates that a firm's investment response to
an exchange rate depreciation is not significantly related to the degree of currency mismatch
on its balance sheet. Moreover, among the firms with significant currency mismatch, the
response of investment to an exchange rate depreciation is not significantly related to whether
or not it is an exporter. Finally, we exploit our observations on assets and liabilities by
currency denomination to do stress tests on the firm balance sheets. We infer that the
reason depreciations have little impact on firms is that the ones with currency mismatch on
their balance sheets have low leverage and can handle the consequences of exchange rate
fluctuations.
    Our second Peruvian dataset was constructed for the research reported in Humala (2019)
and contains a balanced panel for 28 large, publicly traded firms. This dataset has the
advantage that it includes the period of the large 30 percent currency depreciation that
occurred in Peru over the three years, 2013-2015 (see Figure I15d). While the data do
not indicate the extent to which firms are naturally hedged by exports, they do include
information about firms' holdings of foreign exchange derivatives. We show that there is no
significant relationship between a firm's currency mismatch on its balance sheet on the eve of
the depreciation, 2012Q4, and its investment over the subsequent years, 2012Q4 to 2016Q4.
    Our firm-level annual Armenian dataset resembles our second Peruvian dataset in that it
includes a period of sharp depreciation and its aftermath. The Armenian dataset covers the
period, 2014-2017, which allows us to study the impact of the abrupt 17% depreciation in
the Dram that occurred in a three-month period starting at the end of 2014. The data merge
information on credit data by currency from the Armenian credit registry with assets and
investment and other firm variables from the tax authorities. With a minor exception, the
results are consistent with our findings for the second Peruvian dataset: the investment in
2015, 2016 and 2017 of firms with substantial currency mismatch on their balance sheets on
the eve of the depreciation is statistically similar to investment by firms with little mismatch.
The results do not change if we control for whether or not a firm is an exporter.
    The exception in our analysis of the Armenian data lies with the firms in the top quartile
I.1.1 of the Oline Appendix.
   57
      We thank Paul Castillo for drawing our attention to the Peruvian datasets.




                                                    32
in terms of leverage. Among these highly-leveraged firms, the ones with a relatively high
share of credit in dollars in the pre-shock period invested significantly less in 2015 than did
highly-leveraged firms with low credit dollarization. The di erence in investment among
highly-leveraged firms with high and low credit dollarization was not significant in 2016 and
2017. It is not clear how we should interpret these results. To understand why firms with
high leverage cut back on investment in 2015 requires investigating the individual firms,
something that we cannot do for confidentiality reasons. Although one might be tempted to
infer that the results warrant additional prudential regulations, to reach such a conclusion
without further information would be a mistake. For example, a number of firms in the
sample have leverage so high that they are technically in default. There are even some firms
whose dollar debt alone exceeds the value of their total assets. Perhaps the leverage of these
firms is mis-measured in the sense that assets are measured at historical rather than market
value. Or, perhaps these firms have a lot of intangible capital that is not fully reflected in
their total asset data.
    Although our analyses are (to the best of our knowledge) novel, they complement similar
findings for other countries, which already exist in the literature. As a result, we have put
the details of our analysis in Section I.1.1 in the Online Appendix.
    Regarding the existing literature, Kim et al. (2015) show that small firms in Korea with
dollar debt decreased investment following the Asian crises but the e ect is negligible (or
even positive) for large firms with dollar debt. Aguiar (2005) finds that firms with a high
amount of short-term dollar debt decreased investment after the exchange rate shock in
1994. However, Aguiar (2005)'s data show that most of the dollar debt issued by firms in
Mexico is long-term.58 Moreover, he finds that the response of investment to an exchange
rate depreciation is small for firms that issue longer-maturity debt. In Pratap et al. (2003)'s
analysis of Mexican data they report strong balance sheet e ects following the 1994 crisis
but not in the 1998 crisis. They interpret the di erence as reflecting better management of
exchange rate risk. Their results are consistent with the view that sound prudential policy
is important, but that financial dollarization per se is not a problem. Finally, Bleakley and
Cowan (2008) study 450 firms in 5 Latin American countries and they find that balance
sheet e ects are relatively modest.59 That is, they conclude "...firms holding more dollar
debt do not invest less than their peso-indebted counterparts following a depreciation."60
    In sum, our results and those in the existing literature suggest that the role of balance
sheet e ects in exchange rate changes is relatively modest in EMEs. Of course, most of
  58
     See Subsection I.2 in the Online Appendix.
  59
     Bleakley and Cowan (2008) using data from Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, and Mexico.
  60
     Casas et al. (2020) report an interesting study of Colombia, but the relevance of that analysis for our in-
vestigation is not clear. They find that in Colombia, non-exporter firms with dollar mismatch decreased their
imports significantly following an exchange rate depreciation, via the investment price channel. This may
reflect an e cient expenditure switching response to a depreciation rather than a problem with dollarization.




                                                      33
this evidence is drawn from a period in which regulatory authorities have been attentive to
prudential policy. In some cases, there may be a case for strengthening such policies. For
example, the evidence from Mexico might warrant making sure firms do not take out too
much short term dollar debt and the Armenian data may suggest (subject to the measurement
issues raised above) keeping a watchful eye on high-leverage firms that borrow dollars.
    At the same time, it is important to bear in mind that it is not the purpose of prudential
policy to eliminate private sector risk-taking altogether. Risk taking (which by definition
means encountering the possibility of failure and even ruin) is in many ways the driving force
of innovation and economic growth. The purpose of prudential policy is to prevent firms
from making risky decisions in cases where the consequences of those risks are born by others
without their consent or knowledge. For example, if firms which look technically bankrupt are
nevertheless able to receive dollar loans because of implicit government guarantees, then those
loans put taxpayers at risk and such firms may well warrant prudential scrutiny. Similarly,
firms in systemically critical positions may also warrant prudential oversight.
    The principle in the previous paragraph suggests that banks should not be permitted to
have large currency mismatch on their balance sheets.61 Banks typically have a much higher
level of leverage than nonfinancial firms, and so they cannot handle substantial currency
depreciation. This is especially so because central banks in EMEs have at best only a limited
capacity to act as lenders of last resort when there is a dollar liquidity problem. Because a
large part of bank liabilities serve as the medium of exchange for transactions in goods and
services, if banks fail because of an exchange rate depreciation, the consequences are felt by a
wide range of people who took no part in the bank's currency portfolio decisions. Fortunately,
these views are widely understood and, as we show in Subsection 3.2.1, regulators in the 2000s
appear to have successfully acted to prevent currency mismatch in their national banking
systems.62
    What is important for our analysis is that, overall, most firms with dollar mismatch do
not appear to cut back on investment after a depreciation. We conclude that, with sensible
prudential policy in place, the dollar mismatch pushed onto non-financial firms by households
  61
      It is also important that term mismatch in dollar assets and liabilities be avoided. When long-term
illiquid dollar assets (e.g., loans to nonfinancial firms) are financed by short-term dollar liabilities, a failure
of creditors to roll over the dollar liabilities could quickly result in dollar mismatch as assets have to be sold
at fire-sale prices (see, e.g, Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015)).
   62
      Another example of dollarization where prudential regulation is warranted is the large increase in foreign-
currency denominated mortgages taken by households in Eastern Europe. Presumably, a number of factors
contributed to this phenomenon. Among these is a moral hazard problem when a large group of people
undertake a correlated risk (e.g., acquire foreign currency-denominated liabilities). In this case, members of
the group may, knowing that many others are undertaking the same risk, believe that the government (e.g.,
other tax payers) will come to the rescue in case things go awry and there is a substantial appreciation in
the currency in which the debt is taken. Fortunately, regulators are now well aware of this risk and are taken
suitable measures.




                                                        34
that choose to hold dollar deposits does not appear to impose substantial economic disruption
on EME economies.


6     Model
Following is our two-period model designed to interpret the results reported in previous
sections. We interpret the model as capturing a `representative year' in a typical EME,
though we parameterize it using data from Peru. In the model we think of `Period 1' as the
point at the end of that period, after worker-household consumption has occurred and their
consumption saving decision is a state variable. The only decision for the worker-household
in Period 1 is a portfolio decision about how to allocate saving between local currency and
foreign currency deposits. These deposits, as well as potential finance from abroad, are used
to finance period 1 capital investment by a firm-household which has no resources of its own.
The model continues into period 2 when production and consumption occurs. We use this
interpretation of the model as a guide for choosing reasonable parameters. Still, the model
is highly stylized to maximize transparency of the analysis.


6.1    Worker-Households
Households have claims on Y units of the domestic good, at the start of period 1. They sell
all the goods in the period 1 domestic goods market and deposit the corresponding credits in
a domestic bank. The bank o ers two types of deposits, d and dú , both denominated in units
of the period 1 domestic good. The first type of deposit, d, o ers a state non-contingent
claim on dr period 2 final domestic consumption goods. The second type of deposit, dú
o ers a state non-contingent claim on dú rú period 2 foreign goods. We denote r as the `peso
interest rate' and rú as the `dollar interest rate'. Similarly, we refer to d as `peso deposits'
and dú as `dollar deposits'. These must be chosen before the household knows the realization
of the period 2 shocks, subject to:
                                          d + dú = Y.                                       (6)

The household's period 2 budget constraint is:

                   chouse
                    2     = dr + dú rú e2 + w2 l2 = (e2 rú  r) dú + w2 + Y r,               (7)

after substituting out for d using equation 6. Here chouse
                                                     2     and w2 denote period 2 consump-
tion and labor earnings, respectively. They are denominated in terms of the period 2 final
consumption good. In (7), e2 denotes the real exchange rate in period 2. That is, one unit of
period 2 foreign good can be purchased with e2 units the period 2 final consumption good.
The restriction, chouse
                  2     Ø 0, for all realizations of period 2 shocks restricts the household's dú
decision in period 1. Finally, we have imposed the assumption that households supply one
unit of labor in period 2 inelastically.63
   The problem of the household is to choose dú to solve

                                                   /     1         2
                                     max Ec house
                                            2        var   c house
                                                             2       ,                                   (8)
                                      dú           2
subject to the second restriction in (7). The solution to a problem with these mean-variance
preferences is standard:64

                                         E (r  e2 rú ) cov (rú e2 , w2 )
                                dú =                                     .                               (9)
                                         /var (rú e2 )   var (rú e2 )

Here, E , cov and var are the expectation, covariance and variance operators, conditional on
period 1 information. The first term reflects the household's speculative motive for holding
deposits and the second term reflects the worker-household's hedging motive. For the model
to be empirically interesting, it must be that in equilibrium there is a premium on pesos,
that is, E (r  e2 rú ) > 0. The speculative motive alone would then imply that the household
wants to go short on dollars and set dú < 0. Of course, in the data we observe dú > 0. This
can be an equilibrium in an empirically plausible version of our model if the household has
the right hedging motive.
    By equation (9), having the right hedging motive means that the covariance term must
be su ciently large and negative. Put di erently, it must be the case that e2 depreciates in
states of the world when w2 is low. We assume that in period 2, production occurs using
a Cobb-Douglas production function, so that the workers' earnings, w2 , are proportional to
period 2 GDP. So, the worker `has the right hedging motive' if the exchange rate depreciates
in a recession.
  63
     The model with peso and dollar deposits is isomorphic to a model with no dollar deposits and a futures
market in dollars. For the details, see the Online Appendix. The observation is perhaps already obvious from
the second equality in equation (7). Note that (e2 rú  r) dú = (e2 rú  F ) L where L = rú dú and F = r/rú .
Here, L denotes the number of long futures contracts acquired in period 1 to take delivery of a dollar in
period 2. The object, F is the number of pesos to be paid in period 2 for one futures contract. Under this
alternative arrangement, all deposits are made in pesos in period 1, so that earnings from deposits in period
2 correspond to Y r. Under the futures contract, the household receives a payment of (e2  F ) L pesos from
the futures exchange in period 2 if (e2  F ) > 0. Otherwise, (e2  F ) L is a payment made by the household
to the futures exchange. In principle, the household could go long or short (i.e., L < 0) in dollars, though
in the empirically relevant range L > 0. Our requirement, chouse
                                                             2    Ø 0 in all period 2 states of nature means
that the household can guarantee payment to the exchange by putting up its period 2 income as collateral.
  64
     For details, see the Online Appendix, section J.1.1.




                                                     36
6.2     Firm-Households and Period 2 Domestic Output
Identical, competitive local firms are on the other side of the period 1 lending market.
The representative firm needs period 1 resources to produce capital, K. Capital is used, in
combination with the labor of the household, to produce a period 2 tradable good.
    The firm produces K in period 1 using domestic, kh , and foreign, kf , inputs using the
following production function:
                                             Ê 1Ê
                                       K = kh kf .                                     (10)

Conditional on producing a given amount of K, cost minimization leads the usual constant
expenditure share expressions:

                                  e1 kf = (1  Ê ) pK K, kh = Ê pK K,                                   (11)

where e1 kf is the domestic period 1 goods value of kf and e1 is the period 1 exchange rate.
Also, pK denotes the marginal cost of producing K :
                                              3       41Ê 3        4Ê
                                           e1                  1
                                      p =
                                        K
                                                                        ,                              (12)
                                          1Ê                   Ê

which is exogenous to the firm. We refer to pK as the shadow price of capital.65
   The firm must issue debt, b, bú , into the period 1 domestic financial market in order to
produce K , subject to

                                             pK K = b + bú .                                           (13)

Here, b and bú denote peso and dollar loans, which must be repaid at interest r and rú ,
respectively, in period 2. These loans are denominated in units of the period 1 domestic
good. The model does not include foreign direct investment (FDI). In part, this is because
FDI plays no role in our empirical analysis.66
   Capital is used by the firm to produce the period 2 tradable good, Y2h , as follows:

                                                          1­
                                            Y2h = (AK )­ l2  ,                                         (14)

where l2 denotes the quantity of labor hired in period 2 and A denotes a technology shock
  65
      The marginal cost expression in equation (12) is the standard one for the Cobb-Douglas production
function in equation (10). For further discussion see subsection J.1.2 in the Online Appendix.
   66
      We leave the introduction of FDI to future work. One way to introduce FDI into the model is to allow
foreign financiers to come into the country and build K in period 1 and reap the rewards in period 2, just
like our firm-households. A di erence is that the foreign financiers' preferences are in terms of the dollar
good (see Equation (27) below), while the firm-household preferences are in terms of the domestic good (see
equation (8)).




                                                    37
realized in period 2. All shocks, including A, are modeled as the realization of a binomial
distribution of the following form: A oe (µA (1  A ) , µA (1 + A )) , with probability 1/2 for
each possible realization. In this way, the mean of A is µA and its standard deviation is
µA A . Approximately, A is the standard deviation of ln A.
    Conditional on the realization of A and its period 1 chosen value of K, the firm chooses
l2 in period 2 to optimize earnings from K, ph  2 Y2  w2 l2 . Here, p2 denotes the number of
                                                    h                 h

period 2 final consumption goods needed to purchase a unit of the period 2 tradable good.
The optimized earnings of the firm correspond to ­ph   2 Y2 . It is convenient to write this as
                                                           h

 K
r2 K, where r2K
                 is the marginal contribution to earnings of a unit of capital:

                                             K
                                            r2 = ­ ph   h
                                                    2 Y2 /K.                                            (15)

Because the firm is competitive and K/l2 is a function of ph
                                                           2 , w2 and A, we treat the marginal
earning on capital as exogenous to the firm.
   The firm's consumption of final period 2 consumption goods, cf  2
                                                                     irm
                                                                         , must satisfy its budget
constraint,
                                                        1              2
                 cf
                  2
                    irm
                        = r2
                           K
                             K  (br + bú rú e2 ) = R2
                                                    K
                                                       r pK K  bú (e2 rú  r) ,                          (16)

where the second equality follows by substituting out for b using equation (13).67 Also, the
rate of return on capital, R2
                            k
                              , is the marginal earnings on capital, divided by its shadow price:
                                                             K
                                                            r2
                                                 K
                                                R2 =           .                                        (17)
                                                            pK

   We assume that in period 1 the firm chooses K and bú to maximize the following mean-
variance objective:
                                                /
                             max    E (cf
                                        2
                                          irm
                                              )  var(cf
                                                      2
                                                        irm
                                                            ),                     (18)
                               ú
                              b ,K              2
subject to (16) and cf
                     2
                       irm
                           Ø 0 in each period 2 state of nature. Optimization of bú implies:
                                                                   1          2
                                        E (r  e2 r )         cov e2 rú , r2
                                                   ú                      K
                                 bú =                  +                          .                     (19)
                                        var (e2 rú ) /         var (e2 rú )

Note that, like the household's dú decision, the firm's bú decision decomposes into a spec-
ulative and a hedging component. If the exchange rate depreciates (e2 high) in states of
nature in which the firm's income is low (i.e., r2
                                                 K
                                                   is low) then the hedging motive makes the
firm averse to borrowing in dollars. By equation (15), r2  K
                                                             , is proportional to ph
                                                                                   2 Y2 . Below,
                                                                                       h

  67
    In terms of the futures market in footnote (63), with bú > 0 the firm in e ect goes long on bú rú futures
contracts in dollars.




                                                       38
(see equation (40)) we show that ph  2 Y2 corresponds to period 2 GDP. Thus, the hedging
                                         h

motive of the firm is the same as it is for the household, so that makes the firm averse to
borrowing in dollars. However, the firm can be induced to borrow in dollars anyway by the
speculative motive if there is a su ciently high premium on the domestic interest rate (i.e.,
E (r  e2 rú ) > 0).
    Finally, optimization of K leads to the following solution:
                                            1         2          1             2
                                            K
                                         E R2 r               cov e2 rú , R2
                                                                           K

                                 1 K =
                                pK                        +                        bú .                (20)
                                          var (R2
                                                K
                                                  )/             var (R2
                                                                       K
                                                                         )

6.3        Foreign Financiers
There is a representative and competitive foreign financier that also participates in domestic
financial markets. Analogous to the other agents in the model, the financier has mean-
variance preferences over period 2 foreign consumption. In period 1 financier borrows bf in
the foreign financial market, where bf is denominated in foreign goods. The financier must
pay back bf r$ in period 2, where r$ is period 2 foreign goods per period 1 foreign good
borrowed in the foreign market. In equilibrium,

                                                  e1 rú = r$ ,                                         (21)

for otherwise the financier would have an arbitrage opportunity. The financier uses the
borrowed `dollars' to make loans in the domestic credit market. Of these loans, x$ is the
quantity of dollar loans and xD is the quantity of peso loans. Both x$ and xD are in units
of foreign goods, so that the foreign financiers' financial constraint is:68

                                                x $ + xD = b f .                                       (22)

The foreign financier has other exogenous income, Y2f , in period 2, in foreign goods. This
other income is imperfectly correlated with the period 2 foreign demand shifter, which we
denote by Y2ú . In particular,
                                       Y2ú = > + <,                                    (23)

where > and < are independent random variables which are realized in period 2. We model
these variables in the same way as A. Thus, > and < each have a binomial distribution with
mean µ> and µ< , respectively. Similarly, they have standard deviations, µ> > and µ< < . We
  68
       Here, we adopt an important simplification, that foreigners do not do direct investment (see Footnote
7).




                                                      39
assume that the financier's period 2 other income has the following form:

                                                     Y2f = s<,                                           (24)

where s is a parameter that is known in period 1 before the financier solves its problem.
Thus,                               1         2
                                                    2
                                 cov Y2f , Y2ú = s  < .                              (25)

   The financier's consumption is the foreign consumption good value of its period 2 earn-
ings:
                                        xD e1 r
                             x$ e1 rú +          bf e1 rú + Y2f ,                     (26)
                                         e2
where we have substituted out r$ using the arbitrage condition, equation (21). After sub-
stituting out for bf from 22, the financier's consumption of period 2 foreign goods is, after
rearranging:
                                                  e1
                                    (r  rú e2 ) xD + Y2f .                              (27)
                                                  e2
According to this equation, foreign financier's only choice is xD . We assume the foreign
financier has mean-variance preferences with parameter /f , so that optimization leads to:
                                                                            1         2
                                       Ee1
                                           (r  e2 rú )                cov e1
                                                                             r, Y2f
                                xD =                                                                     (28)
                                        e2                                e2
                                               1
                                                   e1
                                                          2                1      2       ,
                                         var       e2
                                                      r       /f       var e  1
                                                                             e2
                                                                                r

after using the no-arbitrage condition, equation (21). We have stressed that an empirically
plausible model of an EME will have the property that there is a premium on the local
currency. Equation (28) implies that, other things the same, this motivates foreign financiers
to lend in terms of domestic currency. Of course, if they actually did this to a su cient extent,
then in equilibrium there could be no premium on the domestic interest rate. However, the
foreign financiers also have a hedging motive. Suppose that in states of the world when the
exchange rate depreciates (i.e., e2 is high) their other sources of income, Y2f , are low. In that
case, their hedging motive makes foreign financiers averse to lending in domestic currency,
even in the presence of a local premium.69
  69
    In practice, we refer to E (r  e2 rú ) as `the local premium'. This takes the perspective of the local
                                                                    e2 (r  e2 r ). In principle, these are two
lenders. Foreigners will view the local premium in foreign units, E e 1        ú

di erent objects. Below, we will see that they are roughly the same in the data, as well as in our calibrated
model.




                                                              40
6.4     Final Consumption Good Production in Period 2
The final good is produced in period 2 by combining the domestically produced period 2
       2 , with an imported period 2 foreign good, c2 . We model this as being accomplished
good, ch                                             f

by a zero-profit, representative competitive good firm. The firm's CES production function
is:
            C                                                        D     "
                1   1        2 "1                1   1        2 "1       " 1
      c2 = A Êc "
                        ch
                         2
                               "
                                    + (1  Êc )   "       cf
                                                          2
                                                                "
                                                                               ,   A = Êc
                                                                                        Êc
                                                                                           (1  Êc )1Êc 0 < " Æ 1.   (29)

The firm solves
                                                     maxf c2  ph  h      f
                                                               2 c2  e2 c2 ,                                        (30)
                                                 c2 ,ch
                                                      2 ,c2


subject to the production function. Optimization leads to the following conditions:
                                                      1       2"
                                                " 1                                       " 1 "
                                    2 = c2 Êc A
                                   ch               ph
                                                     2                  2 = c2 (1  Êc ) A
                                                                     , cf                    e2 .                   (31)

   It is well known that with linear homogeneity in production and perfect competition,
equilibrium requires that the factor prices (expressed in units of the output good) satisfy a
simple relation. We obtain this relation by substituting (31) into the production function
and rearranging, to obtain:
                                           Y5                  6 1
                                           _                 1" 1"
                                           ] A1" (1Êc )(e2 )
                                           _
                                                                                       0<"<1
                                       2 = _
                                      ph             Êc
                                                  1Êc
                                                                                                .
                                           _
                                           [(e2 ) Êc
                                                 
                                                                                       "=1

6.5     Market Clearing, Balance of Payments and GDP
This section describes the goods and financial market clearing conditions in periods 1 and 2.

6.5.1    Period 1

The market clearing condition in the period 1 goods market is given by


                                                               1 + kh = Y.
                                                              cú                                                    (32)

Here, Y is the period 1 endowment of domestic goods, which is supplied to the goods market.
The demand for domestic period 1 goods is the sum of the demand by firms, kh , and the
demand by foreigners, cú 1 . We assume that foreigners' demand for domestic goods is given
by:
                                      1 = Ê e1 Y1 , ÷ > 0,                             (33)
                                             ÷ ú
                                     cú
where ÷ denotes the elasticity of demand for exports and Y1ú denotes the foreign demand
shifter, in units of foreign goods.
    There are clearing conditions in each of the two financial markets in period 1. The supply
of peso loans is d + xD e1 and the demand for those loans is b. Clearing requires:

                                        d + xD e1 = b.                                   (34)

Similarly, clearing in the period 1 market for dollar loans requires

                                       dú + x$ e1 = bú .                                 (35)

   The balance of payments in period 1 requires that the receipts for exports net of imports,
cú
 1 e1 kf , equals assets acquired by domestic residents, d + dú , net of liabilities issued by
domestic residents, b + bú :

                                 1  e1 kf = d + d  (b + b ) .
                                cú                                                       (36)
                                                 ú       ú



6.5.2   Period 2

The market clearing condition in the period 2 domestic tradable goods market is given by

                                        Y2h = ch
                                               2 + c2 ,
                                                    ú
                                                                                         (37)

       2 denotes exports. Although the firm is competitive and takes the price of the tradable
where cú
       2 , as given, the tradable good is specialized on international markets and therefore
good, ph
has the following demand curve:
                                                A        B÷
                                                    e2
                                       cú
                                        2   =                 Y2ú .                      (38)
                                                    ph
                                                     2

Here, Y2ú denotes foreign GDP in period 2 and e2 /ph
                                                   2 is the period 2 relative price of the
foreign good relative to the domestic, tradable good. The market clearing condition for
period 2 final consumption goods is given by:

                                     c2 = chouse
                                           2     + cf
                                                    2
                                                      irm
                                                          .

   Domestic GDP in period 2 is defined as the sum of consumption and exports net of
imports:
                             GDP2 = c2 + ph    ú      f
                                            2 c2  e2 c2 .                      (39)

Using the zero profit condition for final good producers (the maximized value of the objective




                                                    42
in (30) is zero) as well as market clearing, (37), we find that GDP2 in equation (39) can be
expressed in value-added terms as follows:

                                        GDP2 = ph   h
                                                2 Y2 .                                     (40)

So, by equation (15) and its analog for w2 :

                            K
                           r2 = ­GDP2 /K, w2 = (1  ­) GDP2 ,                               (41)

where we have used the fact that equilibrium employment is unity in period 2.
   The balance of payments in period 2, in units of final consumption goods, requires that
the receipts for net exports, ph2 c2  e2 c2 , must equal net foreign asset accumulation. Because
                                   ú      f

period 2 is the last period, net asset accumulation in period 2 results in a zero stock of net
assets at the end of period 2. For example, if the net asset position at the end of period
1 were positive, then net asset accumulation in period 2 would be negative and the trade
surplus would be negative as well.
   On the asset side, recall that net asset accumulation by domestic residents in period 1 is
d + dú  (b + bú ) , in units of period 1 domestic goods. The period 2 net earnings on those
assets, in period 2 final consumption units, is

                                 dr + dú rú e2  (br + bú rú e2 ) .

So, the balance of payments requires:

                           2 c2  e2 c2 = br + b r e2  (dr + d r e2 ) .                     (42)
                              ú      f         ú ú           ú ú
                          ph

That is, net exports must be positive in period 2 if interest obligations to foreigners exceed
their obligations to domestic residents.


6.6    Model Results
In e ect, our model provides a narrative motivated by the data that we study. In the first
section we consider a special case for which we obtain a simple analytic result that illustrates
that narrative. After that, we assign values to the model parameters and then explore the
model's implications in greater detail. The section below describes the calibration of the
model, which uses data from Peru. We then discuss the ability of our model to reproduce
the key features of the Peruvian data.
6.6.1   Analytics: the Simple Narrative in the Model

The core hypothesis of this paper is that within country insurance flows are important
and perhaps of even greater magnitude than inter country flows. In the extreme case,
all insurance in the domestic economy is between residents (`intra-national') and none is
international. This is the case, b = bú (see equation (3)). Then, equating dú from (9) with
bú from (19) and rearranging, we obtain:

                              /   1                 2  /
              E (r  e2 rú ) =  cov rú e2 , w2 + r2
                                                 K
                                                   K =  cov (rú e2 , GDP2 ) .             (43)
                              2                        2
Here, the second equality uses equation (40). According to this expression, there is a positive
premium on peso deposits if the exchange rate depreciates when GDP is low. This expression
is consistent with the very simple intuition in the introduction, in which we (temporarily)
disregarded the role of foreigners in domestic credit markets.
    This makes households averse to lending in local currency and drives them to hold dollars.
The e ect is to create a premium on the domestic interest rate to encourage local firms to
borrow in dollars. Foreign financiers could in principle come in and wipe out the domestic
currency premium. They don't do so because they have the same hedging motive to avoid
lending in domestic currency units that households have. Although we do not describe the
world economy, we have in mind that EME exchange rate uncertainty is a bad hedge for
developed-country suppliers of finance.

6.6.2   Calibration

We simply set r$ = " = 1, and Êc = 0.75, Ê = 0.65. The latter two values ensure home-bias
in the production of period 2 consumption goods and period 1 capital goods (see equations
(29) and (10)). All three shocks are iid with the given standard deviations. For simplicity
we assumed each random variable can take 2 values with equal probability. Overall, we have
8 possible realizations of the three shocks in period 2.We use the Peruvian data to calibrate
the following remaining model parameters:

                          A , µA , ÷ , µ÷ , > , µ> , s, ­, /, /f , ÷ , Y1ú , Y1 .

In our baseline calibration we impose that the foreign financiers have the same risk aversion
parameter as domestic agents, /f = /. We choose the 12 free parameters to get as close
as possible to 10 calibration targets, which correspond to the 10 numbers in column (d) in
Table 4. Each calibration target is an average of annual data covering period in the 2000's
indicated in the note to Table 4. We choose the parameters to optimize a metric which,
roughly, minimizes a weighted sum of the squared deviations between the variables in the
`model' column of Table 4 and the `Peru' column, when both are available.70
    Our calibration targets are constructed from averages of annual Peruvian data covering
the period, 2000-2018. The results are reported in Table 4. Data from the Central Bank
of Peru (CBP) website suggests dú / (d + dú )  .44, where dú denotes dollar by residents in
local banks and d denotes their local currency deposits. Data from the CBP and the Bank
for International Settlements (BIS) suggests that bú / (b + bú )  0.40, where bú denotes dollar
loans to non-financial firms plus dollar bonds issued in international financial markets.71 In
the Peruvian data, (dú  bú ) /dú = 0.07. The fact that dú is similar in magnitude to bú
indicates that exchange rate fluctuations reallocate funds among Peruvians, and only to a
much smaller extent between Peruvians and foreigners. In particular, inter-country insurance
due to dollar debt in the calibrated model is 7% of the insurance flowing between households
and firms within the country. This result for Peru roughly coincides with what we found for
the median country in our dataset (see Figure 7).
    Not surprisingly, the local interest rate premium in Peru is quite high, a little over 2
percent, which is also roughly the average over the premia for the 10 EMEs in Figure 4.
Our 2 percent number is reasonably close to the roughly 3.5 percent premium reported
in Gourinchas et al. (2010).72 This premium represents a tax on holding dollar deposits
rather than soles deposits and our model takes the position that holders of dollar deposits
do so because of its insurance value. To be specific about this, it is useful to combine our
solution to the household's dollar deposit decision (see equation (9)) with equation (39) and
other equilibrium conditions. In particular the Cobb-Douglas assumption about production
in equation (14) implies that the wage bill, w2 , is proportional, to GDP2 , w2 = ­GDP2 .
Substituting this into the household deposit decision we obtain:

                              E (r  e2 rú )         cov (rú e2 , GDP2 )
                          d =
                            ú
                                             (1  ­)                     .                                 (44)
                              /var (rú e2 )             var (rú e2 )

One of our calibration targets is the correlation between the Peruvian goods value of a dollar
and Peruvian GDP, which is 0.20 (see Table 4). This maps into a negative value for the
covariance term in equation (44), explaining why dú > 0 even though households lose money
  70
     With one exception, we assign unit weight to each square deviation. The exception, the scaled trade
deficit, receives a weight of 100. We found it helpful to initiate calculations using the additional convex and
di erentiable penalty that is non-zero when any of the following variables are negative: E (r  rú e2 ), d  b,
1.05  r, ­  0.36. Note from the results in the table that these constraints are non-binding.
  71
     As noted above, we do not consider equity investment or foreign direct investment by foreigners.
  72
     The premium in our model and in the Gourinchas et al. (2010) analysis are not completely comparable.
First, theirs is an average over all non-US countries. Second, as Gourinchas et al. (2010) point out, their
interest rate spreads compare the return on foreign assets with risky payo s held by US residents against
relatively risk free liabilities issued to foreigners by US residents. Our model abstracts from uncertainty in
asset payo s. The only uncertainty for agents to consider in the choice of financial instruments has to do
with the exchange rate in period 2.




                                                      45
on average holding dollars.
    Note that the share of borrowing in dollars by firms is relatively large. In the Peruvian
data the number is 40 percent and in our model it is 60 percent. Given the relatively low
interest rate on dollars, why don't firms denominate 100 percent of their debt in dollars.
The reason is the mirror image of why households prefer to lend in dollars rather than local
currency. To see this, combine the firm's borrowing rule, equation (19), with equation (39)
to obtain:
                                E (r  e2 rú )      cov (e2 rú , GDP2 )
                           bú =                + ­                     .
                                var (e2 rú ) /       var (e2 rú ) K
Note that the covariance terms are identical across firms and households, except for the sign.
So, firms don't do all their borrowing in dollars because that is a bad hedge for them.
    We now turn to the foreign financiers. In our Peruvian dataset, only about 1 percent
of non-financial firm local currency borrowing is financed by foreign financiers (i.e., 100 
(b  d) /b  = 1).73 Why don't foreigners' exploit this apparent profit opportunity by lending
local currency in large quantities and thereby erase the interest rate premium? The answer in
our model is that foreigners have the same hedging motive to avoid local currency assets that
local residents have. In particular, the dominant shocks in the model are the shocks to foreign
demand, Y2ú , and when s > 0 the income of foreign financiers is positively correlated with
those shocks. So, when domestic GDP2 is low and e2 is high, local residents are happy to have
dollar deposits rather than domestic deposits and foreign financiers feel the same way. Thus,
if we ignore the hedging motive in foreign financiers' demand for local currency deposits and
only include the speculative motive, they would attempt to lend 540% of (b  d) /b, rather
than 1 percent. Another way to see this point is to recompute the model equilibrium setting
s = 0, so that foreign financiers have no hedging motive. The model equilibrium for that
case is reported in column (e) of Table 4. We can see that the domestic premium falls by
one percentage point. This reflects that firms substantially increase their lending in local
currency (note the jump in (b  d) /b) and households greatly increase their holdings of dollar
deposits. Indeed, households borrow local currency to finance their dollar borrowing.74 So,
the hedging motive of foreigners plays an important role in our model calibration. In column
(f) we show what happens when we raise /f (holding other parameters at their calibrated
values) by enough to hit the target on the local interest rate premium. To do this, we have
to raise /f all the way to 45. Note that with one exception, the model continues to hit the
targets. The exception is that foreigners now play a bigger role in financing local firms' peso
debt. Even though foreign financiers are now more risk averse, the absence of the hedging
motive causes them to still lend a lot in domestic currency. We take it as given that foreign
financiers' risk aversion is not an order of magnitude higher than that of domestic residents.
 73
      Recall, from equation (34), that xD e1 /b = (b  d) /b.
 74
      Because dú / (d + dú ) > 1 in column (e) of Table 4, it follows that d < 0.




                                                        46
We conclude that, conditional on our model, the hedging motive of foreign financiers plays a
crucial role in quantifying basic features of the data. In many ways, our model resembles the
models used in the literature, (e.g., Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) and Bruno and Shin (2015)).
This literature typically abstracts from this hedging motive (see Lustig and Verdelhan (2007)
for the importance of the hedging motive).

                              Table 3: Calibrated Model Parameter Values

                 Parameter                 Description                 Value
                     ­                  Capital Share, 14              0.38
                     /       Risk aversion, domestic residents, 8, 18   1.55
                    /f        Foreign Financier Risk aversion, 28       1.55
                     ÷      Elasticity of demand for exports, 33, 38    3.28
                    Y  ú
                                   Period 1 trade demand, 33           1.35
                     s     Covariance parameter, financier income, 25   3.82
                     Y                  Period 1 GDP, 6                3.17
                    µ<        Mean, < shock to foreign demand, 23       2.97
                    µA                Mean productivity, 14            7.85
                    µ>        Mean, > shock to foreign demand, 23       7.16
                    A             Std dev, log productivity, 14       0.22µA
                     >     Std dev, log > shock to foreign demand, 23 0.68µ>
                    <      Std dev log u shock to foreign demand, 23 0.22µ<

Note: model parameters selected to optimize a penalty function based on discrepancy between the entries in the `Peru' and
`Model' columns in Table 4



6.7      Results

Correlation between GDP and Exchange Rate vs Dollarization
Figure 10 replicates figure 2 using model simulations. The model is simulated using di erent
values for standard deviations of trade, foreign income, productivity shocks. Note that the
model can get the basic correlation right and it is flexible enough to allow for dispersion.
               Table 4: Endogenous Variables and Corresponding Values for Peru(1)
                   Variable                                Description                    Model                     Peru          s=0          s=0
                                                                                                                                 no adj.   adj. /f only
                       (a)                                      (b)                          (c)                    (d)              (e)         (f)
                      b+bú                            Total domestic borrowing
                      d+dú                             Total domestic lending
                                                                                           1.02                                     1.04        1.02
                100  (r  1)                              Domestic Rate                    -0.3%                 -0.3%             -0.2%       -0.3%
                   E (e2 rú )                        Expected Dollar Rate                 0.975                                   0.975        0.975
              100  E (r  e2 rú )                   Spread (domestic agents)               2.24%             2.20%(6)                1.19      2.20%
              100  E ( er2  rú )                       Spread (financier)                 2.50%                                  1.38%        2.46%
                 dú / (dú + d)                       Deposit Dollarization                  0.60               0.44(2)              1.26        0.62
                       bd
                         b
                                                 Foreign Source of Peso Credit              0.04               0.01(3)              1.22        0.16
                      dú bú
                        dú
                                             Foreign Absorption of Dollar Deposits         -0.00              -0.07(3)              1.14        0.08
                  bú / (b + bú )                      Credit Dollarization                 0.59               0.40(3)              -0.17       0.56
                     cú
                      1 e1 kf
                        Y
                                                     Scaled Trade Surplus                  -0.02              -0.02(4)             -0.04       -0.02
                     E (r r ú e2 ) dú
              100         r       dú +d
                                                 Implicit tax on dollar deposits           1.3%               1.5%(5)              1.5%        1.4%
                      fl                             Correlation, e2 , GDP                 -0.23              -0.20(7)             -0.19       -0.23
                 std(log (e2 ))                     Standard Deviation, e2                 0.04               0.03(8)               0.04        0.04

Notes: (1) Columns (a) and (b) - model variables and description, respectively; column (c) - model steady state at calibrated
parameter values reported in Table (3); column (d) - model steady state with s = 0 and all other parameter values kept at their
calibrated values; column (e) - model steady state with s = 0 and /f is adjusted so that 100  (r  e2 r ú ) = 2.20, requiring
/f = 45. (2) dú denotes the foreign currency deposits of residents, measured in soles and d denotes the domestic currency
deposits of residents, and the ratio is an average over 2000-2016 (source: CBP). (3) b (bú ) denotes soles (dollar) borrowing by
non-financial firms from Peruvian banks (source: CBP) plus international securities issued by nonfinancial corporations in soles
(dollars) (source: BIS); ratios are averages over the period, 2000-2016. (4) Average of scaled trade surplus, over 2000-2017,
scaling in model by Y and in the data by GDP (source: World Bank, World Development Indicators). (5) The implicit tax is
based on the domestic interest rate inferred by covered interest parity and US/soles forward rates. (6) Here, r and rú e2 are
measured as the real return, in units of Peruvian CPI goods, associated with soles deposits (r ) and dollar deposits (r ú e2 ) in
Peruvian banks over 2004-2014 (source: CBP). (7) Correlation based on S/P (S denotes soles per dollar, P denotes Peruvian
CPI) and Peruvian real GDP, where both variables were log, first di erenced, covering the period 2000-2018. (8) `standard
deviation' corresponds to standard deviation of error term in AR(1) representation fit to annual data on log Real Broad E ective
Exchange Rate for Peru, 2001-2020.



                     Figure 10: GDP ER Correlation vs Dollarization in the Model

                                                                                           Slope: -0.53, R2: 0.45
                                      -0.05

                                          -0.1

                                      -0.15

                                          -0.2

                                      -0.25

                                          -0.3

                                      -0.35

                                          -0.4

                                      -0.45

                                          -0.5


                                                 0   0.1      0.2        0.3        0.4   0.5               0.6            0.7




Prohibiting Deposit Dollarization
Several emerging market economies (Mexico, Brazil, India etc) do not allow residents to
hold dollar accounts. In this section, we evaluate the consequences of such a policy using
our model. Table 5 shows that the utility of both workers and firms go down. Workers




                                                                               48
lose their means of insurance whereas firms end up borrowing at high local interest rates.
Interest rate spread declines as households are forced to save in pesos but the exchange rate
becomes more volatile, which reduces investment. Foreigners slightly gain from the policy as
they sell peso assets short to gain insurance against consumption fluctuations coming from
their exogenous income.

                Table 5: Consequences of Prohibiting Deposit Dollarization

                         Spread       e2      UHH       UF irm     UF or
                        -0.23%     0.07%    ­0.07%    -0.98%     0.01%




7    Concluding remarks
We provide evidence that financial dollarization in emerging markets is mostly a within-
country risk sharing arrangement. Exchange rates often depreciate in recessions, setting o
a transfer of local currency from domestic borrowers to domestic lenders.
    In principle, another hypothesis could be at work. The desire for local lenders to denom-
inate their deposits in dollars may reflect their fear of a financial crisis which then becomes
self fulfilling because of the resulting currency mismatch. We find no evidence that deposit
dollarization has any association with financial crisis and so this alternative hypothesis seems
implausible.
    With these considerations in mind, we construct a simple two-period model which cap-
tures what we find to be the key features of the data. This type of exercise is in e ect
an important `reality check' on the impressions we draw from our empirical analysis. For
example, the notion that there is a premium on (risk free) domestic interest rates because
domestic residents prefer dollars for insurance reason leads to an important question: `why
don't foreigners step in and make more domestic currency loans?' Our model must address
this question. In e ect, we take the position that the risk in emerging market economies
is not diversifiable by foreign financiers and they have hedging reasons for not lending in
domestic currency because their other sources of income tend to drop too, when a recession
occurs. Foreigners obviously do in e ect make domestic currency `loans' in the form of for-
eign direct investment and equity purchases. Our model is consistent with this observation.
They do make local currency loans, but they require a premium to do so to compensate
them for the fact that local currency loans are a bad hedge for them.




                                              49
References
Aguiar, Mark, "Investment, devaluation, and foreign currency exposure: The case of Mex-
 ico," Journal of Development Economics, October 2005, 78 (1), 95­113.

Alfaro, Laura, Alejandro Cunat, Harald Fadinger, and Yanping Liu, "The Real
 Exchange Rate, Innovation and Productivity: Regional Heterogeneity, Asymmetries and
 Hysteresis," CEPR Discussion Papers 12943, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers May 2018.

  , Mauricio Calani, and Liliana Varela, "Currency Hedging: Managing Cash Flow
  Exposure," Centre for Economic Policy Research, 2021.

Bahaj, Saleem and Ricardo Reis, "Jumpstarting an International Currency," CEPR
 Discussion Papers 14793, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers May 2020.

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, "Measuring Economic Policy
 Uncertainty," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1593­1636.

  , , , and Kyle J. Kost, "Policy News and Stock Market Volatility," NBER Working
  Papers 25720, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc March 2019.

Bank of Israel, "Statistical Bulletin," 2018.

Benetrix, Agustin S., Deepali Gautam, Luciana Juvenal, and Martin Schmitz,
 "Cross-Border Currency Exposures. New evidence based on an enhanced and updated
 dataset," Trinity Economics Papers tep0120, Trinity College Dublin, Department of Eco-
 nomics January 2020.

Bernanke, Ben S, "Federal Reserve Policy in an International Context," IMF Economic
 Review, April 2017, 65 (1), 1­32.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Kevin Cowan, "Corporate Dollar Debt and Depreciations: Much
  Ado About Nothing?," The Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2008, 90 (4),
  612­626.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, "Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity,"
 Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (2), 535­564.

Bussiere, Matthieu and Marcel Fratzscher, "Towards a new early warning system of
 financial crises," journal of International Money and Finance, 2006, 25 (6), 953­973.

Caballero, Julián A., "Do Surges in International Capital Inflows Influence the Likelihood
 of Banking Crises?," The Economic Journal, 2016, 126 (591), 281­316.




                                            50
Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller, "Robust inference with
 multiway clustering," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2012.

Casas, Camila, Sergii Meleshchuk, and Yannick Timmer, "The Dominant Currency
 Financing Channel of External Adjustment," Drafts of Economy 1111, Bank of the Re-
 public of Colombia April 2020.

Chari, V.V. and Lawrence J. Christiano, "Financialization in Commod-
 ity Markerts," https: // faculty. wcas. northwestern. edu/ ~lchrist/ research/
 commodities/ manuscript_ submited. pdf , 2019.

Coppola, Antonio, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "Re-
 drawing the Map of Global Capital Flows: The Role of Cross-Border Financing and Tax
 Havens*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2021. qjab014.

Corte, Pasquale Della, Steven J. Riddiough, and Lucio Sarno, "Currency Premia
 and Global Imbalances," Review of Financial Studies, 2016, 29 (8), 2161­2193.

Dalgic, Husnu and Kemal Ozhan, "Business Cycle Insurance and Currency Returns,"
 Working Paper 2021.

Dalgic, Husnu C., "Financial Dollarization in Emerging Markets: An Insurance Ar-
 rangement," CRC TR 224 Discussion Paper Series, University of Bonn and University
 of Mannheim, Germany November 2018.

Danielsson, Jon, Hyun Song Shin, and Jean-Pierre Zigrand, "Risk Appetite and
 Endogenous Risk," AXA WORKING PAPER SERIES NO 2 DISCUSSION PAPER NO
 647, 2010.

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, "Deviations from Covered
 Interest Rate Parity," The Journal of Finance, 2018, 73 (3), 915­957.

   and Jesse Schreger, "Local Currency Sovereign Risk," The Journal of Finance, 2016,
  71 (3), 1027­1070.

   and , "Sovereign Risk, Currency Risk, and Corporate Balance Sheets," Harvard Busi-
  ness School Working Papers 17-024, Harvard Business School September 2016.

Eichengreen, Barry and Poonam Gupta, "Managing Sudden Stops," in Enrique G.
  Mendoza, Ernesto Pastén, and Diego Saravia, eds., Monetary Policy and Global Spillovers:
  Mechanisms, E ects and Policy Measures, Vol. 25 of Central Banking, Analysis, and Eco-
  nomic Policies Book Series, Central Bank of Chile, December 2018, chapter 2, pp. 009­047.




                                            51
Farhi, Emmanuel and Matteo Maggiori, "A Model of the International Monetary Sys-
  tem," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (1), 295­355.

Federico, Pablo, Carlos A Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin, "Reserve Requirement Pol-
  icy over the Business Cycle," NBER Working Paper no. 20612, October 2014, (20612).

Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock, "Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight,
  and retrenchment," Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 235­251.

Fuster, Andreas, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Tarun Ramadorai, and Ansgar
  Walther, "Predictably Unequal? The E ects of Machine Learning on Credit Markets,"
  CEPR Discussion Papers 12448, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers November 2017.

Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate
 Dynamics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, pp. 1369­1420.

Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Banking, liquidity, and bank runs in an infinite
 horizon economy," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (7), 2011­2043.

Gopinath, Gita and Jeremy C Stein, "Banking, Trade, and the making of a Dominant
 Currency," Working Paper 24485, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2018.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Maurice Obstfeld, "Stories of the twentieth century
 for the twenty-first," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2012, 4 (1), 226­65.

  , Helene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot, "Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty,"
  IMES Discussion Paper Series, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of
  Japan, 2010.

  , Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot, "Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty,"
  2017.

Hansen, Lars Peter, "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Esti-
 mators," Econometrica, 1982, 50 (4), 1029­1054.

Hassan, Tarek A., "Country Size, Currency Unions, and International Asset Returns,"
 The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (6), 2269­2308.

Hosmer, David W., Stanley Lemeshow, and Rodney X. Sturdivant, Applied Logistic
 Regression, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2013.

Humala, Alberto, "Corporate earnings sensitivity to FX volatility and currency exposure:
 evidence from Peru," Working Papers 2019-021 December 2019.




                                          52
Ilzetzki, Ethan and Keyu Jin, "The Puzzling Change in the International Transmission
  of U.S. Macroeconomic Policy Shocks," Technical Report, London School of Economics
  2020.

  , Carmen M Reinhart, and Kenneth S Rogo , "Exchange Arrangements Entering
  the Twenty-First Century: Which Anchor will Hold?," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2019, 134 (2), 599­646.

IMF, Financial Soundness Indicators: A Compilation Guide, International Monetary Fund,
  Washington, D.C., 2006.

Jurado, Kyle, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Serena Ng, "Measuring Uncertainty," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, March 2015, 105 (3), 1177­1216.

Kim, Yun Jung, Linda L. Tesar, and Jing Zhang, "The impact of foreign liabilities
 on small firms: Firm-level evidence from the Korean crisis," Journal of International
 Economics, 2015, 97 (2), 209­230.

Laeven, Luc and Fabian Valencia, "Systemic Banking Crises Revisited," IMF Working
  Papers 18/206, International Monetary Fund September 2018.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, "Financial dollarization: evaluating the consequences," Economic
  Policy, January 2006, 21 (45), 61­118.

Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan, "The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk
 Premia and Consumption Growth Risk," American Economic Review, March 2007, 97 (1),
 89­117.

  , Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, "Common Risk Factors in Currency
  Markets," Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24 (11), 3731­3777.

Maggiori, Matteo, "Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve
 Currencies," American Economic Review, October 2017, 107 (10), 3038­71.

  , Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "International Currencies and Capital Alloca-
  tion," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming, 0 (ja), null.

Mendoza, Enrique G. and Marco E. Terrones, "An Anatomy Of Credit Booms: Evi-
 dence From Macro Aggregates And Micro Data," NBER Working Papers 14049, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc May 2008.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Hélene Rey, "US monetary policy and the global fi-
 nancial cycle," Review of Economic Studies, 2020.
Nicolo, Gianni De, Patrick Honohan, and Alain Ize, "Dollarization of the Banking
 System; Good or Bad?," IMF Working Papers 2003/146, International Monetary Fund
 July 2003.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor, "Financial Stability, the
 Trilemma, and International Reserves," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 April 2010, 2 (2), 57­94.

Petersen, Mitchell A, "Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing
 approaches," The Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (1), 435­480.

Pratap, Sangeeta, Ignacio Lobato, and Alejandro Somuano, "Debt composition and
 balance sheet e ects of exchange rate volatility in Mexico: a firm level analysis," Emerging
 Markets Review, December 2003, 4 (4), 450­471.

Puttmann, Lukas, "Patterns of Panic: Financial Crisis Language in Historical Newspa-
 pers," SSRN Electronic Journal, 2018.

Ramírez-Rondán, N. R., "Balance sheet and currency mismatch: evidence for Peruvian
 firms," Empirical Economics, August 2019, 57 (2), 449­473.

Richmond, Robert J., "Trade Network Centrality and Currency Risk Premia," The Jour-
 nal of Finance, 2019, 74 (3), 1315­1361.

Shin, Hyun Song, "The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and Its Impact on Emerging
  Economies," in "Prospects for Asia and the Global Economy: 2013 Asia Economic Policy
  Conference" Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2013.

  , "Market liquidity and emerging market local currency sovereign bonds," Presentation
  slides, NBB-ECB conference on Managing financial crises: the state of play, November
  2018.

Suss, Joel and Henry Treitel, "Predicting bank distress in the UK with machine learn-
  ing," Bank of England working papers 831, Bank of England October 2019.

Thompson, Samuel B, "Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both firm and
 time," Journal of financial Economics, 2011, 99 (1), 1­10.

Verdelhan, Adrien, "The Share of Systematic Variation in Bilateral Exchange Rates,"
 Journal of Finance, 2018, 73 (1), 375­418.

Wiriadinata, Ursula, "External Debt, Currency Risk, and International Monetary Policy
 Transmission," Technical Report, IMF 2019.
