                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     IS RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA A GATEWAY
                         TO HARDER DRUG USE AND CRIME?

                                       Joseph J. Sabia
                                       Dhaval M. Dave
                                       Fawaz Alotaibi
                                        Daniel I. Rees

                                     Working Paper 29038
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29038


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2021, Revised August 2021




Dr. Sabia acknowledges support from the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
(CHEPS), which has received grant funding from the Charles Koch Foundation and Troesh
Family Foundation. We thank Samuel Safford, Drew McNichols, Rebecca Margolit, and
Abdullah Alswelh for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joseph J. Sabia, Dhaval M. Dave, Fawaz Alotaibi, and Daniel I. Rees. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Recreational Marijuana a Gateway to Harder Drug Use and Crime?
Joseph J. Sabia, Dhaval M. Dave, Fawaz Alotaibi, and Daniel I. Rees
NBER Working Paper No. 29038
July 2021, Revised August 2021
JEL No. I12,I18,K14

                                         ABSTRACT

Recreational marijuana laws (RMLs), which legalize the possession of small quantities of
marijuana for recreational use, have been adopted by 18 states and the District of Columbia.
Opponents argue that RML-induced increases in marijuana consumption will serve as a
"gateway" to harder drug use and crime. Using data covering the period 2000-2019 from a
variety of national sources (the National Survey of Drug Use and Health, the Uniform Crime
Reports, the National Vital Statistics System, and the Treatment Episode Data Set) this study is
the first to comprehensively examine the effects of legalizing recreational marijuana on hard drug
use, arrests, drug overdose deaths, suicides, and treatment admissions. Our analyses show that
RMLs increase adult marijuana use and reduce drug-related arrests over an average post-
legalization window of three to four years. There is little evidence to suggest that RML-induced
increases in marijuana consumption encourage the use of harder substances or violent criminal
activity, and some evidence that RMLs may aid in reducing opioid-related mortality.

Joseph J. Sabia                                 Fawaz Alotaibi
San Diego State University                      Claremont Graduate University
Department of Economics                         150 E. 10th Street
Center for Health Economics                     Claremont, CA 91711
& Policy Studies                                fawaz.alotaibi@cgu.edu
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182                             Daniel I. Rees
and IZA & ESSPRI                                Department of Economics
jsabia@sdsu.edu                                 University of Colorado at Denver
                                                Campus Box 181
Dhaval M. Dave                                  Denver, CO 80217
Bentley University                              and NBER
Department of Economics                         Daniel.Rees@ucdenver.edu
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and IZA
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
                                                       1. Motivation

                "There's not nearly enough evidence as to whether or not marijuana is a gateway drug."
                                                          -    Joseph R. Biden (2019)

                       "Let's be clear: marijuana isn't a gateway drug and should be legalized."
                                                          -    Kamala D. Harris (2019)


         Recreational marijuana laws (RMLs) legalize the possession, sale, and consumption of
marijuana for recreational purposes. To date, 18 states and the District of Columbia have adopted
RMLs (Anderson and Rees 2021; NORML 2021); at the federal level, there is a push to remove
marijuana from the Controlled Substances Act (Fandos 2021).
         Proponents of legalizing recreational marijuana point to evidence that light-to-moderate
marijuana consumption generates few adverse health effects (National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering and Medicine 2017), and contend that it might even lead to public health gains as users
of substances such as alcohol and opioids substitute to marijuana (Bachhuber et al. 2014; Powell et
al. 2018). They note that the annual costs associated with enforcing the prohibition on marijuana
run into the hundreds of billions of dollars (American Civil Liberties Union 2019) and those who
are convicted of marijuana-related crimes can face substantial labor market penalties (Pager 2003;
Agan and Starr 2018; Dobbie et al. 2018; Mueller-Smith and Schnepel 2021; Agan, Doleac and
Harvey 2021). Finally, proponents of RMLs argue that there are substantial racial disparities in how
the prohibition on marijuana is enforced: despite comparable marijuana usage rates, Blacks are 3.6
times more likely than Whites to be arrested for marijuana-related offenses (Federal Bureau of
Investigation 2020; Edwards and Mandubuonwu 2020). 1
         According to Gallup (2020), support for marijuana legalization has doubled over the last
two decades (from 34 percent in 2001 to 68 percent in 2020). Nonetheless, critics -- including
some policymakers and public health experts -- have expressed several concerns regarding
legalization. First, they argue that RMLs could increase the likelihood of smoking marijuana on a
regular basis, leading to adverse health outcomes such as chronic cough and phlegm production as


1 Among other arguments for lifting the prohibition on marijuana include (i) generating a safer consumer product
through increased market competition and government regulation of a legitimate market (Fernandez 2019), (ii) reducing
violence by limiting market power of and profits to illegal criminal cartels (Gavrilova et al. 2019), and (iii) increasing tax
revenue to state coffers (Marijuana Policy Project 2021a).


                                                              1
well as more frequent chronic bronchitis episodes (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering
and Medicine 2017). Moreover, even if the direct marijuana-related health effects are small,
legalization opponents warn that legalization for recreational purposes will, through a "gateway
effect," encourage the use of and addiction to harder drugs such as cocaine, heroin, fentanyl, and
methamphetamine. In fact, a number of high-profile studies in the public health literature show
associations between liberalizing access to marijuana and harder drug use and crime (Bleyer and
Barnes 2018; Hunt et al. 2018; Wong and Lin 2019; Olfsin et al. 2019). Fears about a "gateway
effect" of marijuana have been voiced by presidents, vice presidents, drug czars, senators,
congressmen, and state and local officials, including state attorneys general (see DeAngelo and
Redford 2015). 2 Drawing on the gateway hypothesis, opponents of legalization further express
concerns that these laws will generate spillovers that increase marijuana use among underage youth,
which can have direct negative and long-lasting effects on their cognitive development (NIDA
2020). Finally, critics note that RMLs may have external spillovers on jurisdictions that have not
adopted RMLs, transferring some of these adverse consequences across state borders.
            The social welfare rationale for RMLs depends on whether the social benefits of
legalization exceed any external costs. A key input in this cost-benefit calculus, and one point of
contention between legalization proponents and opponents, is whether -- and the direction and
extent to which -- RMLs have broader effects on the use of "harder" addictive substances. To the
extent that the health and labor market costs of hard drug use are privately borne by well-informed
agents who gain utility from its consumption, addiction to hard drugs will be rational (Becker and
Murphy 1989) and reflected in the cross-price elasticity of demand for hard drugs with respect to
marijuana. However, there are a number of reasons to expect that the costs of addiction to harder
drugs will not be internalized. If preferences are time-inconsistent (Gruber and Koszegi 2001) and
reflect hyperbolic discounting of future wellbeing, addictive drug use may exceed that which is
socially optimal via "internalities." Moreover, for some younger hard drug users, decision-making

2   In 2010, then-Vice President Joe Biden stated,

           "I still believe [marijuana] is a gateway drug. I've spent a lot of my life as chairman of the Judiciary Committee
           dealing with this. I think it would be a mistake to legalize."

While as a 2020 presidential candidate, Mr. Biden's position on the question of legalization evolved, many politicians,
particularly in the House Republican caucus, still hold this view. In 2021, Rep. Andy Harris (R-MD) stated,

           "In the midst of an increase in opioid addiction deaths during the coronavirus pandemic, it seems strange...to
           fully legalize marijuana, a known gateway drug to opioid addiction."


                                                               2
over consuming addictive substances may not rational due to underdevelopment of the prefrontal
cortex (Casey et al. 2008; Arain et al. 2013). Finally, addiction may lead to more crime -- i.e.,
income-generating crime to finance one's addiction or violent offenses as a result of one's altered
state of mind -- thereby imposing costs of hard drug use on to third parties. Together, the
external costs of legalization must be weighed against (i) the utility gains from consumption, as well
as (ii) the cost savings from reduced incarceration, any reductions in drug cartel-induced violence,
and reduced labor market penalties associated with criminal records to judge the efficacy of
legalization from a social welfare perspective.
         This study is the first to comprehensively examine the broader impacts of state recreational
marijuana laws (RMLs) on a wide set of outcomes related to hard drug use, including illicit non-
marijuana related consumption, drug-related arrests, arrests for property and violent offenses,
mortality due to drug-related overdoses, suicides, and admissions for drug addiction-related
treatment. Using state-level panel data from 2000-2019 from a variety of national sources (the
National Survey of Drug Use and Health, the Uniform Crime Reports, the Vital Statistics Multiple-
Cause-of-Death Mortality Files, and the Treatment Episode Data Set) and a difference-in-
differences identification strategy, we find that the enactment of an RML increased adult marijuana
use by 1.6 to 3.6 percentage-points (18.7 to 42.5 percent) and reduced adult marijuana possession-
related arrests by over 90 percent (1.33 arrests per 1,000 adult population). However, we find little
evidence that RMLs significantly increased (i) "harder" drug use or nonmedical use of prescription
opioids, (iii) overall arrests for property or violent offenses, or (iii) drug-related overdose deaths.
Estimated RML effects are often of the opposite sign than would be predicted from a "gateway
effect," particularly with respect to hard drug-related overdose deaths, where estimated RML
effects are most often negative and occasionally significantly negative for opioid-involved mortality
(heroin, fentanyl, and other opioids). While there is suggestive evidence that legalizing recreational
marijuana may have reduced opioid-related mortality, RMLs appear to be unrelated to treatment
admission rates for addiction.
        Finally, to more fully explore heterogeneity in the effect of RMLs across individual states, as
well as to explore longer-run effects across the earliest RML adopters, we conduct synthetic control
analyses. Our results show little evidence that the earliest-adopting RML states saw important long-
run gateway effects following their enactment, though these analyses also point to some
heterogeneity across state experiences.



                                                     3
         As more states legalize recreational use of marijuana, and as longer post-RML data become
available, it will become feasible to detect any additional longer-term impacts that materialize as the
commercial marijuana markets develop further and mature. However, our analyses to date, which
encompasses the experiences of states that have legalized through 2020, uncover little evidence of
RML-induced adverse health or crime effects. These results on the earliest set of RML adopters
suggest that critics' fears that recreational marijuana would act as a gateway to harder drug use may
be unfounded.


                                                  2. Background
2.1 History of Recreational Marijuana Laws
         In November of 2012, Colorado and Washington became the first states to pass RMLs.
Almost 9 years later, researchers are gaining a better understanding of how legalizing recreational
marijuana affects outcomes of interest to policymakers and the public. Unlike most medical
marijuana laws (MMLs), RMLs do not require a doctor's recommendation and do not require
registration; anyone 21 years of age or older can possess limited amounts of marijuana, and
purchases of marijuana are typically made at recreational dispensaries. All but two RML states
(Illinois and New Jersey) allow adults to grow marijuana plants at home. 3
         In 2021, RMLs were signed or took effect in four additional states (Connecticut, New York,
New Mexico, and Virginia), and the momentum to expand legal access to cannabis products
continues nationwide. However, there is a paucity of evidence regarding the indirect, downstream
effects of RMLs. For instance, although the initial push to legalize the use of marijuana for
medicinal purposes was not in response to the opioid epidemic, there is now credible evidence of a
negative relationship between MMLs and opioid-related mortality (Bachhuber et al. 2014; Powell et
al. 2018), while the relationship between RMLs and opioid use has not been thoroughly
documented. Policy at the state and local levels will ultimately determine whether legalization
affects only those with acute medical needs (for instance, those who are suffering from cancer or
some other easily diagnosed malady), or whether it means that all adults will have safe and easy
access to marijuana for recreational purposes.


2.2 Medical Marijuana Laws, Harder Drug Use, and Crime

3In Washington D.C., home cultivation is allowed, but its RML prohibits the exchange of money, goods, or services for
marijuana; transfers of up to an ounce of marijuana, are, however, legal.

                                                          4
          A number of studies have tested the "gateway hypothesis" in the context of MMLs. MMLs
legalize, for allowable medical purposes, the possession, sale, and consumption of marijuana. As of
December 2020, these laws have been enacted by 36 states (Anderson and Rees 2021). There is
strong evidence that the adoption of state MMLs is associated with an increase in marijuana
consumption among adults (Anderson and Rees 2011; Wen et al. 2015; Sabia and Nguyen 2017;
Choi et al. 2018), with generally larger longer-run lagged effects, consistent with the timing of
dispensary openings.
          Turning to harder drug use, Anderson and Rees (2021) offer a comprehensive review of
this literature. This literature provides little evidence that legalizing medical marijuana had an
appreciable effect on self-reported cocaine use (Wen et al. 2015) or substance abuse treatment
admissions for cocaine (Chu 2015). 4
          There is stronger evidence that marijuana and prescription opioids are related as substitutes
(Anderson and Rees 2021). Bachhuber et al. (2014) finds that the adoption of MMLs is associated
with a reduction in opioid-related mortality, but this relationship appears to be driven by
prescription opioid deaths when dispensaries are present (Shover et al. 2019). The relationship
between MML adoption and opioid-related deaths is much weaker during the post-2010 period
when heroin and fentanyl were responsible for a much larger share of opioid-related deaths (Shover
et al. 2019). Along the same lines, there is compelling evidence that the enactment of MMLs
reduced opioid prescribing (Bradford and Bradford 2016, 2017, 2018; Bradford et al. 2018; Wen
and Hockenberry 2018; McMichael et al. 2020) and the opening of a medical marijuana dispensary
is associated with a reduction in prescription opioid-related mortality (Smith 2020). 5 On the other
hand, Chu (2015) found that legalizing medical marijuana increased drug treatment admissions for
heroin.
          A review of studies on how MMLs impact alcohol use, conducted by Anderson and Rees
(2021), concludes from the weight of the evidence that medical marijuana and alcohol are
substitutes. Both survey-based studies (Anderson et al. 2013; Wen et al. 2015; Sabia et al. 2017;
Johnson et al. 2018; Andreyeva and Ukert 2019; Hollingsworth et al. 2020) and sales-based studies
(Anderson et al. 2013; Baggio et al. 2020; Veligati et al. 2020) find that the enactment of MMLs led


4 In addition, living near an MML dispensary was also essentially unrelated to cocaine-involved emergency department
visits (Conyers and Ayres 2020).
5 Moreover, Bradford and Bradford (2018) find that MML adoption was associated with reductions in anxiety- and

sleep-related prescriptions.


                                                          5
to a reduction in adult alcohol consumption. Moreover, Anderson and Rees (2013) also find that
MML enactment led to a reduction in alcohol-related traffic fatalities. 6
         With regard to crime, as Anderson and Rees (2021) note, the impact of marijuana
legalization is theoretically ambiguous:


         "Legalizing marijuana could shrink the black market and reduce its attendant violence or free
         up police resources, allowing law enforcement officials to reallocate their efforts toward
         reducing non-drug crime (Miron and Zwiebel 1995; Adda et al. 2014). Also, if legalization
         lowers the price of marijuana-- and demand is sufficiently inelastic-- then crimes committed
         to finance marijuana consumption could fall. On the other hand, increased marijuana use
         could lead to more violent behavior directly through a psychopharmacological effect or
         indirectly through a "gateway" effect (Pacula and Kilmer 2003; Morris et al. 2014)."
         (Anderson and Rees 2021, pp. 36-37)


         In the main, the evidence suggests that the legalization of medical marijuana had either (i)
little effect on property or violent offense arrests (Morris et al. 2014; Huber III et al. 2016; Chu and
Townsend 2019), or (ii) reduced arrests (Gavrilova et al. 2019). Gavrilova et al. (2019) found that
states bordering Mexico that adopted an MML experienced a 13 percent reduction in violent crime.
The authors attribute this result to increased competition in the international marijuana market,
which reduced "black market" power of Mexican drug trafficking organizations and reduced their
incentives to invest in violence to deter illicit market entry (Miron and Zwiebel 1995; Gavrilova et
al. 2019). Finally, Chu (2015) found that legalizing medical marijuana was associated with a 0­15
percent reduction in possession arrests for cocaine and heroin, consistent with the hypothesis that
marijuana is a substitute for harder drugs. 7




6 On the other hand, Conyers and Ayres (2020) show that emergency department visits involving alcohol among

Arizonans was essentially unrelated to the opening of dispensaries to purchase medical marijuana.
7 Evidence on the labor market effects of MMLs is also generally consistent with either (i) net health benefits, or (ii) no

adverse health effects of legalization of medicinal marijuana. Ghimire and Maclean (2021) show that the enactment of
MMLs is associated with a reduction in the likelihood of workers' compensation claims and the income received from
such claims. They interpret these results as evidence that medicinal marijuana availability generates health-related
benefits via workers being able to better treat medical conditions. Along the same lines, Nicolas and Maclean (2019)
find evidence that older adults' labor supply increases with increased access to medical marijuana. Finally, Sabia and
Nguyen (2018) find little support for the hypothesis that MMLs had important effects on employment or wages of
working-age individuals (and only a small negative effect on wages for young adult males).

                                                             6
2.3 Existing Literature on Recreational Marijuana Laws
         Studies assessing the effects of RMLs are very new, notably because the adoption of RMLs
is a relatively recently phenomenon and a sufficient post-legalization window of time is required for
a cross-section of adopters to identify internally and externally valid effects. A handful of studies
have examined the relationship between RMLs and marijuana use (Cerdá et al. 2017; Anderson et
al. 2019), while others have explored whether RMLs are related to the use of other substances that
could be complements or substitutes for marijuana. Recent studies have found that legalization of
recreational marijuana leads to less opioid prescribing (Wen and Hockenberry 2018) and fewer
deaths involving prescription opioids (Chan et al. 2020; Stover et al. 2019). Evidence on the effects
of RMLs on traffic fatalities is more mixed (Lane and Hall 2019; Hansen et al. 2020; Santaella-
Tenorio 2020).
         To date, there has been no published research on whether legalizing recreational marijuana
leads to gateway effects on hard drug-related outcomes including overdose deaths, drug-related
arrests, drug treatment admissions, and consumption of other illicit drugs such as cocaine,
methamphetamines and opioids.
         There are a handful of studies that have explored the impact of RMLs on alcohol use.
Dragone et al. (2019) used data from respondents to the National Survey of Drug Use and Health
(NSDUH) in Washington state and a regression discontinuity design (exploiting distance to a non-
RML state border) to find that enactment of an RML led to a 20 percent decline in binge drinking.
Focusing on Washington state, Miller and Seo (forthcoming) found that the adoption of the state's
RML was associated with a 5 percent decline in alcohol sales. Finally, Alley et al. (2020) used data
from the National College Health Assessment-II and a difference-in-differences estimation strategy
to find that RML enactment led to a 6 percent decline in binge drinking among young adults
enrolled in college. 8,9
         Only one recently published study has examined the association between RMLs and crime.
Dragone et al. (2019) found that Washington's RML led to a significant reduction in rapes and
property crime during 2013­2014. Because this study had only two years of post-legalization data


8 Some studies in this literature have explored the effect of RMLs on traffic fatalities, following the seminal work of
Anderson and Rees (2013). The findings in this literature, based on Colorado and Washington, are mixed, owed to both
to differences in empirical strategies (synthetic controls using different matching variables vs difference-in-differences)
state under study (Aydelotte et al. 2017; Hansen et al. 2020; Santaella-Tenorio et al. 2020).
9 Kelly and Rasul (2014) study the decriminalization of marijuana in a borough of London and find some evidence that

reducing the penalties for possession led to a reduction in alcohol consumption.


                                                             7
from a single state, Washington, it is not clear that its results extend to other years and states. 10
Whether other recreational marijuana states will experience reductions in crime, and whether the
reduction in Washington is temporary or permanent, are open questions. 11


2.4 Contributions
         As summarized in Anderson and Rees (2021) and discussed above, the literature on the
broader effects of MMLs is far more developed, and policymakers at times, out of necessity, have
extrapolated from the effects of MMLs to inform the potential impact of RMLs due to the dearth
of studies specifically addressing marijuana legalization. However, there are several reasons why the
spillover effects of RMLs could look quite different from MMLs.
         First, the population directly targeted by MMLs ­ registering patients in need, who stand to
benefit from cannabis use upon a physician's recommendation ­ is a relatively small pool. Only a
little over two percent of the population in medical marijuana states currently comprises registered
patients (Marijuana Policy Project 2021b). Unless there are substantial spillovers to non-targeted
populations, this inherently constrains the "first-stage" effect of the policy on marijuana use
outcomes. Restrictions associated with MMLs make it likely that spillovers to broader populations
remain in check. For instance, even the laxest MMLs require patient registration and a doctor's
recommendation, and the strictest ones further require verifiable medical conditions and
distribution only through state-licensed dispensaries. Consequently, MMLs have been found to
raise marijuana use by a limited amount ­ on the order of 1-2 percentage points at most (Anderson
and Rees 2011; Wen et al. 2015; Sabia and Nguyen 2017; Choi et al. 2018). In contrast, RMLs have
few restrictions, beyond the age verification, and, by definition apply to a much broader population
of current and potential recreational users.
         Second, the limited first-stage response of the MMLs further checks any downstream
effects on harder drug use and associated adverse events such as crime. RMLs, on the other hand,

10 The most likely mechanism underlying this result is substitution away from alcohol as marijuana became available for
recreational purposes. Previous studies provide evidence of a causal link between alcohol consumption and crime (e.g.,
Anderson et al. 2018).
11 Three studies of which we are aware have explored the impact of local dispensary openings (or closings) for

recreational marijuana on crime. These studies have examined the effects of recreational marijuana dispensaries in
Denver, Colorado and Los Angeles, California. Using an instrumental variables (IV) approach, Brinkman and Mok-
Lamme (2019) found that a dispensary opening in Denver is associated with a 19 percent decline in crime. Using a
difference-in-differences approach Burkhardt and Goemans (2019) found that recreational dispensary openings in Los
Angeles were associated with a decline in violent crime in geographically proximate, higher-income neighborhoods. On
the other hand, Chang and Jacobson (2017) find that motor vehicle thefts near recreational dispensaries were positively
related to dispensary closures.

                                                           8
by reaching a much larger population and having a stronger first-stage impact on marijuana
consumption, have the capacity to have more substantial spillover effects on other substance use
and related outcomes.
        The one exception to the limited potential of MMLs for downstream effects relates to
opioids, where the sub-population targeted by MMLs (i.e. patients suffering from medical
conditions such as chronic pain, who may benefit from cannabis use) is also the one that would be
predicted to have an intrinsically higher demand for opioid painkillers. Thus, the availability of
medical marijuana for this population appears to have reduced their need for opioids. Here too,
however, RMLs may have a very different impact on opioid use, because these policies are reaching
a broader population beyond just patients with medical conditions by commercializing the
marijuana market and expanding availability. Moreover, as the opioid epidemic has shifted from Rx
opioids to heroin and synthetic opioids, over the same time period that states were adopting
marijuana legalization, the impact of these laws on Rx vs. illicit opioid use may also be different.
        Finally, it is important to note that every state which adopted RMLs had an MML in place
previously (see Table 1 in Anderson and Rees, 2021). Thus, the relevant local average treatment
effect (LATE) being identified with RMLs is the incremental effect of liberalizing and expanding
the marijuana market for recreational users on top of having liberalized it for medicinal purposes, a
different LATE than the one identified in the MML literature. Hence, responses to RMLs may
differ from MMLs because of the nature of the "treatment" as well as heterogeneity across the
marginal individuals being impacted by these policies.
        This study is the first to use nationally representative data across all 50 states and the
District of Columbia to comprehensively explore the broader impacts of RMLs, providing some of
the first evidence on how marijuana legalization is affecting illicit drug use, heavy alcohol use,
arrests for drug and non-drug offenses, and objectively-measured adverse drug-related events
including drug-related overdose deaths and admissions into substance abuse treatment services.
Where permissible, we conduct analyses for both adults ages 21 and older, who would be legally
permitted to purchase marijuana in RML states, and underage adults (ages 18-20) who continue to
be prohibited from purchasing marijuana. Our findings provide key evidence evaluating the
ongoing, occasionally contentious, political debate on legalizing marijuana use, and inform whether
recreational marijuana use is a "gateway" to addiction to harder drugs and criminal behavior.


                                                3. Data

                                                    9
3.1 National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH)
         We begin by using data from the 2002-2019 National Survey of Drug Use and Health
(NSDUH) to measure marijuana and hard drug use among adults ages 18 and older. While the
individual geographically-identified NSDUH data are not readily available to scholars outside of the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, two-year overlapping state averages
are publicly available over the 2002-2019 period. 12 Data on substance use is provided in each
survey wave.
         First, to assess the "first stage" effects of RMLs on adult marijuana use, we use responses to
the following survey item:


         "During the past 30 days, on how many days did you use marijuana or hashish?"


Over the 2002-2019 period, we find that 7.4 percent of respondents ages 18 and older reported
marijuana use in the prior 30 days. To measure harder drug use, we use responses to the following
survey items to generate state-by-year prevalence of cocaine use, illicit drug use other than
marijuana, and binge drinking:


         "These questions are about cocaine, including all the different forms of cocaine such as
         powder, crack, free base, and coca paste. During the past year, on how many days did you
         use any form of cocaine?"

         "During the past 30 days, on how many days did you use an illicit drug other than
         marijuana? (Includes heroin, hallucinogens, inhalants, cocaine, and the nonmedical use of
         prescription-type pain relievers, tranquilizers, stimulants, and sedatives)?"

         "During the past 30 days, on how many days did you have five or more drinks (for males)
         or four or more drinks (for females) on the same occasion (i.e., at the same time or within a
         couple of hours of each other)?"

         Over the sample period, we find that 2.1 percent of adults ages 18 and older reported
cocaine use in the last year, 3.4 percent reported illicit drug use other than marijuana in the prior 30


12For instance, SAMHSA makes available state-specific estimates for 1999-2000, 2000-2001, and so on. We use these
overlapping state panels in the analyses, and match information on RMLs based on the month and year of enactment
(and in supplementary analysis, based on the month and year of the availability of retail distribution). Our indicator
captures the fraction of the two-year period that the RML was in effect, ranging from 0 (for state-years that fully precede
RML adoption) to 1 (for state-years that fully follow RML adoption). For adoption dates that fall within the two-year
aggregates, we define the indicator to equal the fraction of the 24 months that the RML was in effect.

                                                            10
days, and 25.0 percent reported binge drinking in the last month. In supplemental analysis, we also
explore methamphetamine use, which are available in a more limited fashion in the 2015-2019
state-by-two-year public reports, and non-medical use of prescription opioids, which was asked in
two forms during the 2002-2014 period and in a slightly different manner following 2014. 13
         Trends in each of our primary NSDUH measures (over the 2002-2019 period for which the
public use state aggregated NSDUH data are available) are shown in Appendix Figure 1, first for
the full sample and then by whether the state adopted an RML. While we find that marijuana use
rose more in RML-adopting states than non-adopting states after 2012, the first year of state
enactment (in Colorado and Washington), we find little evidence that rates of other substance use
rose more in RML as compared to non-RML states.


3.2 Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)
         To explore the impact of recreational marijuana laws on criminal arrests, we will use data
from the 2000-2019 Uniform Crime Reports (UCR). The UCR data cover arrests in all 50 states
and the District of Columbia, including 98 percent of the U.S. population. Arrest data are collected
via voluntary reports from more than 16,000 city, county, and state agencies. 14 Arrest data will
understate the true levels of crime because not every crime results in an arrest, or even a report to
law enforcement agencies (Gould et al. 2002). However, Lochner and Moretti (2004) document a
high correlation in arrest reports from UCR and actual crimes when data are available on each
(Lochner and Moretti 2004). 15 However, it is possible that RMLs by diverting law enforcement
resources away from marijuana-related arrests may impact the probability (positive or negatively) of
observing an arrest for other offenses. We discuss this possibility below and its implications for

13In its administration of the NSDUH, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration changed its
asking of questions related to prescription pain reliever misuse in the 2014-15 wave, noting

          "Several changes were made to the prescription drug questions for the 2015 NSDUH. These changes were
          designed to address limitations in the survey design used in prior years. Special attention was paid to revising
          the modules that measure prescription drug misuse or "nonmedical" use because of public health concerns
          about misuse of prescription drugs, such as increases in the number of drug poisoning deaths involving opioid
          pain relievers like hydrocodone, oxycodone, and methadone (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
          2013; Paulozzi, 2012)." See: https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-RedesignChanges-
          2015.pdf
14
   Florida (a non-RML state) is excluded from the UCR analyses due to lack of reporting; data are available for only three
of the 20 years over our sample period. We also exclude the District of Columbia and Wisconsin in the year 2000, as law
enforcement agencies did not report arrest data for this year.

15
 Moreover, measurement error is unlikely to be correlated with adoption of RMLs, which suggests that our estimated
marginal effects (at least in percentage terms) will be unbiased.

                                                           11
interpreting effects on crime. In addition, we note that arrest counts do not necessarily capture
unique individuals, as there may be multiple arrests for the same offender over time.
        We calculate state-by-year arrest counts from the UCR and then generate arrest rates per
1,000 state population using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Program. Our arrest analysis focuses on adults ages 18 and older, as well as arrests among those
ages 18-to-20, for whom possession and cultivation of marijuana under RMLs remains illegal, as
well as for those ages 21 and older.
        We focus on three main classifications of arrests: Drug Arrests (drug possession arrests and
drug sales arrests), Violent Arrests (homicide, robbery, and aggravated assault), and Property Arrests
(larceny, burglary, motor vehicle theft, and arson). Over the sample period, there were 5.6 drug-
related arrests per 1,000 adult population, 1.8 violent arrests per 1,000 adult population, and 4.5
property arrests per 1,000 population.
        Appendix Table 1 shows means of each of these arrest measures and Appendix Figure 2
shows trends in each of these measures over the 2000-2019 period. In addition, the UCR
disaggregates drug (possession and sales) arrests into four categories of drugs: (1) marijuana, (2)
powder cocaine, crack cocaine, heroin, and other opium derivatives, (3) truly addicting synthetic
narcotics and (4) other dangerous non-narcotic drugs (i.e., methamphetamine). Forty-nine (49)
percent of all adult drug-related arrests are attributable to marijuana arrests. Appendix Figure 3
shows evidence of declines in marijuana-related arrests in RML states relative to non-RML states in
the period following the adoption of RMLs (2012 and later).


3.3 National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) Multiple-Cause-of-Death Mortality Files
        To explore the impact of RMLs on adverse health consequences associated with potential
substitution into harder drugs, we use the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) multiple cause-
of-death mortality files, 2000-2019 and focus on overdose deaths (per 100,000 population) related
to cocaine-, heroin-, fentanyl-, other opioids (i.e., prescription painkillers), methamphetamine-, and
alcohol. Our primary interest is in deaths with the following International Classification of Disease,
Tenth Revision (ICD-10) multiple cause-of-death codes: T40.5 (cocaine), T43.6
(methamphetamine), T40.1 (heroin), T40.4 (fentanyl), T40.0, T40.2, T40.3, T40.6 (non-heroin-,
non-fentanyl-related opioids). Deaths related to alcohol abuse are calculated based on the ICD-10




                                                     12
codes (Polednak 2016). 16 Finally, drawing on a possible link between legalization of access to
medical marijuana and suicide (Anderson et al. 2014; Bartos et al. 2020), we also extend our
mortality analysis to include suicides. Appendix Figure 4 shows trends in drug- and alcohol-related
overdoses, with RML states experiencing relatively smaller (larger) increases (declines) in overdose
deaths related to cocaine and opioids, vis-à-vis non-RML states, after about 2013-2015.


3.4. Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS)
         Finally, to explore the impact of RMLs on an alternate indicator of substance use disorders
related to heavy marijuana use and use of other harder drugs, we turn to admission flows into
substance abuse treatment facilities from the Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS) over the period
2000-2018. Facilities, receiving any public funding, are required to report data on all clients
admitted for substance abuse treatment to their state's reporting agency, which are then compiled
by TEDS. For each admission, we observe the primary, secondary, and tertiary substance related to
the treatment admission and also the personal characteristics of the patient along with the source of
referral. Almost half of treatment referrals originate from within the criminal justice system. Other
referrals are from the patients themselves, family and peers, and health care providers. We
document treatment admissions for the following primary drug-related reasons: marijuana, cocaine,
methamphetamine or amphetamine, heroin, other opioids, and alcohol. Treatment admission rates
(per 1,000 population) are calculated based on the SEER data and reported in Appendix Table 1,
with corresponding trends shown in Appendix Figure 5.


                                             4. Empirical Methods
         We use a difference-in-differences (DD) regression strategy to examine the effects of RMLs
on each of the above-mentioned outcomes. Specifically, we begin by estimating the following two-
way fixed effects (TWFE) regression equation:


                     = 0 + 1  +   +  +  +  ,                                                            (1)



16 We use the following codes to classify alcohol attributed deaths: F10.3-F10.9 (alcoholic psychosis), F10.0-F10.1
(alcohol abuse), F10.2 (alcohol dependence syndrome), G62.1 (alcohol polyneuropathy), G31.2 (degeneration of nervous
system due to alcohol), G72.1 (alcoholic myopathy), I42.6 (alcohol cardiomyopathy), K29.2 (alcoholic gastritis), K70.0-
K70.4, K70.9 (alcoholic liver disease), K85.2 and K86.0 (alcohol-induced pancreatitis), X45 and Y15 (alcohol poisoning),
and finally X65 (suicide by exposure to alcohol).

                                                          13
where  denotes the outcome of interest in state s in year t. These include the prevalence of
substance use (NSDUH), the arrest rate per 1,000 population (UCR), mortality per 100,000
population (NVSS) 17, and the rate of treatment admissions per 1,000 population (TEDS). The
primary independent variable of interest,  , is an indicator for whether a recreational
marijuana law (RML) has been enacted.
         In alternate specifications, we also separately include mutually exclusive indicators for
RMLst and Recreational Sales Allowedst, is the latter being an indicator variable for the date at which
marijuana sales were permitted in the state (see Anderson and Rees 2021, Table 1). Doing so
allows us to explore the separate and any delayed treatment effect from when legalization is enacted
to when recreational sales began. While dispensaries are an important feature of the (medical and)
recreational marijuana landscape, given that home cultivation is permitted in all but three of the
RML states, one cannot a priori dismiss the possibility that supply (and consumption) of marijuana
could have increased well before recreational sales through dispensaries became possible. We
therefore explore the separate effects of both the enactment and the opening up of marijuana
distribution at the retail level in the RML states. We also allow for border state RML policies to
affect neighboring states, as well as interactive effects of own and border-state RML policies, in
alternate models to assess spillovers from RML states to bordering non-RML states.
         The vector  includes demographic controls (the share of the state population that is
African American, Hispanic, and male; the share of the state population ages 25 and older who
have a Bachelor's degree or higher; and the number of law enforcement agencies reporting arrests
in the state); marijuana policy controls (whether the state has a medical marijuana law and whether
the state has a marijuana decriminalization law); economic and political controls (whether the
governor is a Democrat, state unemployment rate and per capita income), crime policy controls
(whether the state has a shall issue law, whether the state has a stand-your-ground law, the natural
log of police employment per 1,000 population); and state-level substance use policies (the real beer
tax per gallon, whether the state has a must-access prescription drug monitoring program, whether
the state has a naloxone access law, and whether the state has a Good Samaritan law), and social
welfare policies (the state EITC refundable credit rate, the state minimum wage, and whether the


17 For our regressions on mortality, we use a Poisson specification, using the log of the count of deaths as the left-hand-

side variable and the state population as the exposure variable. In alternate specifications available in the appendix, as
well as in Callaway-Sant'Anna event studies, we use the mortality rate per 100,000 population. We explore similar checks
of sensitivity of the results to functional form for our arrest and admissions analyses.

                                                            14
state has expanded Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act). 18 Finally,  is a year fixed effect,
which accounts for common trends across states, and  is a state fixed effect, which controls for
time-invariant state effects. All regressions are weighted by the state population, and standard errors
are corrected for clustering at the state level (Bertrand et al. 2004).
         Our key parameter of interest, 1, is the estimated effect of a recreational marijuana law on
the outcome of interest, through all reinforcing and competing pathways, ceteris paribus. This
intent-to-treat estimate is identified from within-state variation in recreational marijuana laws as
outlined in Figure 1 (see also, Table 1 of Anderson et al. 2021). Note that all legalizing states
previously had adopted an MML and currently tax recreational marijuana post-legalization, and that
is the treatment effect of interest which is being captured by the parameter 1 ­ the effect of
legalizing recreational marijuana, in addition to having liberalized its availability for medicinal
purposes, while regulating and taxing retail sales. States follow a multitude of taxation approaches
that include a price-based ad valorem tax or a weight-based excise tax, and the application of
different tax rates for marijuana products of varying forms and THC content. 19
         We take several tacks to assess the credibility of the parallel trends assumption underlying
our difference-in-differences approach. First, we explore the sensitivity of our estimate of 1 to the
exclusion/inclusion of the large set of controls included in the vector Xst. In addition, to control
for unmeasured state-specific time trends that unfold linearly, such as pro-marijuana sentiment, we
augment the controls in equation (1) to include state-specific linear time trends (  ):


                 = 0 + 1  +   +  +  +    +  .                                                                (2)


         Next, we conduct event-study analyses in which we include mutually exclusive indicators
for leads and lags of RMLst. This will permit us to assess differential pre-treatment trends in our
outcomes up to four or more years prior to adoption to ensure that outcomes across the treatment
and control states were trending similarly prior to the enactment of RMLs. Moreover, it will also
allow us to examine lagged effects of RMLs, including their long-run effect, up to 4 or more years
after enactment. This long-run effect may be important given that any gateway effects may take

18The means of each of these control variables are listed in Appendix Table 2.
19Of the states that had legalized recreational marijuana by March 31, 2021 (16), 11 followed a pure ad-valorem taxation
approach, and the other five states levy an excise weight-based tax or a combination of an excise tax and an ad valorem
tax. IL is the only state that levies a graduated ad valorem tax based specifically also on the marijuana product's THC
content ( 35% THC vs. < 35% THC). See https://taxfoundation.org/state-recreational-marijuana-taxes-2021/.

                                                           15
time to materialize. Moreover, delayed effects may also materialize from rising trends in marijuana
potency and falling trends in marijuana prices (in both licit and illicit markets) following marijuana
reforms (Anderson and Rees 2021; Chiu et al. 2021; Smart et al. 2017; Sevigny et al. 2014). 20
        Finally, new critiques of two-way fixed effects (TWFE) estimators suggest that in the
presence of heterogeneous treatment effects over time, TWFE estimate of 1may be biased
(Goodman-Bacon 2021) and the evaluation of pre-treatment trends in event studies -- as a test of
common trends --unreliable (Sun and Abraham 2021). In particular, if earlier adopting RML states
serve as controls for later adopting RML states, and earlier adopting states experience
heterogeneous dynamic treatment effects, the TWFE estimator may be biased. Moreover, the
differential timing of treatment relative to the state panel may result in differential weights given to
particular treatment effects relative to the treatment state.
        To assess and correct for these potential biases present in the standard two-way fixed
effects setting, we apply an alternate difference-in-differences estimator proposed by Callaway and
Sant'Anna (2021). Using never-adopting states as controls for treated states ­ thereby bypassing
the problematic DD comparisons between later-adopters and early adopters ­ we re-estimate our
event studies using the Callaway and Sant'Anna (2021) estimator to (i) test for common pre-trends,
and (ii) assess potential biases in the TWFE treatment effects.


                                                  5. Results
        Our main findings are shown in Tables 1 through 9 and Figures 2 through 9. Supplemental
analyses may be found in the appendices.


5.1 Substance Use
        In panel I of Table 1A, we document "first-stage" effects of the enactment of RMLs on
adult marijuana use. Across parsimonious (column 1) and more fully saturated models (columns 2),
we find consistent evidence that RML adoption is associated with a 3.2 to 3.6 percentage-point
increase in prior-month adult marijuana use, or about a 38 to 42 percent increase relative to the pre-
treatment mean in RML-adopting states. In our most conservative specification, which includes
state-specific linear time trends (column 3), we uncover an RML-induced 1.6 percentage-point
increase in marijuana use, an effect that is statistically distinguishable from zero at the 5 percent

20Any general increase in THC content or consumption shift towards marijuana products with higher THC potency will
be captured by the period effects.

                                                       16
level. This coefficient magnitude represents about an 18.7 percent increase relative to the pre-
treatment mean. These RML effect sizes are about two to three times larger than the estimated
effects of MMLs on marijuana use from the literature (Wen et al. 2015; Choi et al. 2019;
Hollingsworth et al. 2021), which is to be expected as the legalization of recreational marijuana use
targeted a much larger potential population of users than did the MMLs. 21
         In Figure 2A, we present event study analyses based on our fully-saturated TWFE estimator
and in Figure 2B based on the Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) estimator. 22 Three points are notable.
First, in each case, we find that pre-treatment differentials, in terms of both levels and trends in
marijuana use, between RML and control states are similar and balanced over the entire pre-policy
period (lead effects are economically and statistically insignificant). Second, in each event study,
the divergence in marijuana use between RML and control states manifests only following the
enactment of the law, consistent with a causal link.
         Third, that the treatment effect dynamics from the TWFE event study are highly similar to
those produced using the Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) approach is ex post validating and perhaps
not altogether surprising. Note that one of the main sources of potential bias identified in the
TWFE setting is its handling of earlier-treated units as a counterfactual for the later-treated units.
With respect to RMLs, ten states plus D.C. adopted legalization over the sample period (see Figure
1); the vast majority of states have not enacted marijuana legalization over our sample period.
Comparison of the treated units (earlier-treated or later-treated) with these non-adopters is not
problematic (Goodman-Bacon 2020), even with dynamic treatment effects. And, given the
preponderance of non-adopting states in our sample, these comparisons drive the bulk of the
variation that is used to derive the RML treatment effect in the standard model.
         The above assessment is confirmed by a formal Goodman-Bacon decomposition of the
comparisons driving the estimated treatment effects in our marijuana analyses. This decomposition
indicated that between 87.5 to 91.6 percent of the weight of our TWFE estimator can be attributed
to the comparison of RML states versus never adopters and between 7.2 to 12.5 percent can be
attributed to earlier versus later-adopting states. The potentially problematic comparison, which
uses early-adopting states as a counterfactual for later-adopting states, never drives more than 1.3

21 Also note that the RML treatment effect reflects the experience of an MML state further liberalizing marijuana use for
recreational users, whereas the MML effect estimated in the literature is the initial treatment effect of a non-MML state
liberalizing marijuana use for medical purposes.
22 The Calloway-Sant'Anna (2021) estimator excludes state-specific linear time trends and other controls since the

estimator explicitly weights each treatment-control comparison for each post-treatment period with an estimated
propensity score that is a function of the other covariates.

                                                           17
percent of the identifying variation in deriving the treatment effects in our DD estimation. In the
analyses that follow, we draw conclusions from the weight of the evidence across consistent
patterns and credible event studies that emerge from the results, and where there is any divergence,
we give preference to the Callaway-Sant'Anna estimation results.
         In the remaining panels of Table 1A, we explore whether RMLs led to spillovers into other
substance use, as measured by cocaine (panel II), binge drinking (panel III), and illicit drug use
other than marijuana (panel IV). The first-order own-effects of RMLs on marijuana use (1.6 to 3.6
percentage points) bound the size of the impacted population that may potentially shift their use of
other substances, since any gateway-type spillovers into other substances are indirect and would
plausibly operate only through changes in marijuana use first. In no case do we uncover evidence
that RMLs are positively related to other substance use, including harder drug use. The precision
of our estimates is such that, with 95 percent confidence, we can rule out increases in illicit drug use
other than marijuana of greater than 0.2 to 0.3 percentage-points (well within the magnitude of the
first-stage effect), or about 5 to 9 percent of the pre-treatment mean in RML-adopting states. 23
Supplemental analyses of effects on methamphetamine use and non-medical use of prescription
opioids, reported in Table 1B, continue to show little evidence of any gateway effects of the
legalization of recreational marijuana over an average post-legalization window of four years.
         The average treatment effect of the RMLs on drug use may mask heterogeneity across
younger and older adults given their baseline differences in the prevalence of substance use and also
because young adults (under the age of 21) continued to be legally barred in RML states from
purchasing and possessing marijuana. Appendix Table 3 presents separate effects on the
prevalence of marijuana and other drug use for younger adults (ages 18-25) and older adults (ages
26 and older). We find comparably sized percentage-point increases in marijuana use for both
younger and older aged adults. Our results show that RMLs were associated with a 1.5 to 3.6
percentage-point increase in marijuana use among each age cohort. 24 With respect to binge
drinking and use of other harder illicit substances, as with the combined sample, there is no
indication of any substitution for either age group. 25 Only for nonmedicinal use of pain relievers


23 Event study analyses, shown in Figures 2A and 2B, are consistent with our null findings on illicit substance use.
24 While the effect sizes are comparable in percentage-point terms, given their lower baseline prevalence these effect
sizes translate into a relatively larger increase for older adults (ages 26 and older) than for the younger adults (23.8
percent vs. 8.2 percent relative to the pre-treatment mean, based on models with trend controls).
25 Data availability in the NSDUH Small Area Estimation files preclude more detailed analysis of disaggregated age

groups. We note that younger adults ages 18-25 combines adults (ages 21-25) that are legally able to purchase marijuana
post-RML adoption as well as underage adults (ages 18-20) who are not able to do so. For the NSDUH, we are not able

                                                          18
(panel IV) is there some evidence that younger adults may substitute away from opioid misuse and
toward marijuana, though this effect is sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific linear time trends.


5.2 Arrests
         Next, we explore whether RMLs impact arrests (Tables 2-5). Before discussing these
estimates, it is important to note that any effects on arrests reflect two potential mechanisms. First,
changes in arrests may reflect changes in underlying criminal activity. Broadly, substance use can
directly affect criminal activity through several pathways, including a pharmacological effect by
affecting aggression or violent tendencies, an economic effect whereby drug users may resort to
income-generating crime in order to finance their drug use habit, and/or a "systemic" effect as
participants interact in illicit markets that inherently tend to resort to a high degree of violence and
criminal activity in their sales and distribution networks (Corman and Mocan 2000; Dave et al.
2021). Legalizing marijuana, by impacting marijuana use and possibly other drug use, by impacting
expenditures on drug consumption, and by shrinking the black market, could affect both property
and violent crimes through each of these channels.
         The second mechanism through which RMLs may impact arrests and crime is more
indirect, by freeing up police resources, and allowing law enforcement officials to reallocate their
efforts toward reducing non-drug crime (Miron and Zwiebel 1995; Adda et al. 2014). This channel
can affect both the probability of an arrest, conditional on committing a crime, as well as underlying
criminal activity through a deterrence effect from the reallocation of policing efforts.
         We present estimates of the effects of RMLs on arrests, separately for drug-related offenses,
violent offenses, and property offenses in Table 2. 26 Our event study analyses based on these
outcomes are visually presented in Figure 3 (TWFE) and Figure 4 (Callaway-Sant'Anna), and
reassuringly show similar trends across the treated and control states prior to RML adoption. Any
divergence in the trends, where there appear to be effects, materialize only post-adoption.
         Panel I reports effects for drug-related arrests, showing a significant decrease on the order
of about one to two arrests (per 1,000 population), representing between a 20.7 and 31.5 percent
decline relative to the baseline pre-treatment mean. The estimated treatment effect is insensitive to

to separate how much of the increase in marijuana use is driven by these two sub-populations. However, our sub-
analyses of other outcomes (arrests, mortality, and treatment admissions), where we are able to observe these outcomes
across more disaggregated age categories, sheds further light on any problematic effects that may be materializing for
underage adults (ages 18-20).
26 In Appendix Table 4, we confirm that our estimated effects on arrests are not sensitive to functional form and present

alternate models specifying the outcome as a natural log.

                                                           19
the inclusion of controls, consistent with the hypothesis that RMLs are enacted exogenously to
drug arrests. Over 41 percent of drug arrests involve marijuana (Appendix Table 1); hence the
reduction in drug arrests is validating as a "first-order" check and is consistent with the shift in
policing resources away from identifying and arresting low-level drug offenders. In analyses to
follow, we explore the specific drugs that drive these arrest results.
         Across specifications in panel II, we find little evidence that the enactment of RMLs
increased arrests for violent offenses. The effect magnitude in the saturated specification is
negative, reflecting a 6.9 percent decline, but this estimate is only statistically distinguishable from
zero at the 10 percent level (t=1.66). The event studies confirm that the RMLs did not materially
impact violent crime arrests, and we are able to rule out increases exceeding 1.2 percent with 95
percent confidence.
         Turning to property crime arrests, there is some suggestive evidence of an uptick in the
most saturated specification (on the order of about 0.27 arrests per 1,000 population or 6.2 percent)
and also dynamically in the event study analyses. However, all of these estimates are highly
imprecise and not statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional levels. As a result of the
inherent noisiness of the property crime data, our 95 percent confidence intervals are unable to rule
out non-trivially sized increases in property crime arrests. It is also difficult to disentangle whether
any potential increase in property crime arrests reflects an increase in underlying criminal activity or
a greater probability of a property crime being detected due to a shift in policing resources. 27
         In Table 3, we explore whether the effects we observe in Table 2 are masking important
heterogeneity among (i) those who may not legally purchase or consume marijuana for recreational
purposes under RMLs (those under age 21) compared to those for whom it is legal (those ages 21
and older), and (ii) males versus females. Our findings show no evidence of significant increases in
violent, property, or total arrests for either those under or over age 21 or for males or females. For
violent offenses (panel II), the sign on the estimated RML effect is as often positive as negative.
For property arrests, the sign is positive in most cases, but the effect is always statistically
indistinguishable from zero in our saturated specifications.
         In sharp contrast to the lack of significant part I arrest declines, we find consistent stronger
and more consistent evidence of significant declines in drug-related arrests (Panel I) for males and
females, and older adults (ages 21 and older). Effects are also negative for those ages 18-20,

27Burkhardt and Goemans (2019), in their study of local crime in Denver, Colorado, found that recreational dispensary
openings were associated with an increase in vehicle break-ins within a mile of the dispensary's location.

                                                         20
reflecting a decline in drug-related arrests of between 7.9 to 24.0 percent, though these are not
statistically significant. These results for the young adults could suggest declines in use of law
enforcement resources to target them for possession of marijuana, even if they are underage. This
finding could also be indicative of a "drying up" of the black market for marijuana, diminishing the
supply for recreational consumption by those under age 21.
        Next, we explore arrests for individual type I violent and property offenses to ensure that
the aggregated effects we obtain on type I offenses are not masking offense-specific heterogeneity
in the effects of RMLs. Across specifications reported in Table 4, there is little evidence that RMLs
are associated with statistically significant increases in arrests for type I offenses. Only for larceny
and burglary (columns 4 and 5, panel II) do we detect that the enactment of an RML is associated
with a 7 percent increase in arrests, though these effects are not statistically significant. The
magnitudes of the estimates (and the direction of the effect for larceny) are also sensitive to the
inclusion or exclusion of state-specific linear trends (panel I vs. II).
        In Table 5, we (i) explore the source of the decline in drug-related arrests observed in Table
2, and (ii) differentiate between arrests for possession and sales. We find consistent evidence that
RMLs reduce drug-related arrests for both possession and sales (panel I). This effect appears to be
largely driven by declines in marijuana-related arrests (panel II). Marijuana-related possession
arrests comprise approximately 27 percent of all drug-related arrests during pre-treatment years for
RML adopting states. For all adults ages 18 and older, we find that RML enactment is associated
with a decline in 1.33 marijuana possession arrests per 1,000 population (panel II, column I). This
represents a very large (over 95 percent) decline relative to the pre-treatment mean in RML-
adopting states; the magnitude of this effect is validating and provides a degree of confidence that
our specification is picking up a plausibly causal effect of RMLs because arrests for marijuana
possession are precisely the outcome that should dry up virtually fully post-legalization. We also
find evidence of an RML-induced 49.7 percent decline in arrests for marijuana sales for those ages
18 and older (column 2), consistent with the hypotheses that (i) the legitimate market has absorbed
a substantial share of the underground market, or (ii) law enforcement agencies may be less likely to
enforce laws related to illegal marijuana sales, particularly in smaller quantities, under an RML
regime. We find evidence of marijuana-related arrest declines for those under and over the
minimum legal sales age (columns 3-6) and for males (columns 7-8) and females (columns 9-10).
         Turning to harder drugs, including cocaine/heroin (panel III), addicting synthetic narcotics
(panel IV), and other dangerous non-narcotic drugs (panel V), we fail to uncover support for the

                                                     21
hypothesis that RMLs lead to increases in arrests for either possession (odd-numbered columns) or
sales (even-numbered columns) of other drugs. Largely for all groups, in fact, there is a significant
negative relationship between RML adoption and heroin/cocaine-related arrests. The magnitudes
suggest some substantial RML-induced declines in heroin and cocaine arrests, on the order of 8.7 to
17.6 percent for possession and 25.0 to 38.8 percent for sales, consistent with the hypothesis that
marijuana and these harder drugs may be substitutes and with the hypothesis that RMLs change
policing practices toward those who possess or sell drugs.
         Event study analyses, shown in Figures 5 through 7 and Appendix Figure 6 suggest a
pattern of findings consistent with a causal interpretation of the above drug-related findings. These
results are also consistent with our NSDUH-based estimates, suggesting little evidence of "gateway
effects" from increased use of recreational marijuana. 28


5.3 Mortality
         Next, in Table 6, we explore the impact of RMLs on substance use-related mortality and
suicides. Panels I through VI present Poisson estimates of the effects of RMLs on overdose deaths
involving cocaine (panel I), methamphetamine (panel II), heroin (panel III) and fentanyl (panel IV),
opioids other than heroin and fentanyl (panel V), and alcohol (panel VI). These estimates
underscore two main findings. 29 First, the results provide no evidence that the legalization of
recreational marijuana led to significant increases in hard drug-related overdose deaths; rather the
signs on the estimated effects are uniformly negative. Second and to the contrary, there is some
evidence that deaths related to methamphetamine, heroin, fentanyl, and other opioids (the latter
category largely comprising prescription opioids) were negatively related to RML enactment. For
instance, in column (2), we find that the enactment of an RML is associated with a 16.8 percent
decline in methamphetamine deaths and a 13.4 to 35.2 percent decline in opioid-involved mortality,
effects that are largest for heroin and fentanyl-related deaths. While the inclusion of state-specific
linear time trends reduces the magnitudes and precision of these effects (with the exception of
fentanyl-involved deaths), the pattern of results is consistent with modest declines in hard drug-
related mortality.


28 In Appendix Figure 7, we show event study analyses for other, non-narcotic sales and possession arrests and find
largely null results as well.
29 In Appendix Table 5, we present mortality estimates from an OLS regression where the left hand-side variable is the

mortality rate per 100,000 population. The results from this specification are largely consistent with those reported in
Table 6.

                                                           22
         Event study analyses from the Callaway-Sant'Anna approach, presented in Figure 8, support
a causal interpretation to these estimates. 30 The decline in opioid-related mortality that we find for
RMLs mirrors similar effects found for MMLs in prior studies (Bachhuber et al. 2014; Powell et al.
2018), indicating that marijuana and opioids are likely substitutes among the broader population.
The reduction in the demand for other addictive substances might reflect improvements in mental
health associated with marijuana policy reform (Anderson et al. 2014; Anderson and Rees 2021),
though we do not find consistent evidence of this when we consider suicide deaths as a proxy for
mental health (Panel VII in Table 6).
         In Tables 7A (models that exclude state-specific linear time trends) and 7B (models that
include state-specific linear time trends), we explore heterogeneity in the effects of RMLs on
mortality by age (panels I and II) and gender (panels III and IV). Our results largely confirm RML-
associated declines in overdose deaths related to heroin, fentanyl, and other opioids for older adults
directly impacted by the liberalized recreational marijuana policy (adults ages 21 and older), and for
both males and females. We do not find any meaningful effects for younger adults (ages 18-20)
who are not able to legally participate in the commercial marijuana market post-legalization; while
the effect for cocaine-related overdose deaths for underage adults is large and significant, an
auxiliary event study analysis, available upon request, casts doubt on its interpretation as causal and
shows no evidence that RMLs increased drug-related mortality for young adults. We detect some
evidence of an RML-induced decline in cocaine-related deaths for females (Table 7B, Panel IV,
column 1). Moreover, we also find some suggestive evidence to the contrary of a decline in cocaine-
related overdose deaths, overall (Table 6, Panel I) and for males and females, which, while largely
imprecisely estimated, is more consistent with a causal effect of the RMLs as indicated by the
Callaway-Sant'Anna event study analysis (Figure 8, Panel a). 31


5.4 Substance Use Treatment Admissions
         Finally, in Tables 8 and 9, we turn to the TEDS to explore the impact of RMLs on
substance use-related treatment admissions, as an alternate proxy for substance use disorders and


30 We note that these Callaway-Sant'Anna (CS) event studies are based on an OLS regression using mortality rates per
100,000 population. The current CS event study package available in R and Stata does not yet permit the estimation of
non-linear models. However, the qualitatively similar findings in Appendix Table 5, Figure 8, and Tables 6 through 7B
add to our confidence that the specific functional form (OLS versus Poisson) does not qualitatively change our findings.
31 There are no meaningful effects on alcohol overdose deaths, and no evidence from the mortality results presented in

Tables 6 and 7, and the event study analysis presented in Figure 8 (Panel f) to suggest that RMLs have resulted in
significant substitution towards problem drinking behaviors.

                                                          23
adverse events related to marijuana and other drug use. We do not find any meaningful effects of
marijuana legalization on flows into treatment facilities, associated with marijuana, cocaine,
amphetamines, opioids or alcohol (Table 8). Effects are statistically insignificant across the board,
and somewhat sensitive (in terms of both magnitude and many times even the direction of the
effect) to excluding/including trend controls. The event study analyses, presented in Figure 9, also
provide little support of any significant causal effects on treatment admissions. 32 These findings
largely carry over into Table 9, where we report heterogeneous treatment effects by age and gender.
         We note that due to variability in state reporting, the TEDS is an unbalanced panel, which
affects which states and periods are identifying our estimates. 33 The TEDS data include one fewer
year of data (the TEDS is available up to 2018, in contrast to the other datasets spanning 2019),
with the average treated state observed in the TEDS for only about three years. Moreover, the
state of Oregon does not identify any of the effects due to lack of reported data for the state over
the post-treatment window. 34
         While we found some suggestive evidence of a decrease in cocaine and opioid-related
overdose deaths associated with the RMLs (Table 6), we do not uncover any corresponding
"beneficial" effects on treatment admissions associated with these substances. In addition to the
aforementioned difference in the identifying variation between the TEDS analyses and those for
the other data sets, this also may be because the margins captured by each of these outcomes
(overdose-related mortality vs. patients who are referred into treatment services for their substance
use disorders) differ, with the former more responsive to RMLs. It is further possible that the


32 Our main TEDS analyses are based on each studied substance being designated as the primary substance of abuse in

order to more cleanly identify treatment admissions that can be attributed to the main drug of abuse. In Appendix Table
6, we explore whether our findings on "primary drug" treatment admission may mask important effects when one
considers secondary or tertiary drugs that were also related to admissions. The latter also captures poly-drug use, and
recognizes that many admissions can involve multiple substances of abuse. Our findings in Appendix Table 6 are largely
consistent with those shown in Table 7. Since marijuana legalization impacts drug-related arrests, this may also impact
substance abuse treatment admissions through court-ordered referrals. In this case, observed declines in treatment
admissions may not necessarily reflect a decrease in substance use disorders but rather a shift in the mode through which
admissions are referred. In order to assess this possibility, we re-estimated all models after restricting treatment
admissions to those that were not court-referred, that is referred from outside the criminal justice system. Our findings
from the TEDS are not materially affected by this restriction.
33 Delays and variability in the reporting from individual treatment facilities to state agencies to the TEDS system can

cause considerable variability in the TEDS data across states and within states. Since this variability affects the total
counts of admissions reported (rather than admissions specific to certain substances), controlling for total admissions
can help adjust for any within-state over-time variance in the data that is driven by reporting issues. We therefore re-
estimated all models for the TEDS controlling for total treatment admissions for each state and year (reported in
Appendix Table 7). Our estimates are not sensitive to this adjustment.
34 The state of Michigan also identifies a very small share of the RML effect in the TEDS analyses because the state

adopted an RML late in 2018.

                                                           24
dynamics across these outcomes may be different, and we do not observe a sufficiently long post-
legalization time window to capture effects that may not yet have materialized. 35 Below, we turn to
early-adopting RML states to explore longer-term effects of the RMLs and also to examine
potential heterogeneity across individual state experiences that may be masked by these average
treatment effects.


5.5 Robustness Checks
         We close this study of gateway effects of increases in recreational marijuana use with four
important robustness checks. First, we use information on the date on which recreational sales of
marijuana were first permitted, which tended to lag the legalization of recreational marijuana by one
to two years (see Table 1 of Anderson and Rees 2021). In Appendix Table 8, we present estimates
from specifications that separately include mutually-exclusive indicators for periods post-RML
adoption but prior to the allowance of recreational sales, and for periods subsequent to the
allowance of recreational sales. We continue to find that the legalization of recreational marijuana
significantly increased prior month marijuana use, by about 1.3 percentage points post-adoption
(and prior to retail distribution), and by 2.2 percentage points following the allowance of
recreational sales (column 1). Similarly, there is a significant decrease in marijuana arrests, both
following adoption and the opening of dispensaries. 36 These results also indicate significant
declines in arrests for violent crime arrests, with effects continuing after retail sales are allowed that
are similar to those realized after legalization prior to sales allowance. 37 There is little evidence that




35 We note that in the Callaway-Sant'Anna event study analyses (Figure 9), the final reported lag for marijuana, cocaine,
and other opioid-related admissions is positive (in contrast to all of the previous lags which are close to zero and
relatively flat), which may suggest a possible delayed uptick; all of these effects however are highly imprecisely estimated.
36 The confidence intervals overlap and we are not able reject the null that the effects following enactment and the

allowance of recreational sales are similar. It is also important to note that given the timing of adoption vs. retail
distribution, and with virtually all treated states allowing recreational sales over our sample period, it is empirically
challenging to fully disentangle the effects of retail distribution from the policy adoption itself; the effect of RMLs with
sales allowed could also capture continuing dynamics of the earlier policy adoption.
37 It is notable that even though distribution at the retail level typically lagged legalization in most states, there are

significant and substantial first-order effects from the adoption itself. Hence, solely focusing on recreational sales
allowance as the treatment may underestimate the effects of legalization. As noted above, while recreational marijuana
dispensaries are an important channel through while RMLs expand the availability of commercial marijuana, almost all
RML states also allowed home cultivation. This presents another mode through which the availability and consumption
of marijuana could increase post-enactment and before retail outlets proliferate in the state. In fact, with post-enactment
effects, classifying the "treatment" based on the date when commercial markets opened up in the state would attenuate
the estimated treatment effects


                                                             25
the increase in marijuana use is a bridge to consuming other harder substances or problem alcohol
use. 38
          Second, in Appendix Table 9, we explore the robustness of our findings to allowing
"border" state effects of RMLs. We separate our RML indicator into four mutually exclusive
indicators, capturing discordant and concordant policy status with contiguous states: (1) RML
adoption without border states having legalized, (2) RML adoption with border states also adopting
legalization, (3) No RML adoption with border states having legalized, and (4) No RML adoption
with border states also not having adopted legalization (reference category). Our main findings of
the "first-order" and spillover effects of own-RMLs on marijuana use, drug-related arrests, and
indicators of other harder substance use are not materially altered by controlling for bordering
states' marijuana legalization status. And, we find little evidence that legalization generates
important gateway effects in RML states, irrespective of whether or not they are contiguous to
other states that have also legalized use of marijuana for recreational purposes. 39,40
          Third, we implemented a leave-one-out analysis (reported in Appendix Figure 8), where we
re-estimated the treatment effects for our outcomes upon omitting each treated RML state in turn
from the sample. 41 The consistency of the estimates for each outcome across the alternate samples
instills a degree of confidence that our findings are not driven or dominated by the experiences of
any single RML state.




38 The one departure from our earlier findings pertains to cocaine-related overdose deaths, where the estimates point to

an increase after retail distribution. Notably, however, this result is not consistent with the other estimates on past-
month cocaine use (column 2) or treatment admissions related to cocaine (column 11), and also not supported by the
Callaway-Sant'Anna event study analysis (Figure 8, Panel A). There is also a significant increase in marijuana-related
substance abuse treatment admissions after legalization; however, this effect does not persist over time and is
insignificant following broader retail distribution. It is important to note that since allowances for recreational sales
lagged RML enactment for most treated states by about one to two years, the effect is identified off slightly fewer
treatment states (MI and VT do not identify effects of recreational sales allowance) and fewer post-treatment periods (on
average, about 3 years per treated state for the NSDUH, UCR and the NVSS analyses, and about 2 years for the TEDS
analyses), and may also pick up lagged effects from the adoption as well as any further effects from the dispensary
openings, that is a conflation of dynamics and treatment effect heterogeneity across states. We turn to individual states'
experiences below in shedding some light on this heterogeneity and longer-term effects (for some of the earliest
adopting states).
39 We are largely not able to reject the null that RML effects are similar across states that border other RML or non-

legalized states.
40 As our analyses are at the state level, this does not preclude the possibility of more substantial spillovers for residents

in close to bordering states with accordant or discordant RML policies.
41 We report estimates from the fully saturated specification including trend controls.




                                                             26
         Finally, we use a synthetic control design to explore whether there are heterogeneous effects
of RML adoption on our key outcomes. 42 Our focus is on states for which we observe a post-
legalization window of at least three full years (Washington, Colorado, Alaska, Oregon, California,
and Massachusetts), allowing us to explore the longer-term effects of legalizing recreational
marijuana. 43 We report the average effect over the post-treatment window, along with permutation-
based p-values generated via placebo tests (Abadie et al. 2010).
         Across each of the six RML states under study, synthetic control estimates provide fairly
consistent evidence of first-order effects (i.e., increases in marijuana use and reductions in
marijuana-related arrests). There is some heterogeneity in the magnitudes of these estimated effects,
with the largest increases in marijuana use and the largest declines in marijuana-related arrests
generally observed for the four earliest adopters with relatively longer post-policy follow-ups (4.5
years or more). 44
         Spillover effects on hard drug use and related overdose deaths are largely nil or
negative. While we detect a small (and statistically insignificant) upticks in other illicit drug use in
Colorado and Oregon, these effect sizes are less than one percentage point. Moreover, in both of
these states, trends in overdose deaths related to opioids and cocaine provide evidence that
marijuana and harder substances are substitutes, suggesting public health gains associated with the
RMLs. 45 In Washington, there is little evidence of spillover effects to harder drugs and suggestive
evidence that recreational marijuana and alcohol (as well as opioids) are substitutes.

42 We construct the synthetic counterfactual for each treated state by matching on the outcome in all pre-treatment
periods. To construct a counterfactual that is not contaminated from the effects of post-RML MML adoption by
donors, we select the donor pool from within the non-RML states that also did not enact any MML in the post-
treatment period. For instance, for Colorado, which enacted an RML on December 10, 2012, the donor pool consists of
states that have not adopted any RML over the sample period and also not adopted any MML post-2012. Results are
not sensitive to using a more restrictive donor pool, where we exclude any state that enacted an MML in the three years
prior to the treatment state's RML adoption or anytime later. For each RML state, in order to facilitate the state-year
synthetic control analyses, we assign the treatment period t based on the majority of the year in which the RML became
effective. Thus, if an RML is enacted in year t, in June or earlier, we denote all years starting with t and later as treated;
otherwise, we denote all years starting with t+1 and later as treated. For analyses of arrests, we drop Florida from the
donor pool since UCR data are missing for the state from 2000-2016. The number of states in the donor pool ranges
from 23 to 35.
43 We exclude DC from this analysis since the constructed synthetic controls for various outcomes showed a poor pre-

policy match. We also do not present estimates from the TEDS since it is an unbalanced panel.
44 We note that the permutation-based p-values on our donor pool of 23 to 35 states imposes a high standard for

achieving statistical significance, with the treatment effect having to rank at the very top (or rank among the top 2 or 3)
along the distribution of placebo tests to achieve 5 (or 10) percent statistical significance.
45 To take another example, the synthetic control estimates also indicate an increase in opioid-related deaths for

California, though there is very little indication from the NSDUH with respect to an increase in other illicit drug use for
the state. Moreover, the first-order effect on marijuana use in California was also among the lowest in terms of
magnitudes, which limits the scope for further spillovers into other drugs and outcomes. Similarly, for MA, there is an
indication of an increase in opioid-related and cocaine-related deaths; however, the trends show that these increases were

                                                             27
         Synthetic control estimates suggest that RMLs decreased marijuana-related arrests across all
six states, but there is heterogeneity in how other arrests evolved in the post-treatment
period. Arrests for other drug arrests decreased in three states (Washington, Alaska, and
Massachusetts), increased modestly in Colorado, and remained essentially unchanged (relative to the
synthetic control) in Oregon and California. Likewise, the results for Part I offenses were decidedly
mixed, suggesting that there was heterogeneity in how states diverted their policing resources across
drug-related and non-drug related crimes.
         In summary, the results from the synthetic control analyses provide strong evidence that
RMLs boost marijuana consumption (and reduce marijuana arrests). However, there is little
evidence to suggest that the increase in marijuana consumption consistently affects illicit substance
use or overdose deaths. It is possible, however, that more substantial, sustained effects may
materialize over time, although even for the earliest-adopting states (Washington, Colorado, and
Oregon) we find either null effects or only trivial upticks in illicit drug use. The synthetic control
analyses also point to considerable heterogeneity in how states responded in their reallocation of
policing resources for other offenses.


                                                 6. Conclusions
         One of the most prominent arguments offered by opponents of recreational marijuana laws
is that they will generate adverse spillover, or "gateway", effects. Our study comprehensively
explores potential gateway effects of legalizing recreational marijuana on a variety of outcomes
related to harder drug use and crime. Across analyses of four national datasets (the NSDUH, the
UCR, the NVSS Mortality Files, and the TEDS) we find little consistent evidence, at least thus far,
of important gateway effects of RMLs. While RMLs are associated with increases in adult
marijuana use and a reduction in marijuana-related arrests, we find little compelling evidence to
suggest that RMLs result in increases in illicit drug use, arrests for part I offenses, drug-involved
overdoses, or drug-related treatment admissions for addiction. In contrast, we find some evidence
that RML-adoption may be associated with a reduction in opioid-related mortality. In the main, a
causal interpretation of our findings is supported by event study analyses, including those that
account for heterogeneous policy effects over time.



underway even prior to the adoption of the RML, and the NSDUH shows little evidence of spillovers into illicit drug use
other than marijuana.

                                                          28
         With regard to limitations of our analyses, we note that our estimates represent average
treatment effects over the post-treatment windows available for our RML states. On average, this
is approximately three to four years. If gateway effects take longer to unfold, future research will be
necessary to detect them. Nonetheless, our synthetic control analyses of Washington and Colorado
suggest that such long-run gateway effects have not materialized in the eight years following their
adoption. In addition, it is certainly possible that nuisance crimes, those not captured by type I
offenses could themselves be impacted by RMLs, which could be a useful path for future work.
Finally, an important area of scholarship in this space includes whether RMLs generate adverse
effects on marijuana use to minors. While early evidence is mixed on the impact of marijuana
liberalization on youth use (Anderson et al. 2019; Cerda et al. 2017), this question remains open for
researchers to tackle. The research design we follow in this study provides an important and useful
starting point for extending these analyses as more data become available and marijuana markets in
legalized states evolve and mature. 46
         The findings of our study are of clear importance to policymakers and the public. The
making of sound public policy depends, in part, upon carefully weighing the explicit costs of
legalizing recreational marijuana against the utility gains from consumption and any savings from,
for instance, reductions in crime or non-rational addition. Our results provide important evidence
on both sides of this social welfare ledger.




46See Clemens et al. (2020), Currie et al. (2020), and Christensen and Miguel (2018) for a discussion of the value of pre-
committed research designs and transparency in quasi-experimental policy analysis.

                                                            29
                                           7. References

American Civil Liberties Union. 2013. "The War on Marijuana in Black and White: Billions of
Dollars Wasted on Racially Charged Arrests," Available at:
https://www.aclu.org/sites/default/files/field_document/1114413-mj-report-rfs-rel1.pdf

Adda, Jerome, Brendon McConnell, and Imran Rasul. 2014. "Crime and the Depenalization of
Cannabis Possession: Evidence from a Policing Experiment." Journal of Political Economy, 122(5):
1130-1202.

Agan, Amanda, and Sonja Starr. 2018. "Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimination:
A Field Experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 191-235.

Agan, Amanda Y., Jennifer L. Doleac, and Anna Harvey. 2021. "Misdemeanor Prosecution." NBER
Working Paper No. w28600.

Alley, Zoe, David Kerr, and Harold Bae. 2020. "Trends in College Students' Alcohol, Nicotine,
Prescription Opioid and Other Drug Use After Recreational Marijuana Legalization: 2008-2018."
Addictive Behaviors, 102: 106212.

Anderson, D. Mark, Benjamin Hansen, and Daniel I Rees. 2013. "Medical Marijuana Laws, Traffic
Fatalities, and Alcohol Consumption." Journal of Law and Economics, 56(2): 333-369.

Anderson, D. Mark, Daniel I. Rees, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2014. "Medical Marijuana Laws and
Suicides by Gender and Age." American Journal of Public Health, 104(12): 2369­2376.

Anderson, D. Mark, Daniel I. Rees, and Erdal Tekin. 2018. "Medical Marijuana Laws and Workplace
Fatalities in the United States." International Journal of Drug Policy, 60: 33-39.

Anderson, D. Mark, Benjamin Hansen, Daniel I. Rees, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2019. "Marijuana Laws
and Teen Marijuana Use: New Estimates from the Youth Risk Behavior Surveys." JAMA Pediatrics,
173(9): 879-881.

Anderson, D. Mark, and Daniel I. Rees. 2021. "The Public Health Effects of Legalizing Marijuana".
NBER Working Paper No. w28647.

Andreyeva, Elena and Benjamin Ukert. 2019. "The Impact of Medical Marijuana Laws and
Dispensaries on Self-Reported Health." Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 22(2): 1-20.

Arain, Mariam, Maliha Haque, Lina Johal, Puja Mathur, Wynand Nel, Afsha Rais, Ranbir Sandhu,
and Sushil Sharma. 2013. "Maturation of the Adolescent Brain." Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment,
9: 449.

Aydelotte, Jayson D., Lawrence H. Brown, Kevin M. Luftman, Alexandra L. Mardock, Pedro G. R.
Teixeira, Ben Coopwood, and Carlos V. R. Brown. 2017. "Crash Fatality Rates After Recreational
Marijuana Legalization in Washington and Colorado." American Journal of Public Health, 107(8): 1329-
1331.


                                                  30
Bachhuber, Marcus A., Brendan Saloner, Chinazo O. Cunningham, and Colleen L. Barry. 2014.
"Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Analgesic Overdose Mortality in the United States, 1999-
2010." JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(10): 1668­1673.

Baggio, Michele, Alberto Chong, and Sungoh Kwon. 2020. "Marijuana and Alcohol: Evidence using
Border Analysis and Retail Sales Data." Canadian Journal of Economics, 53(2): 563-591.

Bartos, Bradley J. Charis E. Kubrin, Carol Newark, and Richard McCleary 2020. "Medical Marijuana
Laws and Suicide." Archives of Suicide Research, 24(2): 204-217.

Becker, Gary A. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1988. "A Theory of Rational Addiction," Journal of Political
Economy, 96(4).

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "How much should we trust
differences-in-differences estimates?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249-275.

Bleyer, Archie, and Brian Barnes. 2018. "Opioid Death Rate Acceleration in Jurisdictions Legalizing
Marijuana Use." JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(9): 1280-1281.

Biden, Joseph R. 2019. Available via The Washington Post at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2019/11/18/joe-biden-marijuana-gateway-drug-
legalization/

Bradford Ashley and David Bradford. 2016. "Medical Marijuana Laws Reduce Prescription
Medication Use in Medicare Part D." Health Affairs, 35(7): 1230-1236.

Bradford Ashley and David Bradford. 2017. "Medical Marijuana Laws May be Associated with a
Decline in the Number of Prescriptions for Medicaid Enrollees." Health Affairs, 36(5): 945-951.

Bradford Ashley and David Bradford. 2018. "The Impact of Medical Cannabis Legalization on
Prescription Medication Use and Costs under Medicare Part D." Journal of Law and Economics, 61(3):
461-487.

Bradford, Ashley, David Bradford, Amanda Abraham, and Grace Bagwell Adams. 2018.
"Association between US State Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Prescribing in the Medicare Part
D Population." JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(5): 667­672.

Brinkman, Jeffrey and David Mok-Lamme. 2019. "Not in My Backyard? Not So Fast. The Effect of
Marijuana Legalization on Neighborhood Crime." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 78(9): 103460.

Burkhardt, Jesse and Chris Goemans. 2019. "The Short-run Effects of Marijuana Dispensary
Openings on Local Crime." Annals of Regional Science, 63(1): 163-198

Callaway, Brantly, and Pedro H.C. Sant'Anna. 2021. "Difference-in-Differences with Multiple Time
Periods." Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.

Casey, Betty Jo, Sarah Getz, and Adriana Galvan. 2008. "The Adolescent Brain." Developmental
Review, 28(1): 62-77.
                                                31
Cerdá, Magdalena, Melanie Wall, Tianshu Feng, Katherine M. Keyes, Aaron L. Sarvet, John
Schulenberg, Patrick M. O'Malley, Rosalie L. Pacula, Sandro Galea, and Deborah S. Hasin. 2017.
"Association of State Recreational Marijuana Laws with Adolescent Marijuana Use." JAMA
Pediatrics, 171(2): 142-149.

Chan, Nathan W., Jesse Burkhardt, and Matthew Flyr. 2020. "The Effects of Recreational Marijuana
Legalization and Dispensing on Opioid Mortality." Economic Inquiry, 58(2): 589-606.

Chang, Tom and Mireille Jacobson. 2017. "Going to Pot? The Impact of Dispensary Closures on
Crime." Journal of Urban Economics, 100: 120-136.

Chiu, V., Leung, J., Hall, W., Stjepanovi, D. and Degenhardt, L., 2021. "Public health impacts to
date of the legalisation of medical and recreational cannabis use in the USA." Neuropharmacology, 193,
p.108610.

Choi, Anna, Dhaval Dave, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2019. "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes: Medication
Marijuana Laws and Tobacco Cigarette Use." American Journal of Health Economics, 5(3): 303-333.

Christensen, G. and E. Miguel. 2018. "Transparency, reproducibility, and the credibility of economics
research," Journal of Economic Literature 56(3), 920­80.

Chu, Yu-Wei Luke. 2015 "Do Medical Marijuana Laws Increase Hard-Drug Use?" Journal of Law and
Economics, 58(2): 481­517.

Chu, Yu-Wei Luke and Wilbur Townsend. 2019. "Joint Culpability: The Effects of Medical
Marijuana Laws on Crime." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 159(3): 502-525.

Clemens, Jeffrey, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J Sabia. 2021. "The Long-Run Effects of the
Affordable Care Act: A Pre-Committed Research Design Over the COVID-19 Recession and
Recovery." NBER Working Paper No. 27999.

Conyers, Gregory and Ian Ayres. 2020. "A Lottery Test of the Effect of Dispensaries on Emergency
Room Visits in Arizona." Health Economics, 29(8): 854-864.

Corman, H. and Mocan, H.N., 2000. A time-series analysis of crime, deterrence, and drug abuse in
New York City. American Economic Review, 90(3), pp.584-604.

Currie, J., H. Kleven, and E. Zwiers 2020. "Technology and big data are changing economics:
Mining text to track methods." NBER Working Paper 26715

Dave, D., Deza, M. and Horn, B., 2021. Prescription drug monitoring programs, opioid abuse, and
crime. Southern Economic Journal, 87(3), pp.808-848.

DeAngelo, Gregory, and Audrey Redford. 2015. "Is Medical Marijuana a Gateway Drug?: The
Effect of Medical Marijuana Legalization on Heroin Use Rates." Working Paper No. 1376-2016-
109662. Available at: https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/229981/?ln=en


                                                  32
Dobbie, Will, Jacob Goldin, and Crystal S. Yang. 2018. "The Effects of Pretrial Detention on
Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges." American
Economic Review, 108(2): 201-40.

Dragone, Davide, Giovanni Prarolo Paolo, and Vanin Giulio Zanella. 2019. "Crime and the
Legalization of Recreational Marijuana." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 159: 488-501.

Edwards, E. and Madubuonwu, B., 2020. A Tale of Two Countries: Racially Targeted Arrests in the
Era of Marijuana Reform. American Civil Liberties Union Research Report.

Fandos, Nicolas. 2021. "In a Milestone, Schumer Will Propose Federal Decriminalization of
Marijuana." New York Times , Accessed on July 14 at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/14/us/politics/marijuana-legalization-
schumer.html?action=click&module=Top%20Stories&pgtype=Homepage

Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2020. Uniform Crime Reports.

Fernandez, Jean-Gabriel. 2019. "Why Legal Marijuana is Safer." Available at:
https://shepherdexpress.com/hemp/cannabis/why-legal-marijuana-is-safer/
Gavrilova, Evelina, Takuma Kamada, and Floris Zoutman. 2017. "Is Legal Pot Crippling Mexican
Drug Trafficking Organisations? The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on US Crime." Economic
Journal, 129(1): 375-407.

Gallup. 2020. "Gallup Poll Social Series: Crime," Available at:
https://news.gallup.com/file/poll/323591/201109Marijuana.pdf

Ghimire, Keshar M. and Johanna Catherine Maclean. 2020. "Medical marijuana and workers'
compensation claiming." Health Economics, 29(4): 419-434.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2021. "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing."
Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.

Gould, Eric D., Brian A. Weinberg, and David Mustard. 2002. "Crime Rates and Local Labor
Market Opportunities in the United States: 1979­1997," Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1): 45-61.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Köszegi. 2001. "Is Addiction `Rational'? Theory and Evidence." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1261-1303.

Hansen, Benjamin, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber. 2020. "Early Evidence on Recreational
Marijuana Legalization and Traffic Fatalities." Economic Inquiry, 58(2): 547-568.

Harris, Kamala D. 2019. Available via Twitter at:
https://twitter.com/kamalaharris/status/1196473557833932803?lang=en

Hollingsworth, Alex, Coady Wing, and Ashley Bradford. 2020. "Comparative Effects of
Recreational and Medical Marijuana Laws on Drug Use Among Adults and Adolescents." Available
at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3400519.


                                                   33
Huber III, Arthur, Rebecca Newman, and Daniel LaFave. 2016. "Cannabis Control and Crime:
Medicinal Use, Depenalization and the War on Drugs." B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy,
16(4): 1-35.

Hunt, Priscillia, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Gabriel Weinberger. 2018. "High on Crime? Exploring
the Effects of Marijuana Dispensary Laws on Crime in California Counties." IZA Discussion Paper
No. 11567.

Johnson, Julie, Dominic Hodgkin, and Sion Kim Harris. 2017. "The Design of Medical Marijuana
Laws and Adolescent Use and Heavy Use of Marijuana: Analysis of 45 States from 1991 to 2011."
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 170: 1-8.

Kelly, Elaine and Imran Rasul 2014. "Policing Cannabis and Drug Related Hospital Admissions:
Evidence from Administrative Records." Journal of Public Economics, 112: 89-114.

Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti. 2004. "The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports." American Economic Review, 94(1): 155-189.

Marijuana Policy Project. 2021a. Retrieved from
https://www.mpp.org/issues/legalization/marijuana-tax-revenue-states-regulate-marijuana-adult-
use/ on July 12, 2021.

Marijuana Policy Project. 2021b. Retrieved from https://www.mpp.org/issues/medical-
marijuana/state-by-state-medical-marijuana-laws/medical-marijuana-patient-numbers/ on July 8,
2021.

McMichael, Benjamin, Lawrence Van Horn, and W. Kip Viscusi. 2020. "The Impact of Cannabis
Access Laws on Opioid Prescribing." Journal of Health Economics, 69(1): 102273.

Miller, Keaton and Boyoung Seo. Forthcoming. "The Effect of Cannabis Legalization on Substance
Demand and Tax Revenues." National Tax Journal.

Miron, Jeffrey and Jeffrey Zwiebel. 1995. "The Economic Case Against Drug Prohibition." Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 9(4): 175-192.

Morris, Robert G., Michael TenEyck, J. C. Barnes, and Tomislav V. Kovandzic. 2014. "The Effect
of Medical Marijuana Laws on Crime: Evidence from State Panel Data, 1990-2006." PloS One, 9(3):
e92816.

Mueller-Smith, Michael, and Kevin T. Schnepel. 2021. "Diversion in the Criminal Justice System."
The Review of Economic Studies, 88(2): 883-936.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2017. The Health Effects of Cannabis and
Cannabinoids: The Current State of Evidence and Recommendations for Research. Washington, D.C.: National
Academies Press.




                                                   34
Nicolas, Lauren H. and Johanna Catherine Maclean. 2019. "The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws
on the Health and Labor Supply of Older Adults: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study,"
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 38(2): 455-480.

NIDA. 2020, May 27. Letter From the Director. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana/letter-director on 2021, July
8.

NORML. 2021. Legalization. Available at: https://norml.org/laws/legalization/

Olfson, Mark, Melanie M. Wall, Shang-Min Liu, and Carlos Blanco. "Cannabis use and risk of
prescription opioid use disorder in the United States." American Journal of Psychiatry 175, no. 1
(2018): 47-53.

Pacula, Rosalie L. and Beau Kilmer. 2003. "Marijuana and Crime: Is There a Connection Beyond
Prohibition?" NBER Working Paper No. 10046.

Pager, Devah. 2003. "The Mark of a Criminal Record." American Journal of Sociology, 108(5): 937-975.

Polednak, Anthony P. 2016. "Surveillance of US Death Rates from Chronic Diseases Related to
Excessive Alcohol Use." Alcohol and Alcoholism, 51(1): 54-62.

Powell, David, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula and Mireille Jacobson. 2018. "Do Medical Marijuana Laws
Reduce Addictions and Deaths Related to Pain Killers?" Journal of Health Economics, 58(3): 29- 42.

Rees, Daniel I., Joseph J. Sabia, Laura Argys, Dhaval Dave, and Joshua Latshaw. 2019. "With a Little
Help from My Friends: The Effects of Naloxone Access Laws and Good Samaritan Laws on
Opioid-Related Mortality," Journal of Law and Economics 62(1): 1-27.

Sabia, Joseph J., Jeffery Swigert, and Timothy Young. 2017. "Medical Marijuana Laws and Body
Weight." Health Economics, 26(1): 6-34.

Sabia, Joseph J. and Thanh Tam Nguyen. 2018. "The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on Labor
Market Outcomes." Journal of Law and Economics, 61(3): 361-396.

Santaella-Tenorio, Julian, Christine M. Mauro, Melanie M. Wall, June H. Kim, Magdalena Cerdá,
Katherine M. Keyes, Deborah S. Hasin, Sandro Galea, and Silvia S. Martins. 2017. "US Traffic
Fatalities, 1985­2014, and Their Relationship to Medical Marijuana Laws." American Journal of Public
Health, 107(2): 336­342.

Sevigny, E.L., Pacula, R.L. and Heaton, P. 2014. "The effects of medical marijuana laws on
potency." International Journal of Drug Policy, 25(2), pp.308-319.

Shover, Chelsea L., Corey S. Davis, Sanford C. Gordon, and Keith Humphreys. 2019. "Association
between Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Overdose Mortality Has Reversed Over Time."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(26): 12624-12626.



                                                 35
Smart, R., Caulkins, J.P., Kilmer, B., Davenport, S. and Midgette, G., 2017. "Variation in cannabis
potency and prices in a newly legal market: evidence from 30 million cannabis sales in Washington
state." Addiction, 112(12), pp.2167-2177.

Smith, Rhet A. 2020. "The Effects of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries on Adverse Opioid
Outcomes." Economic Inquiry, 58(2): 569-588.

Sun, Liyang, and Sarah Abraham. 2020. "Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies
with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects." Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.

Veligati, Sirish, Seth Howdeshell, Sara Beeler-Stinn, Deepak Lingam, Phylicia Allen, Li-Shiun Chen,
and Richard Grucza. 2020. "Changes in Alcohol and Cigarette Consumption in Response to Medical
and Recreational Cannabis Legalization: Evidence from U.S. State Tax Receipt Data." International
Journal of Drug Policy, 75: 102585.

Wen, Hefei, Jason M. Hockenberry, and Janet R. Cummings. 2015. "The Effect of Medical
Marijuana Laws on Adolescent and Adult Use of Marijuana, Alcohol, and Other Substances." Journal
of Health Economics, 42: 64-80.

Wen, Hefei and Jason M. Hockenberry JM. 2018. "Association of Medical and Adult-Use Marijuana
Laws with Opioid Prescribing for Medicaid Enrollees." JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(5): 673­679.

Wong, Su-Wei, and Hsien-Chang Lin. 2019. "Medical Marijuana Legalization and Associated Illicit
Drug Use and Prescription Medication Misuse Among Adolescents in the US." Addictive Behaviors,
90: 48-54.




                                                 36
Figure 1. Enactment Years of Recreational Marijuana Laws




                          37
 Figure 2A. Event-Study Analyses of the Effect of RMLs on Adult Drug Use, NSHUH

Panel (a): Marijuana Use                                        Panel (b): Cocaine Use




Panel (c): Binge Drinking                            Panel (d): Illicit Drug Use Other Than Marijuana




                                      38
Figure 2B. Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) Event-Study Analyses of the Effect of RMLs on Adult Drug Use, NSDUH
            Panel (a): Marijuana Use                                     Panel (b) Cocaine Use




        Panel (c): Binge Drinking                            Panel (d): Illicit Drug Use other than Marijuana




                                                  39
Figure 3. Event-Study Analyses of the Effect of RMLs on Adult Arrest Rates, UCR
                              Panel (a): Drug Arrests




                             Panel (b): Property Arrests




                             Panel (c): Violent Arrests




                                        40
Figure 4. Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) Event-Study Analyses of Adult Arrest Rates, UCR
                             Panel (a): Drug Offense Arrests




                           Panel (b): Property Offense Arrests




                            Panel (c): Violent Offense Arrests




                                          41
 Figure 5. Event-Study Analyses of the Effect of RMLs on Adult Drug Possession Arrest Rates, UCR
      Panel (a): Drug Possession Arrests                          Panel (b): Marijuana Possession Arrests




Panel (c): Cocaine/Heroin Possession Arrests                Panel (d): Synthetic Narcotics Possession Arrests




                                               42
Figure 6. Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) Event-Study Analyses of Adult Drug Possession Arrest Rates, UCR
     Panel (a): Drug Possession Arrests                          Panel (b): Marijuana Possession Arrests




Panel (c): Cocaine/Heroin Possession Arrests                 Panel (d): Synthetic Narcotics Possession Arrests




                                                43
 Figure 7. Event-Study Analyses of the Effect of RMLs on Adult Drug Sales Arrest Rates, UCR

     Panel (a): Drug Sales Arrests                                Panel (b): Marijuana Sales Arrests




Panel (c): Cocaine/Heroin Sales Arrests                      Panel (d): Synthetic Narcotics Sales Arrests




                                            44
Figure 8. Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) Event-Study Analysis of the Effect of RMLs on Substance Use-Involved Mortality
                                        and Suicides, NVSS Mortality Files
            Panel (a): Cocaine Deaths                                      Panel (b): Methamphetamine Deaths




            Panel (c): Heroin Deaths                                           Panel (d): Fentanyl Deaths




                                                       45
                                      Figure 8, Continued
Panel (e): Other Opioid Deaths                               Panel (f): Alcohol Deaths




                                 Panel (g): Suicide Deaths




                                                46
Figure 9. Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) Event-Study Analyses of the Effect of RMLs on Substance Use Treatment Admissions, TEDS

                Panel (a): Marijuana Admissions                            Panel (b): Cocaine Admissions




            Panel (c): Meth/Amphetamine Admissions                           Panel (d): Heroin Admissions




                                                           47
Panel (e): Other Opioids Admissions        Panel (f): Alcohol Admissions




                                      48
       Table 1A. Estimates of the Effect of Recreational Marijuana Laws on Prevalence of
                          Adult Substance Use, NSDHUH 2002-2019

                                                     (1)                         (2)                     (3)

                                                             Panel I: Prior-Month Marijuana Use
                                                           [N = 867; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.085]
 RML                                            0.0323***                    0.0361***               0.0159*
                                                 (0.0083)                     (0.0045)               (0.006)

                                                               Panel II: Prior-Year Cocaine Use
                                                           [N = 867; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.023]
 RML                                             0.0025**                       0.0013                  -0.0001
                                                 (0.0009)                      (0.0011)                 (0.0013)

                                                            Panel III: Prior-Month Binge Drinkinga
                                                           [N = 816; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.257]
 RML                                               0.0069                      0.0041                -0.0029
                                                  (0.0052)                    (0.0052)               (0.0036)

                                              Panel IV: Prior-Month Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuanaa
                                                       [N = 816; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.038]
 RML                                               0.0006                       0.0004                   0.0013
                                                  (0.0011)                     (0.0009)                 (0.0011)

 State & Year FE?                                   Yes                          Yes                    Yes
 Sociodemographic Controls?                         Yes                          Yes                    Yes
 Policy Controls?                                   No                           Yes                    Yes
 State Linear Time Trends?                          No                           No                     Yes

***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and control for the number of law enforcement
agencies reporting arrests. Sociodemographic controls include the state unemployment rate, per capita personal income,
the proportion of state population that is Black, the proportion of the state population that is Hispanic, whether the
governor is a Democrat; Policy controls include the presence of a medical marijuana law , the presence of a marijuana
decriminalization law, beer tax per gallon, presence of alcohol- and drug-specific Good Samaritan laws, the presence of a
naloxone access law, the presence of a must-access prescription drug monitoring program, cigarette tax per pack , the
presence of e-cigarette tax, the natural log of law enforcement personnel per 1,000 population, state EITC refundable
rate, the maximum Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (Food Stamp) benefit level for 4-person family, the
higher of the state of Federal minimum wage, an indicator for whether the state has implemented an Affordable Care
Act Medicaid expansion, the presence of a shall issue law, and the presence of a stand your ground law Regressions are
weighted using the adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.
aThe
   binge drinking and illicit drug use (other than marijuana) measure is missing in the publicly available 2014-15
NSDUH state summary tables.



                                                             49
       Table 1B. Estimates of the Effect of Recreational Marijuana Laws on Prevalence of
         Methamphetamine Use and Non-Medicinal Use of Pain Relievers, NSDUH
                                           (1)                  (2)             (3)
                                                             Panel I: Methamphetamine Use, 2015-2019
                                                             [N = 204; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.0073]
RML                                                  -0.00067*                       -0.0017                   0.0003
                                                     (0.00032)                       (0.0014)                 (0.0017)

                                                      Panel II: Nonmedical Use of Pain Relievers, 2002-2014a
                                                             [N = 612; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.046]
RML                                                   -0.0048*                        -0.0028                      0.0006
                                                      (0.0021)                        (0.0015)                    (0.0028)

                                                      Panel III: Nonmedical Use of Pain Relievers, 2015-2019
                                                             [N = 204; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.041]
RML                                                   -0.0016                         0.0022                   0.0009
                                                      (0.0010)                       (0.0016)                 (0.0025)

                                                     Panel IV: Nonmedical Use of Pain Relievers, 2002-2019a
                                                            [N = 816; Pre-Treatment Mean = 0.045]
RML                                                  -0.0032**                        -0.0023                       0.002
                                                      (0.0011)                        (0.0011)                    (0.0014)

State & Year FE?                                         Yes                            Yes                      Yes
Sociodemographic Controls?                               Yes                            Yes                      Yes
Policy Controls?                                         No                             Yes                      Yes
State Linear Time Trends?                                No                             No                       Yes
***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.
The NSDUH changed its asking of questions related to prescription pain reliever misuse: "Several changes were made to the
prescription drug questions for the 2014-2015 NSDUH. These changes were designed to address limitations in the survey design used
in prior years. Special attention was paid to revising the modules that measure prescription drug misuse or "nonmedical" use because
of public health concerns about misuse of prescription drugs, such as increases in the number of drug poisoning deaths involving
opioid pain relievers like hydrocodone, oxycodone, and methadone (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013; Paulozzi,
2012)." See: https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-RedesignChanges-2015.pdf

aThe  binge drinking, pain reliever misuse, and illicit drug use other than marijuana measures are missing in the publicly
available 2014-15 NSDUH state summary tables




                                                                50
       Table 2. Estimates of the Effect of Recreational Marijuana Laws on Adult Arrests
                             Per 1,000 Population, UCR, 2002-2019

                                                        (1)                      (2)                      (3)

                                                                      Panel I: Drug Arrests
                                                                [Pre-Treatment Mean DV = 6.33]
 RML                                                 -1.308**                  -1.057**                 -1.993***
                                                      (0.360)                   (0.355)                  (0.401)

                                                                     Panel II: Violent Arrests
                                                                [Pre-Treatment Mean DV = 2.75]
 RML                                                   0.051                   0.074                   -0.190
                                                      (0.085)                 (0.098)                  (0.114)

                                                                     Panel III: Property Arrests
                                                                [Pre-Treatment Mean DV = 4.36]
 RML                                                   0.038                   0.047                    0.270
                                                      (0.199)                 (0.272)                  (0.320)

 State & Year FE?                                       Yes                     Yes                       Yes
 Sociodemographic Controls?                             Yes                     Yes                       Yes
 Policy Controls?                                       No                      Yes                       Yes
 State Linear Time Trends?                              No                      No                        Yes
 N                                                      998                     998                       998

***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                          51
                 Table 3. Age- and Gender-Specific Estimates of the Effect of RMLs on Adult Arrest Rate per 1,000 Population,
                                                              UCR, 2000-2019

                                            (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)

                                                  Age 18-20                           Age 21+                          Males 18+                      Females 18+

                                                                                                Part I: Drug Arrests
RML                                       -1.320            -4.015          -1.046**         -1.883***        -1.326*          -3.152***       -0.747***         -0.890***
                                          (2.740)           (3.144)          (0.305)          (0.335)          (0.615)           (0.697)        (0.154)           (0.159)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                     [16.70]           [16.70]          [5.704]          [5.704]         [10.207]          [10.207]        [2.614]           [2.614]
                                                                                             Panel II: Violent Arrests
RML                                        0.171            -0.454            0.072           -0.176            0.118            -0.321           0.042            -0.070
                                          (0.284)           (0.301)          (0.090)          (0.106)          (0.171)           (0.185)         (0.038)           (0.050)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                     [6.516]           [6.516]          [2.520]          [2.520]          [4.543]           [4.543]         [1.025]           [1.025]
                                                                                             Panel III: Property Arrests
RML                                       -1.111             1.048            0.118            0.223            0.100             0.312           0.018             0.221
                                          (0.713)           (0.886)          (0.271)          (0.296)          (0.348)           (0.437)         (0.209)           (0.217)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                     [15.70]           [15.70]          [3.673]          [3.673]          [5.870]           [5.870]         [2.914]           [2.914]

State & Year FE & # Agencies?               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes
Observable Controls?                        Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes
State Linear Trends?                        No                Yes              No               Yes              No                Yes             No                Yes
N                                           998               998              998              998              998               998             998               998

    ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
    Notes: All regressions include state and year fixed effects and all observable controls listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the relevant state
    population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                                        52
            Table 4. Estimates of Effects of RMLs on Adult Individual Type I Offense Rate per 1,000 Population, UCR, 2000-2019

                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)                  (6)              (7)

                                                 Assault           Robbery            Murder             Larceny             Burglary            Motor              Arson
                                                                                                                                              Vehicle Theft

                                                                                             Panel I: All Observable Controls

RML                                                0.036              0.051             -0.0005            -0.075              0.037                0.050             0.005
                                                  (0.091)            (0.029)            (0.004)            (0.227)            (0.042)              (0.048)           (0.003)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                             [2.423]            [0.435]            [0.051]            [3.133]            [1.169]              [0.499]           [0.030]

                                                                                 Panel II: Includes State-Specific Linear Time Trends

RML                                               -0.174             -0.031             -0.0008             0.223              0.083               -0.006             0.002
                                                  (0.089)            (0.037)            (0.006)            (0.296)            (0.069)              (0.039)           (0.003)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                             [2.423]            [0.435]            [0.051]            [3.133]            [1.169]              [0.499]           [0.030]

N                                                   998                998                998                998                 998                 998               998

    ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
    Notes: All regressions include state and year fixed effects and all observable controls listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the relevant state
    population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                                        53
                       Table 5. Estimates of Effects of RMLs on Adult Drug-Related Arrests Per 1,000 Population, UCR, 2000-2019
                               (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)            (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)
                            Possession         Sales         Possession         Sales         Possession          Sales         Possession         Sales         Possession           Sales
                                     Age 18+                           Age 18-20                        Age 21+                    Males Ages 18+                  Females Ages 18+
                                                                                              Panel I: All Drug Arrests
RML                         -1.791***       -0.366***         -5.910***        -0.876**       -1.732*** -0.353***               -2.848***       -0.630***         -0.784***          -0.114***
                             (0.342)          (0.096)           (1.557)         (0.356)        (0.310)        (0.091)            (0.568)          (0.166)          (0.146)            (0.033)
Pre-Treat Mean DV            [5.21]          [1.10]           [13.77]          [2.86]          [5.02]         [1.07]             [8.31]          [1.86]            [2.23]             [0.38]
                                                                                              Part II: Marijuana Arrests
RML                         -1.334***       -0.159***         -5.180***        -0.461**        -1.268*** -0.153***              -2.147***       -0.283***         -0.554***          -0.041***
                             (0.193)          (0.040)           (1.467)         (0.218)         (0.172)        (0.036)           (0.327)          (0.070)          (0.081)            (0.013)
Pre-Treat Mean DV            [1.39]          [0.32]            [7.46]          [1.30]           [1.21]         [0.29]            [2.43]          [0.58]            [0.39]             [0.07]
                                                                                      Panel III: Heroin and Cocaine Arrests
RML                          -0.261**         -0.139**         -0.368**        -0.330*       -0.263**       -0.134**        -0.464**              -0.250**         -0.072            -0.035*
                             (0.122)           (0.059)          (0.158)        (0.169)       (0.123)         (0.057)        (0.203)                (0.102)         (0.053)           (0.020)
Pre-Treat Mean DV            [1.71]           [0.41]           [2.90]          [0.85]         [1.71]        [0.40]          [2.64]                [0.68]           [0.83]            [0.14]
                                                                               Panel IV: Truly Addicting Synthetic Narcotics Arrests
RML                          -0.073           -0.019            -0.048         -0.024        -0.075*        -0.018          -0.102                -0.028           -0.046*           -0.010
                             (0.044)          (0.014)           (0.096)         (0.023)      (0.044)        (0.014)         (0.063)               (0.020)          (0.027)           (0.009)
Pre-Treat Mean DV            [0.13]           [0.04]           [0.25]          [0.06]        [0.13]         [0.04]          [0.19]                [0.06]           [0.07]            [0.02]
                                                                                 Panel V: Other Dangerous Non-Narcotic Arrests
RML                          -0.123           -0.048            -0.314        -0.060         -0.126        -0.048      -0.135                     -0.069           -0.112            -0.028**
                             (0.159)          (0.031)          (0.218)        (0.094)        (0.159)       (0.030)     (0.233)                    (0.052)          (0.095)           (0.012)
Pre-Treat Mean DV            [1.98]           [0.34]          [3.17]           [0.65]        [1.97]       [0.34]        [3.05]                    [0.55]           [0.95]             [0.15]
FE & # Agencies?               Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
Observable Controls?           Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
State Linear Trends?           Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes           Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
N                              998             998              998                998           998              998              998             998              998               998
        ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
        Notes: All regressions include state and year fixed effects and all observable controls listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the relevant state
        population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.


                                                                                            54
Table 6. Poisson Estimates of the Effect of RMLs on Mortality, NVSS Mortality Files, 2000-2019

                                                    (1)                          (2)                       (3)
                                                    Panel I: Cocaine Deaths [Pre-Treat Mean = 225.97]
RML                                               -0.109                       -0.184                   -0.107
                                                  (0.155)                      (0.137)                  (0.115)

                                              Panel II: Methamphetamine Deaths [Pre-Treat Mean = 330.13]
RML                                              -0.255*                      -0.184*                   -0.073
                                                 (0.104)                      (0.087)                   (0.063)

                                                   Panel III: Heroin Deaths [Pre-Treat Mean = 251.87]
RML                                               -0.227                      -0.268*                   -0.137
                                                  (0.174)                     (0.109)                   (0.149)

                                                  Panel IV: Fentanyl Deaths [Pre-Treat Mean = 130.23]
RML                                               -0.297                      -0.434**                 -0.418***
                                                  (0.169)                      (0.129)                  (0.108)

                                                Panel V: Other Opioid Deaths [Pre-Treat Mean = 823.43]
RML                                              -0.204*                      -0.144*                   -0.019
                                                 (0.082)                      (0.070)                   (0.077)

                                                  Panel VI: Alcohol Deaths [Pre-Treat Mean = 2358.85]
RML                                             -0.063***                      -0.007                   -0.003
                                                 (0.018)                       (0.020)                  (0.020)

                                                     Panel VII: Suicides [Pre-Treat Mean = 2145.04]
RML                                             -0.058***                      -0.029                   -0.008
                                                 (0.013)                       (0.019)                  (0.012)

State & Year FE?                                    Yes                          Yes                      Yes
Sociodemographic Controls?                          Yes                          Yes                      Yes
Policy Controls?                                    No                           Yes                      Yes
State Linear Time Trends?                           No                           No                       Yes
N                                                  1,020                        1,020                    1,020

***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                           55
      Table 7A. Heterogeneity in Effects of RMLs on Deaths Per 100,000 Population, by Age and Gender, NVSS Mortality Files, 2000-2019

                                        (1)                 (2)                  (3)                    (4)                      (5)                  (6)               (7)
                                                                                                                               Other
                                      Cocaine        Methamphetamine            Heroin                Fentanyl                                      Alcohol           Suicides
                                                                                                                               Opioids

                                                                                               Panel I: Ages 18-20
RML                                   0.610*              -0.209                0.178                   -0.228                  0.068                0.032             0.007
                                      (0.254)             (0.166)              (0.245)                 (0.266)                 (0.235)              (0.137)           (0.037)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                 [3.812]             [6.106]              [6.436]                 [2.743]                [19.851]              [2.797]          [79.105]
                                                                                        Panel II: Ages 21+
RML                                    -0.200             -0.192*              -0.285**        -0.439**                       -0.281*               -0.009            -0.030
                                      (0.139)             (0.089)               (0.107)         (0.131)                       (0.128)               (0.020)           (0.020)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                [222.058]           [324.100]            [245.410]       [127.511]                      [893.217]            [2354.084]        [2065.236]
                                                                                                Panel III: Males
RML                                    -0.152              -0.155              -0.264*              -0.403***                  -0.246               -0.010            -0.023
                                      (0.140)             (0.084)              (0.107)                 (0.110)                (0.130)               (0.022)           (0.016)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                [166.641]           [242.629]            [205.838]               [73.391]               [578.200]            [1751.915]        [1672.070]
                                                                                               Panel IV: Females
RML                                   -0.276              -0.244*               -0.285*               -0.494**                -0.320**              -0.008            -0.050
                                      (0.142)             (0.101)               (0.117)                (0.169)                 (0.115)             (0.025)           (0.032)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                [59.364]            [88.248]              [46.292]               [56.637]               [335.331]            [611.148]         [476.704]

State & Year FE?                        Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes                  Yes               Yes
Observable Controls?                    Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes                  Yes               Yes
N                                      1,020               1,020                1,020                  1,020                    1,020                1,020             1,020
       ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
       Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the adult state population and standard errors are
       clustered at the state level.




                                                                                          56
                            Table 7B. Sensitivity of Death-Related Estimates to Controls for State-Specific Linear Time Trends

                                         (1)                 (2)                  (3)                    (4)                      (5)                  (6)               (7)
                                                                                                                                Other
                                       Cocaine        Methamphetamine            Heroin                Fentanyl                                      Alcohol           Suicides
                                                                                                                                Opioids

                                                                                                Panel I: Ages 18-20
RML                                    0.684*              -0.116               -0.103                   -0.448                  0.106               -0.212            -0.121
                                       (0.340)             (0.253)              (0.303)                 (0.262)                 (0.286)              (0.275)           (0.071)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                  [3.812]             [6.106]              [6.436]                 [2.743]                [19.851]              [2.797]          [79.105]
                                                                                         Panel II: Ages 21+
RML                                     -0.121              -0.073               -0.137        -0.417***                        -0.150               -0.003            -0.003
                                       (0.112)             (0.065)              (0.146)         (0.105)                        (0.104)               (0.020)           (0.012)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                 [222.058]           [324.100]            [245.410]       [127.511]                      [893.217]            [2354.084]        [2065.236]
                                                                                                 Panel III: Males
RML                                     -0.059              -0.027               -0.125              -0.439***                  -0.151               -0.003            -0.016
                                       (0.133)             (0.063)              (0.152)                 (0.109)                (0.120)               (0.025)           (0.012)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                 [166.641]           [242.629]            [205.838]               [73.391]               [578.200]            [1751.915]        [1672.070]
                                                                                                Panel IV: Females
RML                                   -0.233**             -0.168*               -0.174               -0.379***                 -0.139               -0.006            0.017
                                       (0.087)             (0.070)               (0.135)                (0.108)                (0.088)              (0.019)           (0.024)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                 [59.364]            [88.248]              [46.292]               [56.637]               [335.331]            [611.148]         [476.704]

State & Year FE?                         Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes                  Yes               Yes
Observable Controls?                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes                  Yes               Yes
State-Specific Linear Trends?            Yes                 Yes                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes                  Yes               Yes
N                                       1,020               1,020                1,020                  1,020                    1,020                1,020             1,020
        ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
        Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the adult state population and standard errors are
        clustered at the state level.



                                                                                           57
  Table 8. Estimates of the Effect of Recreational Marijuana Laws on Adult Substance Use
               Treatment Admissions Per 1,000 Population, TEDS, 2000-2018

                                               (1)                      (2)                       (3)
                                              Panel I: Marijuana Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 0.72]
RML                                          -0.090                  -0.036                      0.139
                                             (0.084)                 (0.112)                    (0.093)
                                               Panel II: Cocaine Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 0.66]
RML                                           0.167                  0.230*                      0.058
                                             (0.143)                 (0.114)                    (0.078)
                                       Panel III: Meth/Amphetamine Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 1.31]
RML                                           0.211                     0.319                     0.191
                                             (0.192)                   (0.247)                   (0.190)
                                              Panel IV: Heroin Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 1.82]
RML                                          -0.211                  -0.022                      0.425
                                             (0.367)                 (0.444)                    (0.459)
                                             Panel V: Other Opioids Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean 0.48]
RML                                          -0.116                  -0.151                      0.013
                                             (0.122)                 (0.160)                    (0.159)
                                              Panel VI: Alcohol Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 3.40]
RML                                           0.216                     0.257                     0.066
                                             (0.460)                   (0.537)                   (0.329)

State & Year FE?                               Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Sociodemographic Controls?                     Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Policy Controls?                               No                      Yes                        Yes
State Linear Time Trends?                      No                      No                         Yes
N                                              937                     937                        937
***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                          58
       Table 9. Heterogeneity in Effects of RMLs on Drug Treatment Admissions Rate, by Age and Gender,
                                                   2000-2018

                                   (1)               (2)                   (3)                  (4)            (5)              (6)
                                                                  Methamphetamine/                           Other
                               Marijuana          Cocaine                                     Heroin                          Alcohol
                                                                    Amphetamine                              Opioids

                                                                   Panel I: Ages 18-20
RML                               0.482            0.018              0.536*            0.433               -0.181             0.256
                                 (0.273)          (0.055)             (0.256)          (0.556)              (0.317)           (0.490)
Pre-Treat Mean DV                 [2.78]           [0.35]              [1.56]           [1.75]               [0.60]            [2.96]

                                                                   Panel II: Ages 21+
RML                               0.120            0.061               0.172          -0.429                 0.023             0.057
                                 (0.085)          (0.080)             (0.190)         (0.463)               (0.155)           (0.350)
Pre-Treat Mean DV                 [0.59]           [0.68]              [1.29]          [1.82]                [0.47]            [3.43]

                                                                       Panel III: Males
RML                               0.175            0.041                  0.201               0.532         0.0006             0.130
                                 (0.152)          (0.105)                (0.223)             (0.567)        (0.173)           (0.460)
Pre-Treat Mean DV                 [1.03]           [0.82]                 [1.47]              [2.52]         [0.51]            [5.05]

                                                                    Panel IV: Females
RML                              0.104*            0.073                0.177          0.322                 0.025            -0.042
                                 (0.043)          (0.057)              (0.159)        (0.362)               (0.148)           (0.239)
Pre-Treat Mean DV                 [0.42]           [0.50]               [1.15]         [1.15]                [0.45]            [1.81]

State & Year FE?                   Yes              Yes                   Yes                  Yes            Yes              Yes
Observable Controls?               Yes              Yes                   Yes                  Yes            Yes              Yes
State Linear Time Trends?          Yes              Yes                   Yes                  Yes            Yes              Yes
N                                  937              937                   937                  937            937              937

        ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
        Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
        adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                  59
                           Appendix Table 1. Weighted Means of Dependent Variables

                                                                                 Age 18+           Age 18-25          Age 26+
Panel I: National Survey of Drug Use and Health
Marijuana Use in Last Month                                                   0.074 (0.025)       0.187(0.042)       0.055(0.023)
Cocaine Use in Last Year                                                      0.021 (0.005)       0.056(0.014)       0.015(0.003)
Binge Drinking in Last Month                                                  0.25 (0.027)        0.411(0.054)       0.227(0.027)
Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana in Last Month                           0.034 (0.004)       0.077(0.012)       0.027(0.004)
Methamphetamine Use in Last Year                                              0.006(0.003)        0.008(0.004)       0.006(0.002)
Non-Medicinal Use of Pain Relievers in Last Year                              0.044 (0.006)       0.099(0.027)       0.034(0.005)

 Panel II: Uniform Crime Reportsa
                                                   Pooled          Age 18-20         Age 21+            Males            Females
 Property Arrest Rate                           4.50 (1.68)       15.39 (6.40)      3.86 (1.49)       6.02 (2.29)      3.06 (1.22)
 Violent Arrest Rate                            1.81 (0.99)        4.70 (2.28)      1.64 (0.92)       3.01 (1.62)      0.67 (0.40)
 Drug Arrest Rate                               5.56 (2.46)       18.40 (9.55)      4.80 (2.19)       9.10 (4.00)      2.22 (1.14)
 Drug Possession Arrest Rate                    4.42 (2.36)       14.92 (8.75)      3.79 (2.09)       7.16 (3.78)      1.82 (1.10)
 Drug Sale Arrest Rate                          0.95 (0.56)        2.72 (2.19)      0.84 (0.48)       1.59 (0.99)      0.34 (0.19)
 Marijuana Possession Arrest Rate               2.04 (1.28)       10.79 (7.97)      1.52 (0.94)       3.51 (2.22)      0.66 (0.46)
 Marijuana Sale Arrest Rate                     0.26 (0.19)        1.18 (0.98)      0.20 (0.15)       0.46 (0.34)      0.06 (0.05)
 Total Marijuana Arrest Rate                    2.30 (1.36)       11.97 (8.29)      1.73 (1.01)       3.97 (2.38)      0.73 (0.48)
 Cocaine/Heroin Poss. Arrest Rate               1.13 (0.93)        1.88 (1.60)      1.08 (0.91)       1.78 (1.49)      0.51 (0.42)
 Cocaine/Heroin Sales Arrest Rate               0.39 (0.37)        0.97 (1.38)      0.35 (0.32)       2.92 (2.51)      0.77 (0.67)
 Total Cocaine/Heroin Arrest Rate               1.52 (1.17)        2.85 (2.66)      1.44 (1.11)       0.67 (0.67)      0.12 (0.10)
 Narcotics Possession Arrest Rate               0.21 (0.23)        0.43 (0.43)      0.20 (0.22)       2.46 (1.94)      0.64 (0.48)
 Narcotics Sales Arrest Rate                    0.09 (0.12)        0.17 (0.25)      0.08 (0.11)       0.31 (0.33)      0.12 (0.13)
 Other Non-Narcotic Possess Arrest Rate         1.02 (1.16)        1.80 (1.51)      0.98 (1.16)       1.55 (1.74)      0.52 (0.64)
 Other Non-Narcotic Sales Arrest Rate           0.20 (0.19)        0.39 (0.41)      0.19 (0.18)       0.32 (0.30)      0.09 (0.09)
 Assault Arrest Rate                            1.50 (0.93)        2.81 (1.55)      1.30 (0.83)       2.24 (1.39)      0.58 (0.36)
 Robbery Arrest Rate                            0.35 (0.16)        1.51 (0.77)      0.23 (0.10)       0.55 (0.25)      0.07 (0.03)
 Murder Arrest Rate                             0.48 (0.26)        0.15 (0.09)      0.03 (0.01)       0.07 (0.04)     0.009 (0.007)
 Larceny Arrest Rate                            3.76 (1.60)       11.10 (5.13)      2.97 (1.33)       4.21 (1.85)      2.70 (1.19)
 Burglary Arrest Rate                           0.84 (0.45)        3.00 (1.70)      0.62 (0.33)       1.30 (0.64)      0.24 (0.21)
 Motor Vehicle Theft Arrest Rate                0.32 (0.23)        1.09 (0.87)      0.24 (0.16)       0.48 (0.33)      0.10 (0.08)
 Arson Arrest Rate                              0.03 (0.02)        0.08 (0.06)      0.02 (0.02)       0.05 (0.03)      0.01 (0.01)

 Panel III: NVSS Mortality Filesb
 Cocaine Death Rate                             2.94 (2.50)        0.94 (0.92)      3.05 (2.61)       4.42 (3.71)       1.54 (1.41)
 Methamphetamine Death Rate                     1.68 (2.37)        0.60 (0.76)      1.75 (2.47)       2.44 (3.43)       0.97 (1.38)
 Heroin Deaths Rate                             2.73 (3.01)        1.35 (1.39)      2.81 (3.13)       4.36 (4.65)       1.19 (1.52)
 Fentanyl Death Rate                            3.41 (6.37)        1.20 (2.19)      3.54 (6.63)       4.79 (9.65)       2.12 (3.35)
 Other Opioid Death Rate                        6.13 (3.28)        2.74 (2.02)      6.33 (3.41)       7.81 (4.15)       4.55 (2.72)
 Alcohol Death Rate                             11.51 (4.52)       0.28 (0.41)      12.16 (4.76)      17.46 (6.21)      5.89 (2.97)
 Suicide Rate                                   15.82 (4.19)      11.35 (4.68)      16.09 (4.23)      25.68 (6.59)      6.52 (1.97)

    aArrest   rates are calculated per 1,000 relevant state population
    bMortality   rates are calculated per 100,000 relevant state population



                                                                  60
                                             Appendix Table 1, Continued

Panel IV: Treatment Episode Data Setc
                                                     Pooled          Age 18-20      Age 21+        Males        Females
Marijuana Admissions Rate                         0.89 (0.60)        3.35 (2.35)   0.74 (0.51)   1.33 (0.97) 0.48 (0.28)
Cocaine Admissions Rate                           0.79 (0.67)        0.40 (0.33)   0.81 (0.69)   0.99 (0.92) 0.60 (0.46)
Amphetamine/Meth Admission Rate                   0.62 (0.80)        0.71 (1.03)   0.62 (0.80)   0.69 (0.91) 0.55 (0.70)
Alcohol Admission Rate                            3.06 (2.89)        2.37 (2.74)   3.10 (2.93)   4.65 (4.64) 1.57 (1.27)
Heroin/Fentanyl Admissions Rate                   1.40 (1.93)        1.25 (2.07)   1.41 (1.96)   1.94 (2.73) 0.91 (1.25)
Other Opioids Admissions Rate                     0.48 (0.48)        0.56 (0.83)   0.47 (0.48)   0.53 (0.54) 0.44 (0.44)

  cAdmissions   rates are calculated per 1,000 relevant state population




                                                                61
                    Appendix Table 2. Weighted Means of Independent Variables, 2000-2019
Variable name                          Mean        SD                       Source
ACA Medicaid Expansion                  0.19      0.39          Kaiser Family Foundation, State Health Facts (Medicaid and Health Reform):
                                                                https://www.kff.org/statedata/

Beer tax per gallon (nom $)             0.26      0.24          Urban Institute & Brookings Institution Tax Policy Center:
                                                                https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/state-alcoholexcise-
                                                                taxes
Cigarette tax per pack (nom $)          1.24      0.96          Tax Burden on Tobacco:
                                                                https://chronicdata.cdc.gov/Policy/The-Tax-Burden-on-
                                                                Tobacco-1970-2019/7nwe-3aj9
Marijuana Decriminalized                0.36      0.48          NORML Foundation:
                                                                https://norml.org/laws/decriminalization/
Democrat Governor                       0.43      0.49          Anderson and Rees (2011), and authors' own internet
                                                                searches
Any E-cigarette tax                     0.06      0.24          Hansen et al. (2021): "Do Tobacco 21 Laws Work?"

EITC refundable rate (nom $)            0.07      0.16          University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research, National Welfare Data:
                                                                https://ukcpr.org/resources/national-welfare-data
Log (law enforcement personnel per      0.82      0.23          FBI UCR: https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crimein-the-u.s.-
                                                                2011/police-employee-data
1,000 pop)
Minimum Wage (nom $)                    7.03      1.47          Economic Policy Institute (Ben Zipperer):
                                                                https://www.epi.org/data/
Medical Marijuana Law                   0.32      0.46          Anderson and Rees (2021)

Naloxone Access Law                     0.34      0.46          Rees, Sabia, Argys, Dave, and Latshaw (2019);
                                                                Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System: http://pdaps.org/datasets/good-
                                                                samaritan-overdose-laws-1501695153; and the Network for Public Health Law:
                                                                https://www.networkforphl.org/wpcontent/uploads/2020/10/Fact-Sheet-
                                                                Naloxone-Prescription-Mandates.pdf
Number law enforcement agencies        675.85    368.69         FBI UCR

reporting arrests
Per capital personal income (nom $)   42199.31   9911.62        FRED: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/A792RC0A052NBEA

Must-access prescription drug          0.122      0.317         Dave, Deza, and Horn (2021); Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System:
                                                                http://pdaps.org/datasets/prescriptionmonitoring- program-laws-1408223416-
monitoring program                                              1502818373; and Valant: https://www.valant.io/pdmp/
Share Non-Hispanic Black               0.128      0.08          Calculated using SEER Population Estimates (1990-2019
                                                                single-year age groups): https://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html
Share Hispanic                          0.15      0.12          Calculated using SEER Population Estimates (1990-2019
                                                                single-year age groups): https://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html
Recreational Marijuana Law             0.046      0.20          Anderson and Rees (2021)

Good Samaritan Alcohol Law             0.06       0.23          Rees, Sabia, Argys, Dave, and Latshaw (2019);
                                                                Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System: http://pdaps.org/datasets/good-
                                                                samaritan-overdose-laws-1501695153; and authors' own searches
Good Samaritan Drug Law                 0.19      0.38          Rees, Sabia, Argys, Dave, and Latshaw (2019);
                                                                Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System: http://pdaps.org/datasets/good-
                                                                samaritan-overdose-laws-1501695153; and authors' own searches
Shall Issue Law                         0.64      0.47          Grossman and Lee (2008), Donohue and Ayers (2009), Aneja et al. (2012),
                                                                Hinkston (2012), United States Government Accountability Office (2012),
                                                                Arnold (2015), USA Carry (2015), and Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun
                                                                Violence (2021a)
Max SNAP benefit for 4-person          577.40     92.25         University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research,
                                                                National Welfare Data: https://ukcpr.org/resources/national-welfare-data
family (nom $)
Stand Your Ground Law                   0.38      0.47          McClellan and Tekin (2017), Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence
                                                                (2021b), and authors' own searches of state legislative codes
State Unemployment Rate                 5.90      2.09          FRED: https://fred.stlouisfed.org/release?rid=112


       \




                                                           62
    Appendix Table 3. Heterogeneity in the Effects of RMLs on Adult Substance Use, by Age,
                                           NSDUH
                                                     (1)                       (2)                    (3)                   (4)
                                                           Age 18-25                                         Age 26+
                                                            Panel I: Marijuana Use, 2002-2019 [N = 867]
RML                                              0.035***                    0.017               0.036***                0.015*
                                                  (0.007)                   (0.013)               (0.005)                (0.006)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                              [0.20]                   [0.207]               [0.063]                [0.063]
                                                             Panel II: Cocaine Use, 2002-2019 [N = 867]
RML                                               0.0013                      -0.0001                0.0014                0.0005
                                                  (0.001)                     (0.001)                (0.001)              (0.0011)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                             [0.063]                     [0.063]                [0.016]               [0.016]
                                                           Panel III: Binge Drinkinga, 2002-2019 [N = 816]
RML                                               -0.004                    -0.004                  0.005                -0.002
                                                  (0.007)                   (0.006)                (0.005)               (0.003)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                              [0.40]                    [0.40]                 [0.21]                [0.21]
                                                Panel IV: Nonmedical Use of Pain Relieversa, 2002-2019 [N =816]
RML                                             -0.014***                     0.0003                 -0.0004                0.002
                                                 (0.004)                      (0.003)                (0.0009)              (0.001)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                            [0.112]                      [0.112]                 [0.037]              [0.037]
                                                       Panel V: Methamphetamine Use, 2015-2019 [N = 204]

RML                                               -0.001                      0.0008                 -0.001                0.0002
                                                  (0.001)                     (0.002)                (0.001)              (0.0017)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                             [0.009]                     [0.009]                [0.007]               [0.007]
                                            Panel VI: Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuanaa, 2002-2019 [N = 816]

RML                                               -0.003                      -0.0001                  0.001               0.0016
                                                  (0.003)                     (0.003)                (0.0007)              (0.001)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                             [0.082]                     [0.082]                 [0.029]              [0.029]
State & Year FE?                                    Yes                        Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observable Controls?                                Yes                        Yes                   Yes                   Yes
State Linear Time Trends?                           No                         Yes                   No                    Yes
   ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
   Notes: All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and control for the number of law enforcement agencies reporting
   arrests. Observable Controls ate listed in Table 1A.

   aThe  binge drinking, pain reliever misuse, and illicit drug use other than marijuana measures are missing in the publicly
   available 2014-15 NSDUH state summary tables.




                                                                     63
                        Appendix Table 4. Sensitivity of Estimates in Table 2
                      to Use of Log (Arrest Rate) Specification, UCR, 2000-2019

                                                        (1)                      (2)                      (3)

                                                                         Panel I: Drug Arrests
                                                               [Pre-Treatment Mean Log DV = 1.735]
 RML                                                 -0.355*                   -0.348**                 -0.480**
                                                     (0.135)                    (0.108)                  (0.119)

                                                                       Panel II: Violent Arrests
                                                               [Pre-Treatment Mean Log DV = 0.878]
 RML                                                   0.073                   0.112                   -0.107
                                                      (0.067)                 (0.073)                  (0.092)

                                                                      Panel III: Property Arrests
                                                               [Pre-Treatment Mean Log DV = 1.419]
 RML                                                   0.007                   0.078                    0.050
                                                      (0.063)                 (0.076)                  (0.097)

 State & Year FE?                                       Yes                     Yes                       Yes
 Sociodemographic Controls?                             Yes                     Yes                       Yes
 Policy Controls?                                       No                      Yes                       Yes
 State Linear Time Trends?                              No                      No                        Yes
 N                                                      998                     998                       998

***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                          64
                 Appendix Table 5. Sensitivity of Mortality Estimates to Use of OLS Model where Dependent Variable is Death Rate
                                                                Per 100,000 Population
                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)          (7)
                                Cocaine      Methamphetamine      Heroin          Fentanyl      Other Opioids     Alcohol      Suicides
                                                                               Panel I: Ages 18+
RML                                       0.094    -0.211       -0.681                -1.208         -1.101         0.295        -0.002
                                         (0.591)   (0.500)      (0.841)               (1.649)        (0.748)       (0.400)       (0.207)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                    [1.071]   [1.625]      [1.945]               [1.287]        [6.337]      [14.102]      [14.771]
                                                                               Panel I: Ages 18-20
RML                                      0.732*     0.103        0.153                  -1.176        0.032        -0.063       -0.759
                                         (0.318)   (0.243)      (0.627)                (0.787)       (0.802)       (0.098)      (0.797)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                    [0.594]   [0.576]      [0.851]                [0.427]       [2.520]       [0.311]      [9.862]
                                                                               Panel II: Ages 21+
RML                                       0.062    -0.235       -0.731                 -1.205        -1.170         0.290         0.045
                                         (0.621)   (0.516)      (0.865)               (1.723)        (0.758)       (0.418)       (0.212)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                    [2.161]   [1.689]      [2.011]               [1.340]        [6.569]      [14.940]      [15.069]
                                                                                Panel III: Males
RML                                       0.358    -0.154       -1.010                 -1.507        -0.970         0.425        -0.317
                                         (0.959)   (0.723)      (1.298)               (2.534)        (1.071)       (0.705)       (0.370)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                    [3.089]   [2.377]      [3.147]               [1.583]        [8.115]      [21.053]      [23.575]
                                                                               Panel IV: Females
RML                                      -0.165    -0.276       -0.384                -0.928         -1.226*        0.150        0.264
                                         (0.275)   (0.301)      (0.417)               (0.837)        (0.550)       (0.206)      (0.178)
Pre-Treatment Mean DV                    [1.094]   [0.903]      [0.790]               [1.004]        [4.628]       [7.423]      [6.312]


State & Year FE?                          Yes       Yes           Yes                   Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
Observable Controls?                      Yes       Yes           Yes                   Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
State-Specific Linear Trends?             Yes       Yes           Yes                   Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
N                                        1,020     1,020         1,020                 1,020          1,020         1,020        1,020
        ***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05


                                                                          65
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the adult state population and standard errors are
clustered at the state level.




                                                                                 66
Appendix Table 6. Sensitivity of TEDS Estimates to Use of Primary, Secondary, or Tertiary
                          Substance Admission Rate, 2000-2018

                                               (1)                      (2)                       (3)
                                              Panel I: Marijuana Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 2.36]
RML                                           0.089                   0.348                      0.408
                                             (0.290)                 (0.361)                    (0.250)
                                               Panel II: Cocaine Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 1.71]
RML                                           0.249                   0.331                      0.063
                                             (0.267)                 (0.196)                    (0.159)
                                       Panel III: Meth/Amphetamine Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 1.88]
RML                                           0.589                    0.766*                     0.413
                                             (0.304)                   (0.380)                   (0.339)
                                              Panel IV: Heroin Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 2.06]
RML                                          -0.113                   0.133                      0.481
                                             (0.405)                 (0.471)                    (0.467)
                                             Panel V: Other Opioids Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean 0.83]
RML                                          -0.238                  -0.218                     -0.0032
                                             (0.174)                 (0.213)                    (0.208)
                                              Panel VI: Alcohol Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 4.87]
RML                                           0.519                     0.704                     0.344
                                             (0.525)                   (0.625)                   (0.391)

State & Year FE?                               Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Sociodemographic Controls?                     Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Policy Controls?                               No                      Yes                        Yes
State Linear Time Trends?                      No                      No                         Yes
N                                              937                     937                        937
***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                          67
Appendix Table 7. Sensitivity of TEDS Estimates to Controlling for Total Admissions Rate,
                                       2000-2018

                                               (1)                      (2)                       (3)
                                              Panel I: Marijuana Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 0.72]
RML                                          -0.119                  -0.107                      0.087
                                             (0.083)                 (0.097)                    (0.101)
                                               Panel II: Cocaine Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 0.66]
RML                                           0.148                   0.177                      0.023
                                             (0.114)                 (0.104)                    (0.087)
                                       Panel III: Meth/Amphetamine Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 1.31]
RML                                           0.187                     0.262                     0.140
                                             (0.193)                   (0.236)                   (0.119)
                                              Panel IV: Heroin Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 1.82]
RML                                          -0.307                  -0.192                      0.288
                                             (0.314)                 (0.384)                    (0.318)
                                             Panel V: Other Opioids Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean 0.48]
RML                                          -0.148                  -0.214                     -0.036
                                             (0.118)                 (0.153)                    (0.146)
                                              Panel VI: Alcohol Admissions [Pre-Treat Mean = 3.40]
RML                                           0.132                     0.034                    -0.120
                                             (0.426)                   (0.415)                   (0.279)

State & Year FE?                               Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Sociodemographic Controls?                     Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Policy Controls?                               No                      Yes                        Yes
State Linear Time Trends?                      No                      No                         Yes
N                                              937                     937                        937
***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A. Regressions are weighted using the
adult state population and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                          68
                             Appendix Table 8. Sensitivity of Results to Treatment Date When Recreational Sales Allowed

                    (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)             (8)         (9)

                 Marijuana                                    Misuse Pain                   Marijuana      Cocaine or        Violent     Property
                                 Cocaine     Binge Drinking                   Meth Use
                   Use                                         Relievers                     Arrests      Heroin Arrests     Arrests     Arrests

RML Without       0.013**        0.00005         0.004          0.001          -0.001       -1.617***        -0.265         -0.182*       0.095
Sales Allowed     (0.005)        (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.313)         (0.140)        (0.075)      (0.291)

RML With Sales    0.022**         0.001         -0.001          0.001          -0.001       -1.250***        -0.371         -0.202*       0.480
Allowed           (0.006)        (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.327)         (0.201)        (0.094)      (0.442)
N                   867            867            816            816             204           998             998            998         998
                    (10)           (11)          (12)            (13)            (14)         (15)            (16)            (17)        (18)

                 Marijuana       Cocaine     Amphetamine       Alcohol         Heroin      Other Opioid                                  Heroin
                                                                                                          Cocaine Deaths   Meth Deaths
                 Admissions     Admissions    Admissions      Admissions      Admissions   Admissions                                    Deaths

RML Without       0.233**         0.072          0.570          0.312           0.850         0.010         -0.189**         -0.126      -0.153
Sales Allowed     (0.086)        (0.067)        (0.365)        (0.289)         (0.612)       (0.204)         (0.070)         (0.076)     (0.165)
RML With Sales     0.072         -0.101         -0.132         -0.459           0.499        -0.011          0.230**          0.023       0.226
Allowed           (0.177)        (0.078)        (0.397)        (0.596)         (0.260)       (0.174)         (0.084)         (0.064)     (0.198)
N                   937            937            937            937             937           937            1,020          1,020       1,020




                                                                         69
                            (19)            (20)               (21)

                          Fentanyl      Other Opioid         Alcohol
                          Deaths          Deaths             Deaths

RML Without              -0.476***        -0.162*            -0.006
Sales Allowed             (0.105)         (0.070)            (0.015)
RML With Sales             0.026           0.028             -0.032
Allowed                   (0.144)         (0.084)            (0.023)
N                          1,020           1,020              1,020

***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A and state-specific linear time trends. Regressions are weighted using the adult state population
and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                                            70
                                 Appendix Table 9. Sensitivity of Estimated Effects of RMLs to Border State RML Policy
                       (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)                 (8)         (9)

                    Marijuana                                    Misuse Pain                   Marijuana      Cocaine or        Violent     Property
                                    Cocaine     Binge Drinking                   Meth Use
                      Use                                         Relievers                     Arrests      Heroin Arrests     Arrests     Arrests

RML without RML       0.006         -0.001          0.004          0.003          -0.001       -1.732***        -0.356*         -0.164       0.474
Border States        (0.007)        (0.001)        (0.006)        (0.002)         (0.001)       (0.253)         (0.143)         (0.120)     (0.442)

RML with RML         0.023**        -0.0001        -0.005         -0.001           0.003       -1.602***        -0.418          -0.196       0.084
Border States        (0.008)        (0.002)        (0.006)        (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.318)         (0.225)         (0.120)     (0.295)
No RML with          -0.003         -0.001         0.0001         -0.003           0.001        -0.112           0.115           0.060       0.090
RML Border States    (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.004)        (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.201)         (0.101)         (0.067)     (0.137)
N                      867            867            816            816             204           998             998            998         998
                       (10)           (11)          (12)            (13)            (14)         (15)            (16)            (17)        (18)

                    Marijuana       Cocaine     Amphetamine       Alcohol         Heroin      Other Opioid                                  Heroin
                                                                                                             Cocaine Deaths   Meth Deaths
                    Admissions     Admissions    Admissions      Admissions      Admissions   Admissions                                    Deaths

RML without RML       0.142          0.078         -0.099         -0.586          -0.079        -0.069          -0.231           0.002      -0.303*
Border States        (0.090)        (0.103)        (0.173)        (0.477)         (0.372)       (0.214)         (0.124)         (0.076)     (0.147)
RML with RML          0.213          0.030          0.508          0.821          1.287**        0.166          -0.006          -0.153       0.028
Border States        (0.161)        (0.076)        (0.280)        (0.411)         (0.404)       (0.119)         (0.103)         (0.089)     (0.204)
No RML with          -0.101          0.048         -0.064          0.109           0.586         0.107         -0.279**         -0.051      -0.202
RML Border States    (0.077)        (0.043)        (0.090)        (0.193)         (0.327)       (0.086)         (0.097)         (0.065)     (0.108)
N                      937            937            937            937             937           937            1,020          1,020       1,020




                                                                            71
                            (19)            (20)               (21)

                          Fentanyl      Other Opioid         Alcohol
                          Deaths          Deaths             Deaths

RML without RML          -0.456***        -0.183              0.033
Border States             (0.108)         (0.141)            (0.020)
RML with RML              -0.353          -0.120             -0.031
Border States             (0.192)         (0.110)            (0.030)
No RML with               -0.142          -0.105             -0.002
RML Border States         (0.131)         (0.089)            (0.014)
N                          1,020           1,020              1,020

***p < .001 **p < .01 *p < .05
Notes: Sociodemographic and policy controls are listed in the notes to Table 1A and state-specific linear time trends. Regressions are weighted using the adult state population
and standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                                                            72
Appendix Figure 1. Trends in Adult Substance Use Prevalence, NSDUH, 2002-2018

                                Panel (a): Marijuana Use




                     Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana




                                          73
                        Appendix Figure 2. Trends in Adult Arrest Rate (Per 1,000 Population), UCR, 2000-2019

                    Panel (a): Property Crime Arrest Rate                           Panel (b): Violent Crime Arrest Rate
Panel (a): Property Arrest Rate

[same as above]

Panel (b): Violent Arrest Rate

[same as above]

Panel (c): Drug Arrest Rate

[same as above]

Panel (d): Total Arrest Rate


                  Panel (c): Drug-Related Crime Arrest Rate                          Panel (d): Total Part I Arrest Rate




                                                                 74
Appendix Figure 3. Trends in Adult Drug Possession Arrest Rate (Per 1,000 Population), UCR, 2000-2019

  Panel (b): Cocaine/Heroin Possession Arrest Rate                 Panel (a): Marijuana Possession Arrest Rate




 Panel (c): Synthetic Narcotics Possession Arrest Rate        Panel (d): Other Dangerous Non-Narcotics Arrest Rate




                                                         75
Appendix Figure 4. Trends in Substance Use-Involved Mortality Rate (Per 100,000 Population), NVSS, 2000-2019

       Panel (a): Cocaine-Involved Mortality Rate                     Panel (b): Heroin-Involved Mortality Rate




     Panel (c): Other Opioid-Involved Mortality Rate                  Panel (d): Alcohol-Involved Mortality Rate




                                                       76
Appendix Figure 5. Trends in Substance Use Treatment Admissions Rate (Per 1,000 Population), TEDS, 2000-2018

     Panel (a): Cocaine-Involved Treatment Admissions              Panel (b): Heroin-Involved Treatment Admissions




   Panel (c): Other Opioid-Involved Treatment Admissions               Panel (d): Alcohol-Involved Admissions




                                                           77
Appendix Figure 6. Callaway-Sant'Anna (2021) Event-Study Analyses of Adult Drug Sales Arrest Rates

       Panel (a): Drug Sales Arrests                                Panel (b): Marijuana Sales Arrests




   Panel (c): Cocaine/Heroin Sales Arrests                      Panel (d): Synthetic Narcotics Sales Arrests




                                               78
          Appendix Figure 7. Event-Study Analyses of Arrests Due to Other Dangerous Non-Narcotics
Panel (a): TWFE, Other Non-Narcotic Possession Arrests             Panel (b): TWFE, Other Non-Narcotic Sales Arrests




  Panel (c): CS, Other Non-Narcotic Possession Arrests                 Panel (d): CS, Other Non-Narcotic Sales Arrests




                                                         79
Appendix Figure 8: Sensitivity of Estimated Effects of RML by One-at-a-Time Exclusion of Each Treatment State

          Panel (a): Marijuana Use, NSUDH                           Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana, NSUDH




         Panel (c): Marijuana Arrests, UCR                                Panel (d): Non-Marijuana Drug Arrests, UCR




                                                     80
                                                Appendix Figure 8, Continued
      Panel (e): Part I Offense Arrests, UCR                                   Panel (f): Opioid-Related Deaths, NVSS




      Panel (g): Alcohol-Related Deaths, NVSS                                  Panel (h): Cocaine-Related Deaths, NVSS




Ccc
                                                            81
                                           Appendix Figure 8, Continued


   Panel (i): Cocaine Admissions, TEDS                                    Panel (j): Heroin Admissions, TEDS




Panel (k): Other Opioid Admissions, TEDS                                  Panel (l): Alcohol Admissions, TEDS




                                                       82
                     Appendix Figure 9. Synthetic Control Estimates for Washington
  Panel (a): Marijuana Use, NSUDH                              Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana, NSUDH
RML Effect = 0.032 (p-value = 0.192)                                   RML Effect = 0.0001 (p-value = .654)




  Panel (c): Marijuana Arrests, UCR                                    Panel (d): Non-Marijuana Arrests, UCR
RML Effect = -1.643 (p-value = 0.231)                                 RML Effect = -0.339 (p-value = 0.800)




                                                  83
                                           Appendix Figure 9, Continued
 Panel (e): Part I Offense Arrests, UCR                                    Panel (f): Opioid-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = 0.182 (p-value = 0.680)                                      RML Effect = -2.031 (p-value = 0.846)




Panel (g): Alcohol-Involved Deaths, NVSS                                  Panel (h): Cocaine-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = -1.721 (p-value = 0.038)                                     RML Effect = -0.201 (p-value = 0.769)




                                                       84
                      Appendix Figure 10. Synthetic Control Estimates for Colorado
  Panel (a): Marijuana Use, NSUDH                               Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana, NSUDH
RML Effect = 0.043 (p-value = 0.077)                                    RML Effect = 0.008 (p-value = 0.192)




  Panel (c): Marijuana Arrests, UCR                                      Panel (d): Non-Marijuana Arrests, UCR
RML Effect = -1.728 (p-value = 0.200)                                   RML Effect = 0.424 (p-value = 0.471)




                                                  85
                                           Appendix Figure 10, Continued
 Panel (e): Part I Offense Arrests, UCR                                     Panel (f): Opioid-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = 1.489 (p-value = 0.471)                                       RML Effect = -1.783 (p-value = 0.769)




Panel (g): Alcohol-Involved Deaths, NVSS                                   Panel (h): Cocaine-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = -2.067 (p-value = 0.269)                                      RML Effect = -0.852 (p-value = 0.615)




                                                        86
                        Appendix Figure 11. Synthetic Control Estimates for Alaska
  Panel (a): Marijuana Use, NSUDH                                Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana, NSUDH
RML Effect = 0.018 (p-value = 0.852)                                    RML Effect = 0.00001 (p-value = 0.963)




  Panel (c): Marijuana Arrests, UCR                                      Panel (d): Non-Marijuana Arrests, UCR
RML Effect = -0.554 (p-value = 0.462)                                   RML Effect = -0.905 (p-value = 0.346)




                                                   87
                                           Appendix Figure 11, Continued
 Panel (e): Part I Offense Arrests, UCR                                    Panel (f): Opioid Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = 0.449 (p-value = 0.462)                                       RML Effect = 2.373 (p-value = 1.000)




Panel (g): Alcohol-Involved Deaths, NVSS                                   Panel (h): Cocaine-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = -6.541 (p-value = 0.741)                                      RML Effect = -2.913 (p-value = 0.667)




                                                        88
                       Appendix Figure 12. Synthetic Control Estimates for Oregon
  Panel (a): Marijuana Use, NSUDH                               Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana, NSUDH
RML Effect = 0.044 (p-value = 0.037)                                    RML Effect = 0.006 (p-value = 0.222)




  Panel (c): Marijuana Arrests, UCR                                     Panel (d): Non-Marijuana Arrests, UCR
RML Effect = -1.732 (p-value = 0.077)                                  RML Effect = -0.001 (p-value = 0.962)




                                                  89
                                           Appendix Figure 12, Continued
 Panel (e): Part I Offense Arrests, UCR                                     Panel (f): Opioid-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = 0.165 (p-value = 0.615)                                       RML Effect = -6.275 (p-value = 0.481)




Panel (g): Alcohol-Involved Deaths, NVSS                                   Panel (h): Cocaine-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = -0.472 (p-value = 0.889)                                      RML Effect = -0.395 (p-value = 0.593)




                                                        90
                      Appendix Figure 13. Synthetic Control Estimates for California
  Panel (a): Marijuana Use, NSUDH                                Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana, NSUDH
RML Effect = 0.001 (p-value = 0.206)                                     RML Effect = 0.005 (p-value = 0.206)




  Panel (c): Marijuana Arrests, UCR                                       Panel (d): Non-Marijuana Arrests, UCR
RML Effect = -0.507 (p-value = 0.371)                                    RML Effect = 3.115 (p-value = 0.719)




                                                   91
                                           Appendix Figure 13, Continued
 Panel (e): Part I Offense Arrests, UCR                                    Panel (f): Opioid-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = 0.675 (p-value = 0.094)                                       RML Effect = 1.531 (p-value = 0.647)




Panel (g): Alcohol-Involved Deaths, NVSS                                   Panel (h): Cocaine-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = -3.677 (p-value = 0.118)                                      RML Effect = -0.117 (p-value = 0.500)




                                                        92
                        Appendix Figure 14. Synthetic Controls for Massachusetts
  Panel (a): Marijuana Use, NSUDH                               Panel (b): Illicit Drug Use Other than Marijuana, NSUDH
RML Effect = 0.005 (p-value = 0.771)                                    RML Effect = 0.004 (p-value = 0.486)




  Panel (c): Marijuana Arrests, UCR                                     Panel (d): Non-Marijuana Arrests, UCR
RML Effect = -0.532 (p-value = 0.515)                                  RML Effect = -0.695 (p-value = 0.485)




                                                  93
                                           Appendix Figure 14, Continued
 Panel (e): Part I Offense Arrests, UCR                                    Panel (f): Opioid-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = -0.560 (p-value = 0.727)                                      RML Effect = 7.872 (p-value = 0.514)




Panel (g): Alcohol-Involved Deaths, NVSS                                   Panel (h): Cocaine-Involved Deaths, NVSS
RML Effect = 0.051 (p-value = 0.714)                                       RML Effect = 2.371 (p-value = 0.486)




                                                        94
