                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CREATING CONTROVERSY IN PROXY VOTING ADVICE

                                        Andrey Malenko
                                        Nadya Malenko
                                        Chester S. Spatt

                                      Working Paper 29036
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29036


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We are grateful to Sugato Bhattacharyya, Philip Bond, Briana Chang, Amiyatosh Purnanandam,
Uday Rajan, Yan Xiong, Yishu Zeng, and seminar participants at the Carnegie Mellon
University, Queen Mary University of London, University of Michigan, University of Rochester,
University of Warwick, and Finance Theory Webinar for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andrey Malenko, Nadya Malenko, and Chester S. Spatt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Creating Controversy in Proxy Voting Advice
Andrey Malenko, Nadya Malenko, and Chester S. Spatt
NBER Working Paper No. 29036
July 2021
JEL No. D72,D82,D83,G34,K22

                                         ABSTRACT

The quality of proxy advisors' voting recommendations is important for policymakers and
industry participants. We analyze the design of recommendations (available to all market
participants) and research reports (available only to subscribers) by a proxy advisor, whose
objective is to maximize its profits from selling information to shareholders. We show that even
if all shareholders' interests are aligned and aim at maximizing firm value, the proxy advisor
benefits from biasing its recommendations against the a priori more likely alternative. Such
recommendations "create controversy" about the vote, increasing the probability that the outcome
is close and raising each shareholder's willingness to pay for advice. In contrast, it serves the
interest of the proxy advisor to make private research reports unbiased and precise. Our results
help reinterpret empirical patterns of shareholders' voting behavior.

Andrey Malenko                                  Chester S. Spatt
Stephen M. Ross School of Business              Tepper School of Business
701 Tappan Street, R5412                        Carnegie Mellon University
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234                        4765 Forbes Avenue
amalenko@umich.edu                              Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
                                                and NBER
Nadya Malenko                                   cspatt@andrew.cmu.edu
University of Michigan
R5322, Ross School of Business
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
nmalenko@umich.edu
1         Introduction
Proxy advisory ...rms have emerged as major players in corporate governance. They make
recommendations on how to cast votes and provide research reports for subscribing share-
holders that contain the rationales for recommendations, including information on various
aspects of ...rms'governance practices. While proxy advisors'research reports are only avail-
able to their subscribing shareholders, their recommendations are often made public through
the media. Through both these public recommendations and private research reports, proxy
advisors such as ISS in particular, have a substantial impact on voting outcomes (e.g., Al-
exander et al., 2010; Iliev and Lowry, 2015; Malenko and Shen, 2016).
        Given the strong inuence of proxy advisors, the quality and information content of their
research reports and recommendations have become an important topic of discussion among
market participants and policymakers. For example, over 2018­2020, the SEC adopted a
number of regulatory changes to ensure "that investors who use proxy voting advice receive
more transparent, accurate, and complete information on which to make their voting de-
         1
cisions."  According to the survey evidence in McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2016), there
is heterogeneity among institutional investors in their views about proxy advisors'research:
while 55% of the respondents believe that proxy advisors help them make more informed
voting decisions, 30% are concerned that the resulting advice is too standardized.
        Do proxy advisors have incentives to produce unbiased and informative research and
recommendations? In particular, as the SEC'
                                          s Concept Release on the U.S. Proxy System
stated, "Does the lack of a direct pecuniary interest in the e¤ects of their recommendations on
shareholder value a¤ect how they formulate recommendations,""what criteria and processes
do proxy advisory ...rms use," and are their "proxy research reports ... materially accurate
and complete"?2 Motivated by these questions, this paper studies the information design
problem of a proxy advisor who aims to maximize its pro...ts from information sale to voters.
        Our main result is that even if all shareholders are unbiased and aligned at maximizing
the value of their shares, the pro...t-maximizing proxy advisor often has incentives to produce
public recommendations that are biased against the a priori more likely alternative. By re-
commending for the unexpected alternative too frequently, it "creates controversy" around
the proposal and increases the probability that the vote will be close. At the same time,
    1
     See, e.g., https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2019/34-86721.pdf and https://www.sec.gov/rules/...nal/2020/34-
89372.pdf.
   2
     See p. 125 in https://www.sec.gov/rules/concept/2010/34-62495.pdf.


                                                    2
the advisor has incentives to produce informative and unbiased research reports for its sub-
scribers. These results suggest a reinterpretation of the empirical evidence on shareholders'
voting patterns and proxy advisory recommendations.
       In our model, shareholders vote on a proposal whose value depends on the unknown state,
and the proxy advisor faces an information design problem, modeled as Bayesian persuasion
(Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011; Rayo and Segal, 2010). Speci...cally, it designs two signals
about the state: one, which we refer to as the "research report," is available only to its
subscribers, and the other, which we refer to as the "voting recommendation," is publicly
observed by all shareholders. In addition, the advisor sets a fee for subscribing to its research
report. Each shareholder decides whether to pay the fee and get the report or whether to only
observe the public voting recommendation. The state is then realized, the proxy advisor'
                                                                                       s
report and recommendation are produced, and shareholders cast their votes based on the
information they receive. The proposal is approved if it receives a majority of the votes.
       This setup corresponds to the observed voting practices. Prior to the shareholder meet-
ing, proxy advisors deliver to their subscribers a research report with details about the
company'
       s governance practices and considerations about the proposals on the agenda. In
addition, for each proposal on the agenda, the report contains a recommendation on whether
to vote in favor or against this proposal. Importantly, while research reports are only avail-
able to the subscribers, the recommendations, especially for contentious meetings in which
proxy advisors recommend against management on certain proposals, are typically shared
by the media and are therefore publicly available to all shareholders.3 One potential way
to interpret the advisor'
                        s design of recommendations are the voting guidelines, which proxy
advisors revise each year and announce publicly. These guidelines describe, for various types
of proposals, detailed rules and criteria that the advisor plans to use when making recom-
mendations for each individual company and proposal.4 Proxy advisors tend to follow such
guidelines because of both regulatory and reputational costs of deviating.5 However, the
information design problem of the advisor should be understood more generally than just
   3
     See, e.g., "ISS urges UniCredit investors to reject Orcel'
                                                              s pay package" (March 30, 2021), Reuters.
   4
     See, e.g., https://www.issgovernance.com/policy-gateway/voting-policies/ for ISS'voting guidelines, and
https://www.glasslewis.com/voting-policies-current/ for Glass Lewis'guidelines.
   5
     For example, the 2019 SEC'   s guidance for proxy advisors (https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2019/34-
86721.pdf) states that to avoid a potential violation of Rule 14a-9, proxy advisors "may need to disclose ...
an explanation of the methodology used to formulate its voting advice on a particular matter (including any
material deviations from the provider'  s publicly-announced guidelines, policies, or standard methodologies
for analyzing such matters)."



                                                     3
the design of the guidelines. Importantly, as we discuss in more detail in the paper, the
chosen information design policies are time-consistent: because the advisor does not obtain
any ex-post bene...t from a vote outcome in either direction, and simply maximizes its ex-ante
pro...t from information sales, it has no ex-post incentives to deviate from the design of either
the research report or recommendations.
   While the proxy advisor designs the recommendations and research reports to maximize
its pro...t from information sales, it does not maximize the value of either the asset managers
or the operating companies, highlighting a fundamental conict of interest. In fact, value
maximization for the downstream entities (asset managers and operating companies) would
suggest that the public recommendations are perfectly aligned with the reports and reveal
all the information the proxy advisor has-- but then no investors would need to purchase
the reports and the proxy advisor would have zero revenue. (Arrow (1962) highlights the
underlying challenge of getting paid for information.)
   This raises the question of which design of recommendations and reports would maximize
the fees that can be obtained from the subscribers. There is no obvious answer to this
problem. For example, it may be natural to expect that the advisor will produce totally
uninformative public recommendations, so as not to dilute the value of the private reports,
and only give informative signals for a fee. Or, to the extent that public recommendations
reveal some information, it may be natural to expect that they will be unbiased since all
shareholders are unbiased and aligned at maximizing ...rm value.
   Nevertheless, we show that the proxy advisor'
                                               s pro...t from information sale is maxim-
ized if (1) it designs a fully informative and unbiased research report, and (2) provides a
public recommendation that is partially informative but biased against the alternative that
is a priori more likely to be value-increasing (as long as the a priori likelihood of it being
value-increasing is high enough). We refer to this bias against the more likely alternative
as "creating controversy" (see also discussion in Spatt, 2021). The key idea behind such
information design is that the advisor manipulates the public signal in order to increase each
shareholder'
           s willingness to pay for the private signal.
   To see the intuition, consider one of the most frequent and important issues on which
shareholders vote: the approval of directors proposed by the board'
                                                                  s nominating committee.
Suppose, for example, that the prior probability that a director nominee is good for the
...rm is su¢ ciently high. If the advisor only provides information about the director in the
research report but issues uninformative public recommendations, then shareholders who do

                                               4
not subscribe to the report will base the decision on their positive priors and predominantly
vote in favor of the director. This, however, implies that all non-subscribers tend to vote in
the same way, so the aggregate vote outcome is unlikely to be close. Hence, a shareholder
who is deciding whether to subscribe to the research report has little incentive to do so,
because the probability that his informed vote will matter and sway the outcome towards
the value-increasing decision is small.6
      Suppose, instead, that the advisor issues informative but biased recommendations to "cre-
ate controversy": it always recommends voting against directors who are value-decreasing,
but sometimes recommends even against directors who are value-increasing. In this case, non-
subscribing shareholders who see a negative recommendation infer that the director could
be either good or bad for the ...rm and are unsure how to vote. This leads to a high chance
of a close vote, which, in turn, gives incentives to other shareholders to subscribe to the
report so as to vote informatively. In other words, by recommending for the unexpected al-
ternative too often and "creating controversy,"the advisor increases the probability that the
vote will be close and thus each shareholder'
                                            s willingness to pay for its research. Of course,
the fact that negative recommendations are frequent implies that a positive recommenda-
tion is very informative about the director being value-increasing, leading non-subscribing
shareholders to vote in favor. Hence, an increase in the probability of a close vote after a
negative recommendation comes with a trade-o¤ of a reduction in the probability of a close
vote after a positive recommendation. Nevertheless, we show that a recommendation appro-
priately biased this way is often optimal for the advisor and dominates any other information
design, such as issuing on average unbiased but imprecise recommendations, or biasing the
recommendations toward the more likely alternative.
      At the same time, we show that the advisor has incentives to produce fully informative
and unbiased research reports because it helps maximize the revenue from the fees it charges
to the subscribing shareholders. In this sense, the interest of the proxy advisor is aligned
with those of the shareholders to whom it sells subscriptions. The combination of public
recommendations and private research reports is therefore central to the mechanism in our
paper: the advisor serves the needs of its clients (subscribers), while limiting and biasing the
information it releases through recommendations in order to obtain maximum revenue from
selling the subscriptions.
  6
    Maug and Rydqvist (2009) and Filali Adib (2020) provide evidence that shareholders are strategic in
that they think carefully about the events where their votes can make a di¤erence.


                                                  5
       Our results are consistent with the evidence on how institutional investors use proxy ad-
visory services. According to the survey of institutional investors by Bew and Fields (2012),
"virtually unanimously, research participants highlighted the value they derive from ... proxy
advisers ... digest[ing] and normaliz[ing] the vast quantities of data present in proxy state-
ments in a short period of time." In other words, institutional investors believe that proxy
advisors'research reports do a valuable job in extracting and aggregating information from
complex and lengthy proxy statements, consistent with our prediction that the reports will be
informative and unbiased. The evidence in Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch (2013, 2018) supports
this view: these papers show that the extent to which shareholders vote against a com-
pany'
    s compensation policy and director nominees, respectively, increases with the number
and severity of concerns raised by proxy advisors in their research reports. However, while
institutions praise the quality of the reports, they rely less on the voting recommendations
per se, consistent with our prediction that recommendations are less informative and biased.
For example, Bew and Fields (2012) conclude that the "value of ... voting recommendations
                         7
is distinctly secondary."  We discuss this and other empirical evidence in more detail in
Section 6.
       Proxy advisors are frequently criticized for following a one-size-...ts-all approach, i.e.,
for giving recommendations according to their prescriptive guidelines and without taking
into account ...rm-speci...c circumstances (e.g., Iliev and Lowry, 2015; Hayne and Vance,
2019). Such a one-size-...ts-all approach can be rationalized by our model because it can
help the advisor implement recommendations that create controversy. For example, one of
proxy advisors'guidelines concerns busy directors: "Generally vote against or withhold from
                                                                       8
individual directors who sit on more than ...ve public company boards."  While a director'
                                                                                         s
busyness is likely to be negatively correlated with his contribution to ...rm value (e.g., Fich
and Shivdasani, 2006), leading to partially informative recommendations, this guideline does
not take into account other relevant director characteristics. Consider a nominee who sits on
six boards but is an expert in the industry, has many years of experience, and whose other
board seats are not too demanding. Whereas the proxy advisor'
                                                            s research report typically
describes all the quali...cations of the director and thus allows the subscribers to infer that the
   7
     According to one of their respondents, "we don'
                                                   t necessarily agree with everything they say, but they do
a tremendous amount of work pulling information together and packaging it, so we can take what we want"
(Bew and Fields, 2012, p.13).
   8
     See ISS 2021 Voting Guidelines, p. 11. Likewise, Glass Lewis 2021 Voting Guidelines, p. 19­  20, specify
a similar policy: "we generally recommend that shareholders vote against a director ... who serves on more
than ...ve public company boards."


                                                     6
director is likely good for the ...rm, the voting recommendation will be negative, consistent
with the "one-size-...ts-all"criticism.
       We also show that the incentives to create controversy do not arise if the prior probability
that the proposal is bene...cial is close to 50%. In this case, the advisor designs an informative
and unbiased report, but makes its recommendations completely uninformative. Intuitively,
with priors close to 50%, an uninformative recommendation will naturally lead to a close vote,
increasing shareholders' incentives to subscribe to the report. One way for the advisor to
implement such an uninformative recommendation is to always recommend the same action
(always vote against or always in favor) on a given type of proposal, without taking into
account ...rm-speci...c circumstances. For example, both ISS and Glass Lewis 2021 guidelines
specify a general recommendation against proposals to classify the board and in favor of
proposals to repeal a classi...ed board.
       Moreover, our model predicts that deviations from the proxy advisor'
                                                                          s recommendations
take a speci...c form: compared to the advisor, shareholders are more predisposed towards
the a priori more likely alternative, essentially counteracting the bias in recommendations.
In the director elections example, suppose that director nominees are a priori likely to be
value-increasing, so that the advisor biases its recommendations against them. Then, con-
ditional on a positive recommendation, a director must be good for the ...rm, so both the
non-subscribing shareholders observing the positive recommendation and the subscribing
shareholders observing the entire report vote in favor. Essentially, all shareholders "rub-
berstamp" a positive recommendation. In contrast, some directors receiving a negative
recommendation are, in fact, value-increasing, leading the subscribers to deviate from the
recommendation and vote in their favor. A negative recommendation also generates a lot of
uncertainty for non-subscribing shareholders, which leads some of them to vote in favor and
others to vote against. Hence, both subscribers and non-subscribers frequently deviate from
negative recommendations and vote in favor of the director.
       This prediction corresponds to the observed empirical evidence on funds' voting beha-
vior if we assume that management proposals are a priori su¢ ciently likely to be value-
increasing.9 Management proposals that receive a positive recommendation typically pass
with very high voting support, i.e., are "rubberstamped". In contrast, proposals that receive
   9
    Empirically, both proposals to approve director nominees, and management proposals in general, pass
with a very high support rate, consistent with the assumption that the priors are high. See Section 6 for
more details.



                                                   7
a negative recommendation often generate a lot of disagreement among shareholders.10
       These results suggest a natural interpretation of the empirical evidence on funds'voting
behavior. Voting in favor of management when proxy advisors recommend "against"is often
interpreted as lack of monitoring, passivity, or pro-management bias. In contrast, our model
emphasizes that proxy advisors' recommendations may not be the right benchmark since
they can be biased against management to create controversy (see also related discussion
in Spatt, 2021). Shareholders who support management and deviate from the negative
recommendation could be simply correcting the bias in recommendations, rather than voting
in a biased way themselves. In this spirit it is striking that large index investors that invest
considerable resources in stewardship, such as BlackRock and Vanguard, seem to be more
supportive of management than ISS and Glass Lewis (e.g., Bubb and Catan, 2019; Bolton
et al., 2020; Brav et al., 2020) and that the votes of smaller mutual fund complexes (who
sensibly invest less heavily in stewardship and due diligence) are more closely aligned with
ISS (see, e.g., Iliev and Lowry, 2015, and the discussion in Spatt, 2021). While asset managers
may have conicts that inuence their votes, these seem secondary compared to managing
large market baskets.
       This implication is also important for policy discussions of proxy advisors' biases. A
frequently expressed concern is that in addition to selling its research to shareholders, ISS
also provides consulting to corporations, which may lead it to bias its recommendations in
favor of management in ...rms that purchase its consulting services (Li, 2018). Our paper
emphasizes a very di¤erent type of bias, which emerges even if providing voting advice is the
only business of the proxy advisor (e.g., as in the case of Glass Lewis). The bias we identify is
inherent and cannot be alleviated by separating the two businesses or disclosing the advisor'
                                                                                            s
consulting relationships with ...rms, which has been the focus of policy proposals.
       The baseline model assumes that the proxy advisor is the only source of information for
the shareholders. In practice, large institutional investors often perform independent research
about the issues being voted on (e.g., Iliev and Lowry, 2015; Iliev, Kalodimos, and Lowry,
2021). We therefore consider an extension in which a fraction of the shareholders know
the value of the proposal from their own research and cannot learn additional information
from the advisor'
                s report. Interestingly, we show that as the fraction of such informed
shareholders increases, the advisor'
                                   s incentives to create controversy become even stronger,
  10
   See, e.g., Table 1 in Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch (2018) for director elections and Table 1 in Malenko and
Shen (2016) for say-on-pay proposals. This evidence is described in more detail in Section 6.


                                                    8
in that it designs recommendations that are even more biased and less informative.


Related literature
Our paper contributes to the literature on shareholder voting,11 including the growing lit-
erature on proxy advisory ...rms. Malenko and Malenko (2019) and Buechel, Mechtenberg,
and Wagner (2021) analyze how the presence of proxy advisors a¤ects shareholders' inde-
pendent research; both papers take the quality of recommendations as given and assume
they are unbiased. Levit and Tsoy (2020) show how one-size-...ts-all recommendations arise
in a cheap talk setting where a biased expert (e.g., a proxy advisor) wants to convince other
agents (e.g., shareholders) to accept a certain proposal. Unlike these papers, we focus on
the information design problem of an advisor who maximizes its pro...ts from information
sale. Ma and Xiong (2021) also study information design by a proxy advisor, but unlike
our paper, do not distinguish between a public (recommendation) and private (research re-
port) signal. As a consequence, in their model, the advisor designs biased recommendations
only if shareholders themselves are biased; if shareholders maximize ...rm value, then recom-
mendations are unbiased. In contrast, in our setting, biased recommendations arise even
though all shareholders maximize ...rm value, as a way to increase the probability of a close
vote through manipulation of public information. This also distinguishes our paper from
Matsusaka and Shu (2021), who study how proxy advisors cater their recommendations to
biased shareholders such as SRI funds, and analyze the industry structure that emerges in
equilibrium.
       In the literature on Bayesian Persuasion, the closest papers to ours examine information
design by a biased expert who wants to manipulate the elections to achieve his preferred
outcome (Alonso and Camara, 2016; Bardhi and Guo, 2018; Chan et al., 2019). In contrast,
in our paper, the designer is unbiased in that he does not get any bene...t from the vote going
in a particular direction; instead, he maximizes the ex-ante pro...ts from information sale.
This implies, in particular, that his information design policies are time-consistent, which is
di¤erent from most other papers on Bayesian Persuasion. Another feature that distinguishes
our paper is that the designer (proxy advisor) designs two signals for two di¤erent audiences
­one public (for all shareholders) and one private (only for the subscribers). Furthermore,
the composition of the latter audience is endogenously determined by the designer'
                                                                                 s choice.
  11
    E.g., Maug (1999), Brav and Mathews (2011), Levit and Malenko (2011), Bar-Isaac and Shapiro (2020),
Cvijanovic, Groen-Xu, and Zachariadis (2020), and others.


                                                  9
Inostroza (2021) also considers a designer (regulator) designing two signals for multiple audi-
ences, but unlike our paper, these are both public signals on two di¤erent dimensions of the
bank'
    s fundamentals. In Leitner and Yilmaz (2019), the designer (bank) designs two signals,
one of them is observed by the receiver (regulator), and the other is possibly only observed by
the designer himself. Goldstein and Huang (2016) and Inostroza and Pavan (2020) study the
regulator designing information (stress test) for multiple receivers who have private informa-
tion, but unlike our paper, assume that the designer sends one signal to all receivers.12 Chang
and Szydlowski (2020) analyze persuasion in a matching market with multiple heterogeneous
senders (investment advisors) and multiple heterogeneous receivers (their customers).
       Credit rating agencies are another type of information provider to investors. Sangiorgi
and Spatt (2017) provide an overview of the literature on credit rating agencies and discuss
their similarities and di¤erences from proxy advisors. In the context of our paper, the most
important di¤erences between the two are 1) the pricing models ­ whereas credit rating
agencies are paid by the issuers, proxy advisors are paid by investors; and 2) the nature of
externalities between the users of information ­whereas traders in ...nancial markets compete
for pro...ts, shareholders'objectives in voting are often aligned at value maximization. There
are also certain similarities, such as the issue of multiple (albeit di¤erent from the proxy
advisory setting) audiences explored in Frenkel (2015) and Bouvard and Levy (2018), and
the provision of both paid and unpaid signals explored in Fulghieri, Strobl, and Xia (2014).
       Finally, our paper is related to the literature on the sale of information to traders in
...nancial markets (e.g., Admati and Peiderer, 1986, 1990; Fishman and Hagerty, 1995;
Cespa, 2008; Garcia and Sangiorgi, 2011). One important conclusion in this literature is
that the seller may bene...t from adding noise to the information it sells, as a way to decrease
the leakage of information through prices. Di¤erently from this result, we show that the
seller of information to voters bene...ts from selling the most precise information to those
subscribing to its report. Instead, to increase the value of this information, it strategically
biases the public information it reveals. Thus, both the result and the underlying mechanism
are di¤erent from this literature.
  12
    Other papers studying information design in the context of stress tests include Goldstein and Leitner
(2018), Leitner and Williams (2020), and Orlov, Zryumov, and Skrzypacz (2020).




                                                   10
2        Model setup
The ...rm is owned by N          3 shareholders, where N is odd. Each shareholder owns one share
in the ...rm and has one vote. There is a proposal to be voted at the shareholder meeting,
                                             N +1
which would be approved if at least           2
                                                    shareholders vote for it. Let d 2 f0; 1g denote the
decision on the proposal, with d = 1 (d = 0) referring to the proposal approval (rejection).
       The value of the proposal to shareholder i, ui (d; ), depends on the unknown state
  2 f0; 1g and on the importance of the proposal to the shareholder, vi , as follows:

                                           ui (d; ) = vi u (d; ) ;

where
                                                     (
                                                          1;   if   = 1;
                                      u (1; ) =
                                                            1; if   = 0;
                                      u (0; ) = 0:

In other words, approving the proposal increases (decreases) shareholder value if                      =1( =
0), while rejecting the proposal and maintaining the status quo leaves ...rm value unchanged.
The ex-ante probability that the proposal is value-increasing is Pr ( = 1) =                      2 (0; 1).
       Thus, all shareholders'interests are perfectly aligned, but the extent to which they care
about the proposal, vi , may di¤er across them. There are multiple reasons for this hetero-
geneity in practice. First, vi is likely to depend on the sensitivity of the fund manager'
                                                                                         s
compensation to the value of its portfolio ...rm, which di¤ers signi...cantly across funds. For
example, holding ownership constant, vi is likely to be highest for hedge funds, lowest for
index funds, and medium for actively-managed mutual funds.13 Second, heterogeneity in vi
can be due to the fact that the voting practices of shareholders are scrutinized by regulators
and investors to a di¤erent extent ­for example, retail investors may have a lower vi than
institutional investors for this reason. In addition, vi can indirectly capture the shareholder'
                                                                                               s
position in the ...rm, although this interpretation needs to be used cautiously given our as-
sumption of equal stakes across shareholders. Lewellen and Lewellen (2021) provide empirical
estimates of vi across institutional investors and ...rms. Value vi is an independent (across
  13
     See Corum, Malenko, and Malenko (2021) for a model in which active and passive institutional investors
have di¤erent equilibrium sensitivities vi to the value of their portfolio ...rms due to di¤erent fees they charge
to investors.


                                                       11
shareholders) draw from a distribution with c.d.f. H ( ) over [v; v ] with 0           v<v       1. For
example, in the special case where H ( ) is degenerate at v , shareholders are homogeneous;
and in the special case where H ( ) has two atoms, vL and vH , we can think of two groups
of shareholders ­those that care little about voting and those that care more substantially.
Each shareholder i knows her own preference parameter vi , but not the preference para-
meters of other shareholders, aside from distribution H ( ). The role of heterogeneous vi is
to produce variation across shareholders in their incentives to pay for advice so as to make
informed voting decisions.
   Each shareholder is initially uninformed about the state. There is a seller of information,
the proxy advisor, that has an informative signal about the state. For simplicity, we assume
that the proxy advisor knows the state with certainty. The advisor prepares two signals,
a private signal available only to the subscribers and a public signal available to everyone.
The private signal, denoted R = R; f ( j )g           2f0;1g   , consists of a ...nite signal space R and
two distributions f ( j )g     2f0;1g   of signal realizations r over R, one for each state    2 f0; 1g.
The public signal, denoted S = S; f ( jr)gr2R , consists of a ...nite signal space S and
a family of distributions f ( jr)gr2R of signal realizations s over S for each private signal
realization r 2 R. Let      (s) denote the probability of observing public signal s 2 S implied
by information policy S :
                                   X
                         (s)                 (sjr) ( (rj1) + (rj0) (1         )) :
                                 r2R;s2S


   We will refer to the private signal policy R with signal realizations r 2 R as the research
report of the proxy advisor and to the public signal policy S with signal realizations s 2 S as
the voting recommendation of the proxy advisor. This formulation means that the research
report is informative about the true state , while the voting recommendation determines
how the content of the research report is mapped into a voting recommendation. As discussed
in the introduction, the assumption that the recommendation is observed by all investors,
while the research report is only learned by the proxy advisor'
                                                              s subscribers, corresponds
to reality: for important decisions, such as proxy contests or contentious say-on-pay votes,
proxy advisors' recommendations are typically publicly revealed in the media, but their
research reports, which contain a comprehensive analysis of the proposal, are only available
to the advisors' institutional clients. One way to think of policy S is that it represents
the voting guidelines that each proxy advisor publicly discloses every year: for each type

                                                    12
of proposal, these guidelines describe how the proxy advisor will issue its recommendation
on this proposal in a given company based on various aspects of the company'
                                                                           s corporate
governance and performance.
   Note also that while our baseline model analyzes subscriptions to only one proposal and
in one ...rm, Section 6 discusses how our analysis and results can be extended to a setting
where the subscription covers multiple proposals and ...rms.
   Following the literature on Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011, and
follow-up work), we assume that the advisor commits to policies R and S . As we discuss
later, the seller'
                 s ex-ante optimal information policy turns out to be dynamically consistent
for the seller in our model, unlike in Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) and most other models
of Bayesian persuasion.




                             Figure 1. Timeline of the model.



   The timeline of the model is shown in Figure 1. At stage 1, the advisor chooses the inform-
ation policy (R; S ) and fee f that it charges to shareholders for subscribing to its research
report R. At stage 2, having observed the information policy (R; S ), fee f , and his real-
ization of proposal importance vi , each shareholder i simultaneously and non-cooperatively
decides on whether to pay fee f to subscribe to the advisor'
                                                           s report or not. At stage 3, the
advisor observes   and issues a research report r 2 R and recommendation s 2 S , so that all
shareholders observe the realization of s and shareholders that subscribed to the advisor also
see the research report r. At stage 4, each shareholder decides whether to vote "for"(ai = 1)
or "against" (ai = 0) the proposal, and the proposal gets implemented if it is approved by
the majority.
   Shareholders maximize ui (d; ) minus any costs of information acquisition, and the proxy
advisor maximizes its expected pro...ts from selling the subscriptions.      The equilibrium
concept is a symmetric Bayes-Nash equilibrium. In particular, when we write that there

                                             13
is a unique equilibrium, we mean a unique equilibrium in this class.
      We conjecture and later verify that it is optimal for the proxy advisor to design a fully
informative research report, i.e., R = f0; 1g and r = . Thus, by subscribing to the proxy ad-
visor'
     s services, a shareholder learns the state with certainty. Given this, the proxy advisor'
                                                                                             s
problem is how to design the public recommendation, given each possible realization of state
 : S =       S; f ( j )g   2f0;1g   . For example, in the case of a binary recommendation space
S = f0; 1g, which we will show to be optimal, the recommendation policy is characterized
by two probabilities, Pr (s = 1j = 1) =            (1j1) and Pr (s = 1j = 0) =           (1j0).


3       Solution of the model
We solve the model by backward induction. We focus on the case in which the research report
R is fully informative, and solve for the equilibrium in the voting game, the equilibrium
subscription decisions, pricing of information, and the public recommendation design. In
Section 3.5, we complete the solution by proving that making the research report truthful is
optimal for the seller.


3.1       Voting stage
Since the payo¤ of a shareholder is proportional to the importance vi of the proposal to him,
his vote does not depend on vi , and depends only on his information set (s or fs; rg), as
well as the information that he infers from the fact that his vote is pivotal. Speci...cally, as
in the literature on strategic voting (e.g., Austen-Smith and Banks, 1996; Feddersen and
Pesendorfer, 1998), shareholders take into account that their vote only matters in situations
where it changes the voting outcome and thus rationally condition their voting decisions on
the information that is true in this situation.14
      A shareholder ...nds it optimal to vote "for"(ai = 1) if his posterior probability of                = 1,
given his information set and what he infers from the fact that his vote is pivotal, exceeds
1
2
  .   If this posterior is below 1
                                 2
                                   , he ...nds it optimal to vote "against" (ai = 0). If it is exactly
         1
equal to 2 , the shareholder is indi¤erent.
  14
     Such strategic voting is related to the idea of the "winner' s curse:" both in auctions and in voting, an
agent' s action only matters in a particular situation ­when his bid is the highest and when his vote is pivotal,
respectively. Since other agents (bidders and voters, respectively) have valuable information, the rational
agent conditions his decision on the information that must be true when his decision matters.


                                                       14
     First, consider a shareholder who subscribed to the research report. Since he knows the
state with certainty from the research report, it is optimal for his vote to match the state:
ai = .
     Second, consider a shareholder who did not subscribe to the research report. To solve for
his optimal voting strategy, we need to calculate Pr ( = 1js; P iv ), where s is the realization
of the public signal generated by the proxy advisor (the voting recommendation) and P iv is
the event that this shareholder'
                               s vote is pivotal for the vote outcome. Let                             s   = Pr ( = 1js)
denote the posterior probability of              = 1 implied by signal realization s, and let q denote the
probability, as perceived by shareholder i, with which each other shareholder is a subscriber
of the proxy advisor'
                    s research report. If every non-subscribing shareholder votes for the
proposal with probability , then using the Bayes'rule,

                                                            Pr (P iv j = 1; q; s ) s
          Pr ( = 1jq;     s ; P iv )   =                                                                            :      (1)
                                           Pr (P iv j = 1; q; s ) s + Pr (P iv j = 0; q;            s ) (1     s)


Intuitively, a shareholder constructs a posterior of state                    = 1 having two pieces of inform-
ation: the recommendation of the proxy advisor and the additional information he learns
from the fact that he is pivotal. The ...rst signal corresponds to terms                        s   and 1           s   in (1),
while the second signal corresponds to terms Pr (P iv j = 1; q;                       s)   and Pr (P iv j = 0; q;            s)

in (1).
                                       1
     If Pr ( = 1jq;     s ; P iv )     2
                                           for   = 1, there is an equilibrium in which all non-subscribing
                                                                                1
shareholders vote for the proposal. If Pr ( = 1jq;               s ; P iv )     2
                                                                                    for     = 0, there is an equilib-
rium in which all non-subscribing shareholders vote against. Finally, if Pr ( = 1jq;                           s ; P iv )   =
1
2
    for some   2 (0; 1), there is an equilibrium in which each non-subscribing shareholder ran-
domizes between voting for and against with probabilities                           and 1       , respectively. The
next proposition shows that there is a unique equilibrium in the voting game for any recom-
mendation realization s:


     Proposition 1. Consider the voting game that follows a recommendation realization s.
This game has a unique equilibrium, which takes the following form. If a shareholder is a
subscriber, he votes ai = . If a shareholder is not a subscriber and                            s    2 (0; 1), he votes




                                                          15
ai = 1 with probability
                                                                                       q
                                                              zs (1       2q )    1+       (zs   1)2 + 4q 2 zs
                                             (q;    s)   =                                                       ;                              (2)
                                                                             2 (zs     1) (1     q)
                                     2
                                 N       1
where zs            1
                         s
                                             . If a shareholder is not a subscriber and                     s   =1(          s       = 0), he votes
                             s

ai = 1 with probability one (zero).


     This equilibrium is intuitive. All shareholders with precise information (subscribers) vote
according to their information. In contrast, shareholders with imprecise information (non-
subscribers) randomize between voting for and against the proposal, with the property that
the expected fraction of votes for the proposal obtained from these shareholders is increasing
in the belief       s    that the proposal is value-improving.
     Figure 2 illustrates Proposition 1 and highlights the property that the sensitivity of votes
of non-subscribers to their posterior                                 s   is a¤ected by the expected fraction of subscribers,
q . Intuitively, a shareholder knows that his vote matters only in the event that the votes of
other shareholders are split and tries to infer information from that event. Since he expects
the non-subscribers to likely vote along the posterior belief                                          s,   the fact that the vote is
split implies that the subscribers were more likely to vote against belief                                                       s   than initially
expected. Thus, the shareholder updates the probability that the state is                                                             = 1, and his
vote becomes less reliant on                             s.   The extent of this learning depends on q . If q is very low,
the shareholder learns very little from the fact that the vote is split, since almost no vote is
perfectly informed. As a consequence, the voting strategy relies heavily on whether posterior
                1                1
 s   is above   2
                        or below 2 , as illustrated by the blue line in Figure 2 for q = 0:01. In the
                                                                                                                             1
limit when q ! 0,                        (q;       s)   converges to a step integer function 1                       s   >   2
                                                                                                                                     . In contrast,
if q is relatively high, a non-subscriber learns quite a bit from the fact that the votes of
others are split, since the probability that each vote is perfectly informed is now higher. As
a consequence, in equilibrium, the probability that he votes "for," (q;                                                      s ),     becomes less
                                                                   1
sensitive to posterior                       s   around       s   =2 . This is illustrated by the yellow and orange lines in
Figure 2 for q = 0:2 and q = 0:45, respectively.




                                                                                 16
                                                       1

                                                                  q=0.01
                                                      0.9
                                                                  q=0.2
                                                                  q=0.45
                                                      0.8
                   )
                                         s
                                                      0.7
                   Probability of voting "for", (q,



                                                      0.6

                                                      0.5

                                                      0.4

                                                      0.3

                                                      0.2

                                                      0.1

                                                       0
                                                            0   0.1        0.2   0.3   0.4        0.5      0.6   0.7      0.8   0.9   1
                                                                                        Posterior belief    s




Figure 2. Illustration of Proposition 1. This ...gure shows the probability that a non-subscribing
shareholder votes for the proposal as a function of his posterior s for three di¤erent values of q .
The parameters are N = 7, q 2 f0:01; 0:2; 0:45g.


3.2       Information acquisition stage
While all shareholders can utilize the recommendation of the proxy advisor, the incentive to
purchase the research report reects the incremental value from the shareholder'
                                                                              s perspective
of an improved outcome due to the value to that shareholder of an enhanced voting decision.15
       Given the equilibrium in the voting game from Proposition 1, we can calculate the private
value to an individual shareholder from the research report, i.e., from learning the state. It
will be a function of probability q , with which he expects each other shareholder to subscribe
to the report and therefore vote informatively, the recommendation policy S , and type vi of
the shareholder. Let Vi (q; S ) denote this value.
       To obtain Vi (q; S ), consider shareholder i'
                                                   s value from learning the state for a particular
realization s 2 S that induces posterior                                               s.    If    s    = 1 or   s     = 0, then the shareholder already
knows the state with certainty from observing the public recommendation s. In addition, his
  15
    A traditional challenge confronting information producers, such as proxy advisory ...rms, is the free-rider
problem which leads to di¢ culty in being paid for the information that they generate (e.g., Arrow (1962)),
but the presence of the research report that is not publicly available facilitates the ability of the proxy
advisory ...rm to be paid for the information that it generates. The presence of the proxy-advisory ...rm helps
overcome the free-rider problem among shareholders, provided that there is not a free-rider problem that
would prevent the intermediary from being paid for the information it produces.


                                                                                              17
vote is never pivotal in this case, since all shareholders vote the same way. Thus, if                                      s   =1
or         s   = 0, the shareholder'
                                   s value from the research report is zero. If                                 s   2 (0; 1), then
shareholder i'
             s value from learning the state is positive. His vote changes the decision of the
...rm with probability Pr (P iv jq;                 s ),   and, conditional on his vote being pivotal, learning the
                                                                                                     1
state changes the probability of the correct decision (d = ) from                                    2
                                                                                                          to 1.16 Using this and
the fact that the importance of the proposal to shareholder i is vi , his value from learning the
state is 1 v Pr (P iv jq;
         2 i                           s ).   Aggregating over all possible realizations of the recommendation
s 2 S , we obtain that the value of the research report to shareholder i is

                                                     Vi (q; S ) = vi V (q; S ) ;                                                (3)

where
                                                                1X
                                               V (q; S ) =             Pr (P iv jq;     s)   (s)                                (4)
                                                                2 s2 S

and            (s) =           (sj1) + (1         ) (sj0) is the probability of observing recommendation s.
Intuitively, V (q; S ) is the average (before the recommendation s 2 S is realized) probability
                                                                                         1
that each shareholder is pivotal multiplied by the bene...t                              2
                                                                                             of learning the state conditional
on being pivotal.
          Hence, shareholder i buys the report if and only if vi V (q; S )                           f , or equivalently,

                                                                             f
                                                           vi        v
                                                                     ^              :
                                                                          V (q; S )

It follows that, given fee f , the fraction of shareholders subscribing to the advisor'
                                                                                      s report is
                   f
1         H     V (q;S )
                           . We can equivalently rewrite this expression as an inverse demand function.
Speci...cally, to ensure that, on average, fraction q of shareholders subscribe to the proxy
advisor'
       s report, the fee must be:

                                        f = V (q; S ) H         1
                                                                    (1                   ~ (1
                                                                         q ) = V (q; S ) h         q) ;                         (5)

      ~()
where h                    H   1
                                   ( ) is an increasing function.
          We can summarize these arguments in the following proposition:

     16
      The probability of voting correctly (vi = ), conditional on signal s and shareholder i being pivotal, is
1
2,   because conditional on this information, both states are equally likely by Proposition 1.



                                                                         18
   Proposition 2. For a given fee f and public recommendation policy S , a shareholder
subscribes to the proxy advisor's report if and only if the importance of the proposal to him
exceeds f =V (q; S ). The expected fraction q of shareholders that subscribe to the report is
given by the solution to (5), if q 2 (0; 1).


3.3    Seller'
             s public recommendation design
The seller'
          s problem is to choose fee f and the information policy S to maximize expected
pro...ts N qf , where f is given by (5). Equivalently, we can rewrite the seller'
                                                                                s problem as
choosing q and S to maximize
                                                                                               !
                                                       X
                                     ~ (1
                               max q h           q)             Pr (P iv jq;                                                 (6)
                                                                                   s)   (s)
                                q;S
                                                       s2S


subject to the constraint that the information policy is Bayes plausible, i.e., that the expected
posterior probability of each state equals its prior probability (this requirement is necessary
to ensure Bayesian rationality):
                                                 X
                                                           s    (s) = :                                                      (7)
                                                 s2S

   For a ...xed q , problem (6)­(7) can be solved using the concavi...cation approach from
Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011). Let P ( jq ) be the concave closure of Pr (P iv jq; ). Then,
                             P
P ( jq ) is the largest payo¤ s2S Pr (P iv jq; s ) (s) the seller can achieve when the prior is
  and the probability with which each shareholder subscribes to the seller'
                                                                          s research report
is q . The next lemma establishes the key properties of Pr (P iv jq; ), and Figure 3 illustrates
them graphically.

                               1
   Lemma 1.           If q <   2
                                 ,    there exist      l       2 0; 1
                                                                    2
                                                                      ,        h    2    1
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           ;1      , and " > 0, such that
Pr (P iv jq; ) is strictly convex in            at     2 (0;        l)   and       2(     h ; 1),    and strictly concave in
            1         1                  1
  at    2   2
                "; + " . If q >
                      2                  2
                                           ,   Pr (P iv jq; ) is strictly concave in                        if    is su¢ ciently
close to 1
         2
           , and if       is close to 0 and 1.


   Given Lemma 1, it is straightforward to characterize the optimal recommendation policy
                               1                                                                   1
when     is close to 1, 0, and 2 . According to Lemma 1, if q <                                    2
                                                                                                     ,   P ( jq ) is linear at
                                                                                         1
su¢ ciently close to 0 and 1 and strictly concave at                       close to      2
                                                                                           .   It follows that the optimal


                                                               19
                                       0.16                                                                                               0.14
                                                  q = 0.01                                                                                           q = 0.2
                                       0.14
                                                                                                                                          0.12

                                       0.12
        Probability of a split vote




                                                                                                                                           0.1




                                                                                                            Probability of a split vote
                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                          0.08
                                       0.08
                                                                                                                                          0.06
                                       0.06

                                                                                                                                          0.04
                                       0.04


                                       0.02                                                                                               0.02


                                          0                                                                                                 0
                                                             0.2     0.4           0.6       0.8   1                                             0             0.2     0.4         0.6       0.8   1
                                                                   Posterior belief,                                                                                 Posterior belief,
                                                                                         s                                                                                               s

                                                                    Panel A                                                                                           Panel B
                                      0.045
                                                  q = 0.6
                                       0.04

                                      0.035
  Probability of a split vote




                                       0.03

                                      0.025

                                       0.02

                                      0.015

                                       0.01

                                      0.005

                                          0
                                              0              0.2     0.4           0.6       0.8   1
                                                                   Posterior belief,     s

                                                                     Panel C

Figure 3. Illustration of Lemma 1 for three di¤erent values of q. Panels A and B show
cases of q < 1
             2
               , when Pr (P iv jq; ) is convex for low and high values of but concave for middle
                                               1
values of . Panel C shows the case of q > 2      , when Pr (P iv jq; ) is concave for all values of q .
The parameters are N = 7, q = 0:01 (Panel A), q = 0:2 (Panel B), q = 0:6 (Panel C).




                                                                                                       20
recommendation policy is characterized by the following proposition, illustrated in Figure 4.


   Proposition 3 (optimal recommendation design for a ...xed fraction of sub-
scribers). The optimal public recommendation is binary, S = f0; 1g, and has the following
properties:

                    1                                                                                                      Pr(P iv jq;    1)
   1. If q <        2
                        and         <      l,   signal s = 1 induces a belief                   1    2   ;1
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                            , satisfying                       =
                                                                                                                                  1
        @
       @
            Pr (P iv jq;          1 ),   and signal s = 0 induces a belief                       0   = 0.
                    1
   2. If q <        2
                        and         >      h,   signal s = 1 induces a belief                    1   = 1, and signal s = 0 induces a
                              1                         Pr(P iv jq;   0)              @
       belief       0   2     2
                                ;        , satisfying      1 0
                                                                           =         @
                                                                                          Pr (P iv jq;   0 ).

                    1                      1        1                               1
   3. If q <        2
                        and         2      2
                                                 "; 2 + " , or if q                 2
                                                                                      ,   the optimal signal is uninformative.



   If the prior beliefs are su¢ ciently asymmetric and the proxy advisor does not have too
many subscribers, the optimal signal creates controversy. For example, consider                                               >       h   (the
case        <   l   is analogous). Proposition 3 shows that the positive recommendation reveals
that the state is 1 and leads shareholders to rubberstamp the proposal: all shareholders vote
in favor, regardless of whether they are subscribers or non-subscribers, so the research report
is irrelevant.
   However, the negative recommendation only reveals that the probability of                                                = 1 is close
to 50%. The seller achieves this by issuing a negative recommendation in all cases where
  = 0, but also in many cases where                            = 1. For example, as discussed in the introduction,
such information design can be implemented by proxy voting guidelines that commit to give
a negative recommendation if a certain condition is satis...ed (e.g., a director has too many
board seats). From the Bayes plausibility constraint (7), the probability of a negative signal
                        1
is Pr (s = 0) =         1
                                  , which exceeds the probability that the correct decision is to reject the
                              0
                                                                                1
proposal (Pr ( = 0) = 1                           ) by a factor of          1
                                                                                        . Intuitively, by making negative recom-
                                                                                    0

mendations frequent but with a confusing meaning, the advisor increases the probability of
a close vote upon a negative recommendation and thereby each shareholder'
                                                                        s willingness to
pay for advice.
   Proposition 3 also shows that it is suboptimal to give any information for free if either
the prior is close to 50% or if su¢ ciently many shareholders are subscribers. The former
result is intuitive: If there is already a lot of uncertainty about the correct decision, then

                                                                           21
the probability of a close vote is high, so shareholders have incentives to become informed,
and there is no bene...t to manipulating public information. Regarding the latter result, as
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
Figure 2 shows, the impact of a marginal reduction in the belief                                                                                                                                   >   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             on the probability of
voting in favor is greater when q is higher. Thus, the bene...t from inducing beliefs close to
50% is smaller when q is higher. Since there is also a cost, uninformative recommendations
become optimal if q is high enough.




                                0.16                                                                                                                      0.14
                                       q = 0.01                                                                                                                      q = 0.2
                                0.14                                                                                                                      0.12

                                0.12
  Probability of a split vote




                                                                                                                                                           0.1




                                                                                                                            Probability of a split vote
                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                          0.08
                                0.08
                                                                                                                                                          0.06
                                0.06

                                                                                                                                                          0.04
                                0.04

                                                                                               1
                                                                                                   and   0
                                                       and 0
                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                          0.02                     and                                           and
                                0.02              when     is low
                                                                                              when       is high                                                               1          0                                  1         0

                                                                                                                                                                           when          i s low                            when       i s high


                                  0                                                                                                                         0
                                                  0.2                 0.4           0.6                  0.8       1                                             0                 0.2                 0.4        0.6            0.8              1
                                                                    Posterior belief,                                                                                                              Posterior belief,
                                                                                          s                                                                                                                             s

                                                                     Panel A                                                                                                                           Panel B

Figure 4. Optimal public recommendation for di¤erent values of q. The left panel illus-
trates the case of q=0.01. In this case, if is low (below 0.4997), the optimal public recommendation
induces posteriors 0 and 0.4997; if is high (above 0.5003), the optimal public recommendation
induces posteriors 0.5003 and 1. The right panel illustrates the case of q=0.2. In this case, if
is low (below 0.3721), the optimal public recommendation induces posteriors 0 and 0.3721; if is
high (above 0.6279), the optimal public recommendation induces posteriors 0.6279 and 1. If is
between the two cut-o¤s, the optimal public recommendation is uninformative.




3.4                                    Pricing of information by the seller
Next, consider the optimal pricing of information by the seller. Suppose the seller chooses a
fee such that it sells, in expectation, to a fraction q of shareholders. Then her expected pro...ts
                 ~ (1 q ), where, as discussed above, P ( ; q ) is the highest probability of a
are N qP ( ; q ) h
shareholder being pivotal that the seller can achieve when the prior is                                                                                                                                       and the probability


                                                                                                                       22
that shareholders subscribe to the report is q . Thus, the optimal fee induces q that solves

                                                              ~ (1
                                               max qP ( ; q ) h             q) :                                                           (8)
                                                 q


Consider the case in which the prior is su¢ ciently asymmetric,                                  >     h       or           <        l   from
                                                                                                                                            1
Proposition 3. According to Proposition 3, the optimal recommendation is biased if q <                                                      2
                                1
and uninformative if q          2
                                  .   Thus, there are two possibilities to consider.
   The ...rst possibility is that the solution to (8) is q < 1
                                                             2
                                                               . In other words, the seller sets a
high enough fee so that in expectation fewer than 50% of shareholders become subscribers,
and designs public recommendations that are biased against the status quo. What will be
the pro...t-maximizing choice of q in this range? First, consider the case of                                              <    l.       Since
the optimal recommendation induces posteriors                         1   and 0 with probabilities                         and 1                ,
                                                                                                                       1                    1

respectively, (8) is equivalent to

                         ~ (1              Pr (P iv jq;    1)              ~ (1            Pr (P iv jq; m)
                   max q h            q)                        =    max q h          q)                   ;                               (9)
                       q                             1               q;m                         m

                                                                                                                       Pr(P iv jq;m)
where the equality follows from the fact that, by Proposition 3,                           1   maximizes                    m
                                                                                                                                          over
m. Using the expression for Pr (P iv jq; m), (25), (8) implies

                                                                                                       N       1
                        ~ (1
                  max q h        q ) ((q + (1            q ) (q; m)) (1      q ) (1         (q; m)))       2       :                      (10)
                  q;m


We note two properties of (10). First, the optimization problem does not depend on the prior
 . Thus, as long as the prior is su¢ ciently asymmetric to make biased recommendations
optimal, it is optimal to set the fee to induce the same (independent of the prior) frac-
tion of subscribers q and the same posteriors that follow public recommendations. Second,
the optimization problem depends on m only via m a¤ecting the votes of non-subscribing
shareholders. It follows that (10) is maximized when

                                                                             1
                                              q + (1       q ) (q;     1)   = ;                                                           (11)
                                                                             2

i.e., posterior    1   is such that the probability of voting for the proposal, conditional on it
being good and the recommendation being positive, is exactly 50%. This, in turn, implies
that the optimal posterior that the positive recommendation induces is less than 50% and



                                                                23
given by
                                                                                         N       1
                                                             (1               4q 2 )         2

                                                 1   =                                           N       1   :                                                                 (12)
                                                          1 + (1                      4q 2 )         2


   Using similar arguments for               >       h,   the optimal posterior that the negative recommend-
ation induces is greater than 50% and given by
                                                                  N       1
                                             (1          4q 2 )       2
                                                                                                                 1
                             0   =1                                       N       1    =                                   N       1                                           (13)
                                           1 + (1          4q 2 )             2              1 + (1               4q 2 )       2




Then, from (10) it follows that the optimal q is

                                                           ~ (1
                                             q = arg max q h                                         q) :                                                                      (14)
                                                                  q


To sum up, if the seller chooses to design a biased recommendation, it is optimal to set the
fee to sell research to a fraction q of the shareholders and to design a recommendation that
induces posterior 0 and          1   (if   is low) or             0       and 1 (if                          is high).
                                                                                                                     1
   The second possibility is that the solution to (8) is q                                                           2
                                                                                                                       .   In this case, the optimal q
solves
                                                                                                                                         N       1
                      ~ (1
                max q h              q ) ((q + (1         q ) (q; )) (1                                  q ) (1            (q; )))           2       :                         (15)
                    q

Note that (15) is weakly below (10) since it has one fewer degree of exibility: the posterior
belief of non-subscribing shareholders is ...xed at                                        rather than being a parameter of choice
                                                 1
for the seller. Therefore, if q <                2
                                                   ,   then it is optimal for the seller to design a biased
                                                                                                                                                                         1
recommendation and sell to a fraction q of the shareholders. By contrast, if q                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                           ,   then
the optimal recommendation is uninformative and the fee is such that the expected fraction
of subscribers is

                                                                                                                                                         N       1
           q               ~ (1
               = arg max q h               q ) ((q + (1               q ) (q; )) (1                               q ) (1               (q; )))               2       :         (16)
                         q


This analysis is summarized in the following proposition:


   Proposition 4 (optimal pricing and design of information). Suppose that prior
is su¢ ciently asymmetric. The optimal public recommendation and the price of a research
report are as follows.



                                                                      24
                                                        1
  1. If q , de...ned by (14), is below                  2
                                                            and               is low, then recommendation s = 1 occurs
                                                                                                     N       1
                                                                                   (1   4q   2
                                                                                                 )       2
      with probability             and induces belief                 1   =                      2)
                                                                                                      N          1   ; and recommendation s = 0
                               1                                                  1+(1 4q                    2

      occurs with probability 1 and induces belief 0 = 0. The price of the research report
                               1
                N ~
      is f = 2     h (1 q ), and the probability that a shareholder subscribes to it is q .

                           1
  2. If q is below         2
                               and       is high, then recommendation s = 1 occurs with probability
      1
          0
               and induces belief          1   = 1; and recommendation s = 0 occurs with probability
          0
      1                                                      1
      1
              and induces belief          0    =                 2)
                                                                      N       1   . The price of the research report is f =
          0                                        1+(1 4q                2

      2   N
              (1     ~ (1
                    )h             q ), and the probability that a shareholder subscribes to it is q .

  3. If q is above 12
                      , then the recommendation is uninformative, the price of the research
                  1
     report is f = q Pr (P iv jq ; ) h~ (1 q ), where q is given by (16), and the prob-
                       2
      ability that a shareholder subscribes to it is q .



   To illustrate the intuition for Proposition 4, consider an example in which the intens-
ity of shareholders' preferences about the proposal is distributed according to the power
distribution with parameter :

                                                                                                                 1
                                      ~ (1
   Example: H (x) = x . In this case, h                                           q ) = (1               q ) , so q =               . Therefore, if
                                                                                                                               +1
  < 1, then a pro...t-maximizing seller ...nds it optimal to design a biased recommendation
and sell research report to fraction               +1
                                                        of shareholders (in expectation). In contrast, if                                     > 1,
then a pro...t-maximizing seller ...nds it optimal to design an uninformative recommendation
and sell research report to fraction q                  of shareholders.
   Intuitively,     < 1 means that the distribution of the intensity of shareholders'preferences
has a positive skew: There are many shareholders who care little about the proposal, and
relatively few who care quite a bit. In this case, it is optimal to sell the research report
to a relatively small fraction of shareholders who care signi...cantly about the proposal, and
to increase the private value of the research report by inducing controversy via a biased
public recommendation. In contrast,                         > 1 means that the distribution of the intensity
of shareholders'preferences has a negative skew: There are many shareholders who care a
lot about the proposal and some who care very little. In this case, it is optimal to sell the
research report to a large fraction of shareholders. Since there are few shareholders who


                                                                  25
do not have access to the research report, it is optimal to have an uninformative public
recommendation so as not to dilute the value of information available in the research report.


3.5       Seller'
                s private research report design
So far, we have solved for the optimal public recommendation design, the fee charged for
the research report, and the equilibrium in the voting game conjecturing that the seller ...nds
it optimal to design the private research report that reveals the state truthfully. The next
proposition veri...es that this conjecture is indeed correct:


    Proposition 5 (optimality of a fully informative research report). A fully in-
formative private research report, i.e., the one with R = f0; 1g and r = , is optimal for the
seller.


    Loosely speaking, a fully informative private research report is optimal, because adding
noise to a private research report only dilutes its value and thus lowers the willingness to
pay of shareholders who subscribe to it. The more formal intuition is a combination of two
steps. First, observe that for any research report with an arbitrary number of signals, there
is a research report with two signals for which each shareholder'
                                                                s willingness to pay is not
lower. Intuitively, any signal induces one of the three best responses from subscribers: They
either vote for the proposal, or they vote against the proposal, or they randomize between
voting for and against. In the latter case, the private value of a research report is zero, so
the seller is better o¤ designing a research report that avoids such signals. As for the former
two types of signals, the seller could equivalently combine all signals that induce subscribers
to vote "for" into one, and all signals that induce subscribers to vote "against" into the
other. Therefore, it is without loss of generality to limit attention to research reports with
two signals. Second, observe that since the seller is the only source of information about the
state, one could rede...ne the problem by referring to signals in the private research reports
instead of states. In this rede...ned problem, an imperfectly informative research report is
equivalent to a reduction in each shareholder'
                                             s payo¤ from the "correct" decision, which
reduces his willingness to pay for the information. Therefore, a fully informative private
research report is optimal.




                                               26
4      Properties of strategic recommendation design
It is interesting to explore the properties of the recommendation designed by the advisor.
Consider the case of low                  (the case of high                  is similar). One can measure the degree of
bias in recommendations in the following two ways: (1) the factor by which the probability
that the signal is s = 1 exceeds the probability that the state is                                                             = 1, which is given by
                                                                                                               N       1
                                      Pr (s = 1)                    1
                                                                            1 + (1         4q 2 )                  2
                                                 =                      =                              N       1           ;                            (17)
                                      Pr ( = 1)                                  (1     4q 2 )             2




and (2) the di¤erence between Pr (s = 1) and Pr ( = 1), which is given by

                                                     1
                                                                1       =                      N       1   :                                            (18)
                                                        1                   (1        4q 2 )       2




Notice that q only depends on the distribution of vi (the importance of the proposal to
shareholders), but is otherwise independent of other parameters of the model, in particular,
                         Pr(s=1)
 . Thus, the ratio       Pr( =1)
                                      does not depend on prior , whereas the di¤erence Pr (s = 1)
Pr ( = 1) is increasing in                 for      <       l   and decreasing in                          for                 >1     h.

    First, consider the comparative statics with respect to the number of shareholders N .
Notice that q does not depend on N , and consider the case of q < 1
                                                                  2
                                                                    . Then, 1 4q                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                    2 (0; 1),
                              N       1
and therefore (1     4q 2 )       2
                                          , is decreasing in N , approaching zero for N ! 1. This implies
that   1   is decreasing in N . Hence, the range of priors over which a (partially) informative
public recommendation is optimal shrinks. However, if the prior                                                                     belongs to the region
in which a partially informative public recommendation is optimal, the recommendation
                                                                                 Pr(s=1)
creates more controversy in the sense that both                                  Pr( =1)
                                                                                           and Pr (s = 1)                             Pr ( = 1) increase
                                                 Pr(s=0)
in N for low     (similarly, both                Pr( =0)
                                                            and Pr (s = 0)                 Pr ( = 0) increase in N for high ).
Controversial recommendations become very frequent and thus not very informative.
   Second, consider the comparative statics with respect to the fraction of shareholders that
subscribe to the research report (q ). Recall that q is the value that maximizes q h~ (1 q ),
      ~() = H
where h              1
                         ( ) is the inverse of the c.d.f. of proposal importance to shareholders.
Hence, comparative statics in q should be interpreted as comparative statics in properties
                                                                                                               N           1
of the c.d.f. H ( ) that determine q . Notice that (1                                          4q 2 )                  2
                                                                                                                               is decreasing in q , reach-
ing zero for q = 1
                 2
                   . Therefore, as q increases, the range of priors over which the public
recommendation provides some information shrinks, and the degree with which it creates

                                                                        27
                                                         Pr(s=1)
controversy increases, in the sense that both            Pr( =1)
                                                                    and Pr (s = 1)      Pr ( = 1) increase in
^ for
q         <1
           2
             .
    The next proposition summarizes these comparative statics:


    Proposition 6. The extent of recommendations against the prior, measured by either
Pr(s=1)                                                             Pr(s=0)
Pr( =1)
          or Pr (s = 1)     Pr ( = 1) when               <    l   ( Pr( =0)
                                                                            or Pr (s = 0)    Pr ( = 0) when
    >   h ):


        increases in the number of shareholders N ;

        increases with any change in the distribution H ( ) that increases q                           ~ (1
                                                                                            arg maxq q h      q ).


5       Extension: Exogenously informed shareholders
The base model makes a stark assumption that the proxy advisor is the only source of inform-
ation for shareholders. In reality, large institutional investors perform their own research and
thus are likely to vote informatively irrespectively of research reports and recommendations
of the advisor. Does the presence of these informed shareholders lead a pro...t-maximizing
adviser to design more or less biased recommendations?
    To study this question, consider the following simple extension of the base model. Sup-
pose that with probability         2 (0; 1), a voter is informed about the state without buying the
research report, which he learns at the beginning of the game. Suppose that the research
report is fully informative about the state, and suppose that the prior                  is su¢ ciently asym-
metric, as in the analysis of Section 3.4. The solution of the model is unchanged up until
the seller'
          s problem, which now becomes:
                                  X
                           max          (q                         ~ (1
                                             ) Pr (P iv j = 1; q ) h          q ) (s)                    (19)
                            q;S
                                  s2S


subject to the constraint that the information policy is Bayes plausible:
                                             X
                                                     s   (s) = :                                         (20)
                                              s2 S


Here, q          denotes the probability with which a shareholder learns the state, and therefore
q       is the probability with which a shareholder subscribes to the seller'
                                                                            s report.

                                                         28
    Notice that as in the base model, one can consider the problem of the optimal recom-
mendation design for a given q . Thus, the analysis of Section 3.3 and Proposition 3 are
unchanged. The only part that is di¤erent is the pricing of information by the seller. Spe-
ci...cally, if the seller designs a biased recommendation, it is now optimal to choose q that
maximizes
                                    max (q         ~ (1
                                                  )h        q) :                              (21)
                                      q

Denote the solution by qe ( ). As we show in the proof of the next proposition, for any       > 0,
qe ( ) satis...es qe ( ) > q . In other words, having exogenously informed shareholders leads
to a higher fraction of informed shareholders even after accounting for the strategic pricing
of information by the seller. Since there are more informed shareholders in equilibrium, the
argument in Proposition 6 suggests that pro...t-maximizing public recommendations become
more biased and less informative. The following proposition summarizes this result:


    Proposition 7. Suppose that       is su¢ ciently asymmetric and that a partially inform-
ative recommendation is optimal. A marginal increase in                 0 increases qe ( ) and in-
                                                                                        Pr(s=1)
creases the frequency of recommendations against the prior, measured by either          Pr( =1)
                                                                                                  or
                                            Pr(s=0)
Pr (s = 1)   Pr ( = 1) when      is low (   Pr( =0)
                                                      or Pr (s = 0)   Pr ( = 0) when    is high).


6     Implications and discussion
In this section, we relate our results to the empirical evidence on shareholders'voting patterns
and their use of proxy advisors, and also discuss several assumptions and policy implications.


6.1    Information content of research reports and recommendations
Our model predicts that the proxy advisor will design research reports that are accurate
and unbiased ("fully informative") but that its public recommendations will be partially
informative and biased. Consistent with this, many mutual funds that subscribe to proxy
advisors and that also invest in stewardship suggest that their prime interest in the feedback
from the proxy advisors is the detailed data and reports that they generate, rather than the
speci...c recommendations. For example, at the SEC'
                                                  s Proxy Advisory Services Roundtable
in 2013, Michelle Edkins, Global Head of BlackRock'
                                                  s Investment Stewardship team, praised
the information content of proxy advisors'research reports stating "we get to read a lot [of

                                                 29
proxy statements], and it can be very hard to ...nd the pertinent information ... so having
that information synthesized and accessible is hugely important to us being able to take
an informed decision,"but emphasized that they rely less on speci...c recommendations and
                                                            17
guidelines: "we take our decisions on a case-by-case basis."   This view is consistent with a
broader view of many other institutional investors, as evidenced by the survey evidence in
Bew and Fields (2012) cited in the introduction.
       Relatedly, Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch (2013 and 2018) examine the information content of
ISS and Glass Lewis research reports and its relation to shareholders'voting on say-on-pay
proposals and director elections, respectively. Their evidence is consistent with sharehold-
ers utilizing the contents of the research reports beyond the information contained in the
recommendations. In particular, they show that shareholders'tendency to vote against the
company'
       s executive compensation policies and its directors is stronger if the research report
identi...es multiple, rather than a single, reasons for concern, and if the severity of these
concerns is higher.
       Importantly, even though the advisor'
                                           s recommendations in our model are biased and less
informative than its reports, they nevertheless contain valuable information (whenever the
priors are su¢ ciently asymmetric). Is there evidence that proxy advisors'recommendations
are indeed informative about the value of the proposal? Alexander et al. (2010) examine
the price impact to ISS recommendations in proxy contests and conclude that the answer
is yes. Their analysis suggests that the price impact contains both a prediction component
(recommendations a¤ect prices by changing the beliefs about who will win the proxy contest)
and a certi...cation component (recommendations are informative about the value that the
dissident or incumbent team would create for the ...rm); the latter component suggests that
recommendations are at least partially informative.


6.2       Shareholders'sensitivity to proxy advisors'recommendations
Our model predicts that the optimally designed advisor'
                                                      s recommendations are biased against
the a priori more likely alternative. Empirically, management proposals are typically ap-
proved with a high support rate, suggesting that "for management" is often the a priori
more likely alternative. For example, the average support rate is about 95% in director elec-
tions (Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009; Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch, 2018) and about 90% for
  17
    See the transcript of the roundtable at https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/proxy-advisory-services/proxy-
advisory-services-transcript.txt.


                                                  30
say-on-pay proposals (Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch, 2013; Malenko and Shen, 2016). This is
expected, given that proposals are endogenously put forward by management and thus are
more likely to be designed to appeal to the shareholders.18
      Given this, our model predicts a particular pattern of shareholders'deviations from proxy
advisors'recommendations. In situations where the advisor'
                                                         s recommendation is in favor of
the a priori expected alternative (in favor of management in the examples above), share-
holders should "rubberstamp" this recommendation. In contrast, if the recommendation is
against the a priori expected alternative, we expect a large disagreement in shareholders'
votes, with some shareholders voting in favor and some against.
      The evidence on say-on-pay proposals and director elections is consistent with this pre-
diction if we assume that "for management" is indeed the a priori more likely alternative.
Speci...cally, Table 1 in Malenko and Shen (2016)'
                                                 s analysis of say-on-pay votes shows that
favorable ISS recommendations are accompanied by 93% average shareholder support and
zero failed proposals (out of 1,764 proposals with a positive recommendation in their sample),
consistent with the "rubberstamping"prediction. In contrast, negative ISS recommendations
are accompanied by 69% average support and an 11% likelihood of the say-on-pay proposal
being rejected (29 out of 256 proposals with a negative recommendation). Table 1 in Er-
timur, Ferri, and Oesch (2018) shows a similar pattern for director elections: all directors
that received a favorable recommendation from either ISS or Glass Lewis received majority
support (with the vast majority receiving more than 90% votes in favor), but there is much
greater dispersion in shareholder votes upon a negative recommendation from either proxy
advisor.


6.3       Bias in recommendations and the correct voting benchmark
In our model, the bias in the proxy advisor'
                                           s recommendations arises because the advisor
is maximizing its pro...ts from information sales, rather than the value of the operating
companies. One way to explore our conclusions is to compare the recommendations of the
proxy advisors with the votes cast by large asset managers, whose interests are potentially
more directly aligned with value maximization. Empirical evidence highlights that proxy
advisors often make recommendations that are more anti-management than the votes of the
major index funds. For example, Brav et al. (2020) show that large index funds, such as
 18
      Additionally, many of the votes are about non-contentious matters (such as most director elections).



                                                      31
BlackRock and Vanguard, seem to be more supportive of management than ISS in proxy
contests, and the estimates of investor ideology and corporate governance preferences in
Bolton et al. (2020) and Bubb and Catan (2019) suggest a similar pattern for other types
of proposals and both ISS and Glass Lewis recommendations.
       Index funds are frequently criticized because their votes do not align with the proxy
advisory recommendations, and their greater support for management is viewed as a sign of
passivity or pro-management bias. In contrast, our results suggest a di¤erent interpretation
of such voting behavior and emphasize that proxy advisors' recommendations may not be
the most suitable benchmark (see also discussion in Spatt, 2021). Assuming, given the
discussion above, that "for management"is the a priori more likely alternative, shareholders
who deviate from negative proxy advisors'recommendations and support the management,
could instead be optimally correcting the "controversy"bias in these recommendations.
       If proxy advisors'recommendations are not always the correct benchmark, what could be
an alternative? Our results suggest that the votes of large asset managers could potentially
reect a more suitable benchmark. To see this, note that our model allows an additional
interpretation for vi , the extent to which shareholders care about the proposal: vi could
                                               s portfolio.19 Under this interpretation, our
stand for the number of ...rms in a shareholder'
model predicts that institutional investors that manage larger portfolios are more likely to
subscribe to the reports and make voting decisions based on their own analysis of these
reports, rather than purely on the basis of recommendations. This prediction is consistent
with the idea in Iliev and Lowry (2015), Iliev, Kalodimos, and Lowry (2021), and Gantchev
and Giannetti (2020) that larger asset managers are more likely to conduct governance
research and be "active voters." Moreover, while the proxy advisor'
                                                                  s recommendations are
biased, the votes of shareholders with large vi are both informed and unbiased in our model,
and in this sense, their votes could be considered a more suitable benchmark to proxy
advisory recommendations.


6.4       One-size-...ts-all recommendations
Proxy advisors issue recommendations according to their pre-speci...ed guidelines and often
without taking into account the individual circumstances of the company in question (see
  19
    Assuming that all ...rms have the same prior probability that a certain proposal is value-increasing, the
shareholders'concern about the value of the proposal, vi , would be proportional to the number of ...rms in
their portfolio that have this proposal on the agenda.


                                                     32
section 5.1 in Iliev and Lowry (2015) and the ...eld study evidence in Hayne and Vance
(2019)). This one-size-...ts-all approach has been widely criticized.20 Our results suggest
that such a one-size-...ts-all approach can arise naturally, to help the proxy advisor "create
controversy"around the issue at vote. Consider, for example, the voting guidelines of proxy
advisors on director elections. One of the aspects of these guidelines concerns overboarding.
For example, ISS will recommend against "individual directors who sit on more than ...ve
public company boards,"and Glass Lewis will recommend against "a director who serves as
an executive o¢ cer of any public company while serving on more than two public company
                                                                                   21
boards and any other director who serves on more than ...ve public company boards."
Being overboarded is indeed likely to be on average negatively correlated to the time the
director spends with the company and his value contribution (see, e.g., Fich and Shivdasani,
2006). In this sense, recommending against a director who is overboarded provides valuable
information, but at the same time is biased against the director, since many busy directors
are likely to be valuable given their extensive connections and expertise.22 Our analysis shows
that by designing such one-size-...ts-all guidelines, the proxy advisor can generate controversy
around director elections, which would induce more shareholders to purchase its research
reports and thereby acquire more detailed information about the director'
                                                                        s quali...cations
and experience.23
       In addition, we would expect subscribers to proxy advisors' reports, especially large
asset managers that make substantial investments in due diligence, to deviate from this
"one-size-...ts-all approach." By reading and internalizing the information in the reports,
these shareholders could be accounting for ...rm-speci...c factors and often coming to di¤erent
  20
     See, e.g., the discussion at the SEC'      s 2013 Proxy Advisory Services Roundtable available at
https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/proxy-advisory-services/proxy-advisory-services-transcript.txt. See also the
comment letter from the directors of 43 open-end and closed-end funds to the SEC: "we are concerned
with the practice of at least one proxy advisory ...rm to implement what is e¤ectively a `      one-size-...ts-all'
policy that applies one vote recommendation to all similar proxy proposals without analyzing the issue on a
company-by-company basis" at http://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-14-10/s71410-196.pdf.
  21
     The norms in this area and the nature of the responsibilities of a board member (and compensation)
have changed substantially over time as illustrated by https://www.thestreet.com/investing/stocks/the-age-
of-vernon-jordan-is-over-serving-on-a-board-is-a-full-time-job-now-13271386. At some point the late Vernon
Jordan served on ten boards.
  22
     This perspective is illustrated by the comment of a colleague of one of the authors in a broader context:
"If you want something done, then you should ask a busy person."
  23
     Other aspects of the criticism of a "one-size-...ts-all" approach include that the advice would not adjust
to re  ect other portfolio holdings of the investors (which would be particularly relevant in a merger and
acquisition situation) or the tax circumstances of the investor. Since the preferences of shareholders in our
model are aligned, we do not capture these other aspects of the criticism.



                                                       33
conclusions from proxy advisors on these issues. This prediction is consistent with the
analysis of one-size-...ts-all recommendations in Section 5.1 of Iliev and Lowry (2015), who
conclude: "There are important issues on which ISS is predisposed to recommending against
management, and active voter mutual funds frequently come to a di¤erent conclusion than
ISS on these issues."
   A speci...c type of one-size-...ts-all recommendations is when proxy advisors always recom-
mend against or in favor of certain proposals. For example, the 2021 ISS guidelines contain
a "general recommendation"to "vote against proposals to classify (stagger) the board" and
"vote for proposals to repeal classi...ed boards and to elect all directors annually,"and Glass
Lewis 2021 guidelines state that "Glass Lewis favors the repeal of staggered boards and the
annual election of directors."Our analysis predicts the emergence of such recommendations
as well. In particular, we show that sometimes the proxy advisor optimally designs com-
pletely uninformative recommendations, and always recommending against a certain type of
proposals (or always in favor) is one way to implement such uninformative recommendations.


6.5    Discussion
In this subsection, we discuss some institutional features of the proxy advisory process in
the context of our model and assumptions.

Multiple proposals and ...rms. Our baseline model features one ...rm and one proposal.
In practice, proxy advisors sell their research as a bundle: a shareholder subscribing to
the proxy advisor receives research reports for all companies in the shareholder'
                                                                                s portfolio,
and the research report for each company contains information on all proposals on the
company'
       s agenda. Such bundling does not change the conclusions of our model, in that the
incentives to create controversy arise in this case as well. To see this, suppose that there
is still one ...rm, but it has K proposals on the agenda. The proxy advisor combines its
research on all K proposals in one report, so that shareholders choose whether to purchase
the report with information on all K proposals, or not purchase any information at all.
Importantly, for any of these proposals, the value of the report to the shareholders increases
in the probability that the vote on this proposal is close. Hence, for a given fee, the problem
of the proxy advisor can be considered as K separate problems, and the incentives to create
controversy will arise on any of those K proposals, as long as its prior probability of being


                                              34
value-increasing is su¢ ciently asymmetric. (Of course, the fee that the advisor will charge
for its report will now depend on the combined value of these proposals to the shareholders.)
A similar argument applies to a subscription that bundles research across multiple ...rms in
the subscribing shareholders'portfolios.

Communication among shareholders. In our setting, since all shareholders'interests
are perfectly aligned, it would be in the ex-post interest of the subscribing shareholders to
disclose the information they learn from the advisor'
                                                    s report to other shareholders, and such
communication would be credible. For example, even though sharing the report itself is
likely not possible given contractual restrictions, the subscribers could nevertheless disclose
how they are going to vote. We assume that this does not happen, because in practice, the
extent of such disclosure is often limited for several reasons. One reason is that communica-
tion with other shareholders could be considered as "forming a group,"which may trigger a
poison pill or require ...ling form 13D. For example, the 2011 report by Dechert LLP states
that "shareholder concern about unintentionally forming a group has chilled communications
                                                        24
among large holders of shares in U.S. public companies."   Another reason is that, based
on anecdotal evidence, publicly disclosing one'
                                              s vote against management is viewed by man-
agement much more negatively than a negative (but private) vote per se, so institutional
investors are usually reluctant to disclose such votes to avoid managerial retaliation.


7       Conclusion
This paper analyzes the information design problem of a proxy advisor that aims to maximize
its pro...ts from information sale to voters. The advisor designs two signals ­one available to
all shareholders for free (a voting recommendation), and one available only to the advisor'
                                                                                          s
subscribers (a research report). The advisor also optimally chooses the fee that it charges
for subscribing to its research report.
      We show that even though all shareholders are unbiased and aligned at maximizing
...rm value, the advisor designs recommendations that are biased against the a priori more
likely alternative. By "creating controversy" in this way, the advisor makes a close vote
more likely and, in turn, increases the incentives of shareholders to subscribe to its research
report, which it makes fully informative and unbiased. Such design of recommendations
 24
      See https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/us-court-clari...es-shareholders-actin-14535/.


                                                     35
is consistent with the "one-size-...ts-all approach" for which proxy advisors are frequently
criticized. Our model predicts that while shareholders will rubberstamp recommendations
that support the a priori more likely alternative, there will be a lot of disagreement in
shareholders' votes upon a recommendation that goes against the more likely alternative.
This prediction is consistent with the observed evidence on institutional investors' voting
behavior and suggests a reinterpretation of that evidence.
   Our paper focuses on a monopolistic proxy advisor, whereas in practice, the proxy advis-
ory industry is a duopoly. Analyzing the joint information design problem of two advisors
competing with each other is an interesting direction that we leave for future research.




                                             36
References
 [1] Admati, Anat R., and Paul Peiderer, 1986, A monopolistic market for information,
    Journal of Economic Theory 39, 400­438.

 [2] Admati, Anat R., and Paul Peiderer, 1990, Direct and indirect sale of information,
    Econometrica 58, 901­928.

 [3] Alexander, Cindy R., Mark A. Chen, Duane J. Seppi, and Chester S. Spatt, 2010,
    Interim news and the role of proxy voting advice, Review of Financial Studies 23, 4419­
    4454.

 [4] Alonso, Ricardo, and Odilon Camara, 2016, Persuading voters, American Economic
    Review 106, 3590­3605.

 [5] Arrow, Kenneth J., Economic welfare and the allocation of resource for inventions, in
    the rate and direction of inventive activity: economic and social factors, RR Nelson
    (red.), Princeton University, Princeton (1962).

 [6] Austen-Smith, David, and Je¤rey S. Banks, 1996, Information aggregation, rationality,
    and the Condorcet Jury Theorem, American Political Science Review 90, 34­45.

 [7] Bardhi, Arjada, and Yingni Guo, 2018, Modes of persuasion toward unanimous consent,
    Theoretical Economics 13, 1111­1149.

 [8] Bar-Isaac, Heski and Joel D. Shapiro, 2020, Blockholder voting, Journal of Financial
    Economics 136, 695­717.

 [9] Bew, Robyn, and Richard Fields, 2012, Voting decisions at US mutual funds: How
    investors really use proxy advisers. IRRC Institute.

[10] Bolton, Patrick, Tao Li, Enrichetta Ravina, and Howard Rosenthal, 2020, Investor
    ideology, Journal of Financial Economics 137, 320­352.

[11] Bouvard, Matthieu, and Raphael Levy, 2018, Two-sided reputation in certi...cation mar-
    kets, Management Science 64, 4755­4774.




                                            37
[12] Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, Tao Li, and James Pinnington, 2020, Picking friends before
    picking (proxy) ...ghts: How mutual fund voting shapes proxy contests, ECGI Working
    Paper No. 601/2019.

[13] Brav, Alon, and Richmond D. Mathews, 2011, Empty voting and the e¢ ciency of cor-
    porate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 289­307.

[14] Bubb, Ryan, and Emiliano Catan, 2019, The party structure of mutual funds, Working
    Paper, New York University

[15] Buechel, Berno, Lydia Mechtenberg, and Alexander F. Wagner, 2021, When do proxy
    advisors improve corporate decisions? Working Paper, University of Fribourg.

[16] Cai, Jie, Jacqueline L. Garner, and Ralph A. Walkling, 2009, Electing directors, Journal
    of Finance 64, 2389­2421.

[17] Center on Executive Compensation (CEC), 2011, A call for change in the proxy advisory
    industry status quo, White paper, January.

[18] Cespa, Giovanni, 2008, Information sales and insider trading with long-lived informa-
    tion, Journal of Finance 63, 639­672.

[19] Chan, Jimmy, Seher Gupta, Fei Li, and Yun Wang, 2019, Pivotal persuasion, Journal
    of Economic Theory 180, 178­202.

[20] Chang, Briana, and Martin Szydlowski, 2020, The market for conicted advice, Journal
    of Finance 75, 867­903.

[21] Corum, Adrian Aycan, Andrey Malenko, and Nadya Malenko, 2021, Corporate gov-
    ernance in the presence of active and passive delegated investment, Working Paper,
    University of Michigan.

[22] Cvijanovic, Dragana, Moqi Groen-Xu, and Konstantinos E. Zachariadis, 2020, Free-
    Riders and Underdogs: Participation in Corporate Voting, ECGI Working Paper No.
    649/2020.

[23] Ertimur, Yonca, Fabrizio Ferri, and David Oesch, 2013, Shareholder votes and proxy
    advisors: Evidence from say on pay, Journal of Accounting Research 51, 951­996.


                                             38
[24] Ertimur, Yonca, Fabrizio Ferri, and David Oesch, 2018, Understanding uncontested
    director elections, Management Science 64, 3400­3420.

[25] Feddersen, Timothy, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer, 1998, Convicting the innocent: The
    inferiority of unanimous jury verdicts under strategic voting, American Political Science
    Review 92, 23­35.

[26] Fich, Eliezer M., and Anil Shivdasani, 2006, Are busy boards e¤ective monitors? Journal
    of Finance 61, 689­724.

[27] Filali Adib, Fatima Zahra, 2020, Passive aggressive: How index funds vote on corporate
    governance proposals, Working paper, Copenhagen Business School.

[28] Fishman, Michael J., and Kathleen M. Hagerty, 1995, The incentive to sell ...nancial
    market information, Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 95­115.

[29] Frenkel, Sivan, 2015, Repeated interaction and rating ination: A model of double
    reputation, American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7, 250­280.

[30] Fulghieri, Paolo, Günter Strobl, and Han Xia, 2014, The economics of solicited and
    unsolicited credit ratings, The Review of Financial Studies 27, 484­518.

[31] Gantchev, Nickolay, and Mariassunta Giannetti, 2020, The costs and bene...ts of share-
    holder democracy: Gadies and low-cost activism, The Review of Financial Studies,
    forthcoming.

[32] Garcia, Diego, and Francesco Sangiorgi, 2011, Information sales and strategic trading,
    Review of Financial Studies 24, 3069­3104.

[33] Goldstein, Itay, and Chong Huang, 2016, Bayesian persuasion in coordination games,
    American Economic Review 106, 592­596.

[34] Goldstein, Itay, and Yaron Leitner, 2018, Stress tests and information disclosure, Journal
    of Economic Theory 177, 34­69.

[35] Gordon, J. N.: 2009, "Say on pay": Cautionary notes on the U.K. experience and the
    case for shareholder opt-in, Harv. J. on Legis. 46, 323.



                                              39
[36] Hayne, Christie, and Marshall Vance, 2019, Information intermediary or de facto stand-
    ard setter? Field evidence on the indirect and direct inuence of proxy advisors, Journal
    of Accounting Research 57, 969­1011.

[37] Iliev, Peter, Jonathan Kalodimos, and Michelle Lowry, 2021, Investors' attention to
    corporate governance, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

[38] Iliev, Peter, and Michelle Lowry, 2015, Are mutual funds active voters? Review of
    Financial Studies 28, 446­485.

[39] Inostroza, Nicolas, 2021, Persuading Multiple Audiences: An Information Design Ap-
    proach to Banking Regulation, Working Paper, University of Toronto.

[40] Inostroza, Nicolas, and Alessandro Pavan, 2020, Persuasion in global games with ap-
    plication to stress testing, Working paper, Northwestern University.

[41] Kamenica, Emir, and Matthew Gentzkow, 2011, Bayesian persuasion, American Eco-
    nomic Review 101, 2590­2615.

[42] Leitner, Yaron, and Basil Williams, 2020, Model secrecy and stress tests, Working paper,
    New York University.

[43] Leitner, Yaron, and Bilge Yilmaz, 2019, Regulating a model, Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 131, 251­268.

[44] Levit, Doron, and Nadya Malenko, 2011, Nonbinding voting for shareholder proposals,
    Journal of Finance 66, 1579­1614.

[45] Levit, Doron, and Anton Tsoy, 2020, A theory of one-size-...ts-all recommendations,
    American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.

[46] Lewellen, Jonathan, and Katharina Lewellen, 2021, Institutional investors and corporate
    governance: The incentives to be engaged, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

[47] Li, Tao, 2018, Outsourcing corporate governance: Conicts of interest within the proxy
    advisory industry, Management Science 64, 2951­2971.

[48] Ma, Shichao and Yan Xiong, 2021, Information bias in the proxy advisory market,
    Review of Corporate Finance Studies 10, 82­135.

                                             40
[49] Malenko, Andrey and Nadya Malenko, 2019, Proxy advisory ...rms: The economics of
    selling information to voters, Journal of Finance 74, 2441­2490.

[50] Malenko, Nadya, and Yao Shen, 2016, The role of proxy advisory ...rms: Evidence from
    a regression-discontinuity design, Review of Financial Studies 29, 3394­3427.

[51] Matsusaka, John G., and Chong Shu, 2021, A theory of proxy advice when investors
    have social goals. Working Paper, University of Southern California.

[52] Maug, Ernst, 1999, How e¤ective is proxy voting? Information aggregation and conict
    resolution in corporate voting contests, Working paper, Duke University.

[53] Maug, Ernst and Kristian Rydqvist, 2009, Do shareholders vote strategically? Voting
    behavior, proposals screening, and majority rules, Review of Finance 13, 47­79.

[54] McCahery, Joseph A., Zacharias Sautner, and Laura T. Starks, 2016, Behind the scenes:
    The corporate governance preferences of institutional investors, Journal of Finance 71,
    2905­2932.

[55] Orlov, Dmitry, Pavel Zryumov, and Andrzej Skrzypacz, 2020, The design of macro-
    prudential stress tests, Working paper, University of Rochester.

[56] Rayo, Luis, and Ilya Segal, 2010, Optimal information disclosure, Journal of Political
    Economy 118, 949­87.

[57] Sangiorgi, Francesco, and Chester S. Spatt, 2017, The economics of credit rating agen-
    cies, Foundations and Trends in Finance 12, 1­116.

[58] Spatt, Chester S., 2021, Proxy advisory ...rms, governance, market failure, and regula-
    tion, Review of Corporate Finance Studies 10, 136­157.

[59] Topkis, Donald M., 1978. Minimizing a Submodular Function on a Lattice, Operations
    Research 26, 305­321.




                                            41
Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Using
                                                                       N   1                                                                        N       1
                 Pr (P iv j = 1; q;                 s)   = CN 2 1 ((q + (1                         q ) ) (1        q ) (1                      ))       2       ;
                                                                       N   1                                                       N       1
                 Pr (P iv j = 0; q;                 s)   = CN 2 1 ((1                        q ) (1        (1          q )))           2       ;

plugging these expressions into (1), and simplifying, we obtain

                                                                                                                   N       1
                                                                       ((q + (1              q ) ) (1         ))       2
                                                                                                                                   s
   Pr ( = 1jq;     s ; P iv )      =                                                 N       1                                                     N        1                   :   (22)
                                           ((q + (1      q ) ) (1               ))       2
                                                                                                 s + ( (1              (1              q )))           2        (1         s)

   First, consider a candidate equilibrium in which each non-subscribing shareholder votes ai =
1. In this case,           = 1. Therefore, (22) implies that Pr ( = 1jq;                                                   s ; P iv )              = 0 if              s   < 1, and
Pr ( = 1jq;   s ; P iv )   = 1 if            s   = 1. Hence, this equilibrium exists if and only if                                                         s   = 1.
   Second, consider a candidate equilibrium in which each non-subscribing shareholder votes ai =
0. In this case,           = 0. Therefore, (22) implies that Pr ( = 1jq;                                                   s ; P iv )              = 1 if              s   > 0, and
Pr ( = 1jq;   s ; P iv )   = 0 if            s   = 0. Hence, this equilibrium exists if and only if                                                         s   = 0.
   Finally, consider a candidate equilibrium in which each non-subscribing shareholder votes ai = 1
with probability       2 (0; 1). For this to be optimal, he must be indi¤erent between ai = 1 and ai = 0.
This is the case if and only if Pr ( = 1jq;                            s ; P iv )    =1
                                                                                      2 . Equivalently,

                                                               N       1                                               N       1
                   ((q + (1                  q ) ) (1     ))       2
                                                                            s   = ( (1                (1   q )))           2       (1               s) :                            (23)

                                   2
                               N       1
Denoting zs        1
                       s
                                           , we can rewrite this equation as
                           s


                                                               2
                                       (zs       1) (1   q)            + (1 + (2q                1) zs )        zs q = 0:                                                           (24)

It has a unique positive root given by (2). Since the left-hand side of (24) is negative at                                                                                     = 0 and
q > 0 at   = 1, this root is between 0 and 1.


Proof of Proposition 2. Proven in the main text.


Proof of Proposition 3. We can rewrite the indi¤erence condition (23) as

                                Pr (P iv j = 1; q; )                       = Pr (P iv j = 0; q; ) (1                               ):




                                                                                42
Therefore,

              Pr (P iv jq; ) = Pr (P iv j = 1; q; ) + Pr (P iv j = 0; q; ) (1                                                                  )                       (25)
                                                      N        1                                                                                   N       1
                                       = 2 CN 2 1 ((q + (1                                   q ) (q; )) (1                  q ) (1     (q; )))         2       ;

where     (q; ) is the equilibrium probability that a non-subscribing shareholder votes "for," given
by (2). Plugging (2) from Proposition 1 into (25) and simplifying the expression, we get

                                                                0q                                                                             1 N2 1
                                                                                                2
                                         N    1    N       1      (z ( )                      1) +    4q 2 z (          )      q (1 + z ( ))
           Pr (P iv jq; ) = 2CN 2 1 q                  2        @                                                                              A                   ;
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                    (z ( )             1)

                             2
                         N       1
where z ( )      1                   . De...ne         ( jq ):

                                                                                                           N       1
                                                                                   ' (z ( ))                   2
                                                       ( jq )                                                           ;                                              (26)
                                                                                 (z ( ) 1)2

where                                                           q
                                             ' (z )              (z              1)2 + 4q 2 z              q (1 + z ) :                                                (27)

Then, Pr (P iv jq; ) is concave (convex) in                                     at some ( ; q ) if and only if                        ( jq ) is concave (convex)
in    at this ( ; q ). Taking the ...rst and second derivative of z ( ) and the ...rst four derivatives of
' (z ):

                                                  2 z( )
                      z0 ( ) =                               ;                                                                                                         (28)
                                             N 1 (1        )
                                                   2
                                               2 N 1 (1 2 )
                      z 00 ( ) =                                     z( );                                                                                             (29)
                                             N 1     2 (1      )2
                                                z 1 + 2q 2
                      '0 (z ) =              q                    q;                                                                                                   (30)
                                              (z 1)2 + 4q 2 z
                                                      4q 2 1                q2
                      '00 (z ) =                                                         3                                                                             (31)
                                                                   2                     2
                                              (z           1) +             4q 2 z
                                                  12q 2 1               q2           z        1 + 2q 2
                     '000 (z ) =                                                                5                                                                      (32)
                                                                             2                  2
                                                           (z           1) +         4q 2 z
                                                                                                       2
                                             60q 2 1                   q2        z       1 + 2q 2                       12q 2 1        q2
                     '0000 (z ) =                                                               7                                              5                       (33)
                                                                            2                   2                                2             2
                                                           (z          1) +          4q 2 z                            (z      1) +   4q 2 z


                                                                                         43
Di¤erentiating (26) twice,

 00                              0               N           1       '0 (z )                2                              1
      ( jq ) =                       ( jq )                                                           z0 ( ) +                                                                                               (34)
                                                     2               ' (z )            z        1
                                                                                        0
                                                 N               1        '0 (z )                         2                          2       N         1    '0 (z )               2                          1
                              + ( jq )                                                      +                     2        z0 ( )        +                                                        z 00 ( )   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 :
                                                         2                ' (z )                (z            1)                                  2         ' (z )            z           1

Using (28)-(29) and simplifying,
                                                 0                                                             2                                       1
           00 (                                                                        '0 (z ( ))       2
                 jq )          N      3
                                                                                       '(z ( ))      z( ) 1                                                      2                        2(N +1)
                               N      1     = @                                                                                                        A     N       1   (1           )    N 1
               ( jq )                                                         '00 (z ( ))'(z ( )) ('0 (z ( )))2
                                                         + N2 1                            '(z ( ))2
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                 + (z ( ) 1)2
                                                              '0 (z ( ))     2                                                      N +1
                                                 +2                                                                   (1       )    N 1
                                                              ' (z ( ))   z( ) 1
                                                              0
                                                             ' (z ( ))      2                                              2                                              2
                                                 +                                                                                   (1       2 ) (1                 )    N   :
                                                             ' (z ( ))   z( ) 1                                       N        1

                                                                                                                                                          1
       Consider the limit case of                                    ! 0. By symmetry of                                      ( jq ) around             = 2 , the case of                         ! 1 is
identical. When                           ! 0, lim       !0 z (           ) = 0, lim             !0 ' (z )             = 1 q , and lim                !0 '0 (z )         = (q         1) (2q + 1).
Therefore,
                                                                                                2N    4
                                                                              00 (    jq ) N         1             N +1
                                                                 lim                                          =         (1               2q ) :
                                                                     !0                ( jq )                      N 1
Hence,                00 (   jq ) > 0 for            close to 0 if and only if q < 1
                                                                                   2.
                                                                                    1                             0    1
       Next, consider the limit case of                                           ! 2 . Using                          2 jq    = 0 and the expressions (28)-(29), (34)
                  1
at         =      2   yields
                                                                                                                                !
      00    1
            2 jq                 32                  '00 (z ) ' (z ) ('0 (z ))2     2                                                        32              '0 (z )                  2
           1            =                  lim                        2         +                                                   +                 lim                                              4:
           2 jq
                             N        1 z !1                    ' (z )            (z 1)2                                                 N        1 z !1     ' (z )               z           1

Consider the second limit. Notice that ' (1) = '0 (1) = 0 and '00 (1) 6= 0. Applying l'
                                                                                      Hopital's rule
three times,

                                                 '0 (z )                      2                       '0 (z ) (z 1) 2' (z )
                                           lim                                              = lim
                                          z !1   ' (z )                   z       1           z !1           ' (z ) (z 1)
                                                                                                      ' (z ) (z 1) + '000 (z )
                                                                                                        0000
                                                                                            = lim
                                                                                              z !1 '000 (z ) (z       1) + 3'00 (z )
                                                                                               '000 (1)        1
                                                                                            =     00
                                                                                                         =       ;
                                                                                              3' (1)           2

where the last transition is from evaluating (31) and (32) at z = 1. Consider the ...rst limit. Using



                                                                                                     44
                                    2
            '0 (z )     2                        1
limz !1     '(z )     z 1               =        4   and applying l'
                                                                   Hopital'
                                                                          s rule four times,

                                                                          !                                                                              !
         '00 (z ) ' (z ) ('0 (z ))2     2                                                     '00 (z ) (z         1)2 + 6' (z ) 4'0 (z ) (z         1)        1
lim                        2        +                                         = lim
z !1                ' (z )            (z 1)2                                           z !1                         ' (z ) (z 1)2                             4
                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                              '000000 (z ) (z         1)2 + 4 (z    1) '00000 (z ) + 2'0000 (z )       1
                                                                              = lim
                                                                                       z !1    '0000 (z ) (z          1)2 + 8 (z    1) '000 (z ) + 12'00 (z )          4
                                                                                                                3(1 q 2 )(5q 2 1)
                                                                                       '0000 (1)     1                 8q 3            1   3q 2 1
                                                                              =                        =              1 q2
                                                                                                                                         =        ;
                                                                                       6'00 (1)      4              6 2q               4     8q 2

where the transition on the last line is from evaluating (31) and (33) at z = 1. Therefore,

                                                         00    1
                                                               2 jq               32    3q 2 1              16
                                                              1          =                                               4
                                                              2 jq
                                                                              N        1 8q 2           N         1
                                                                                       4    1 + q2
                                                                         =                              4 < 0:
                                                                                  N        1 q2

Hence, Pr (P iv jq; ) is strictly concave at                                      = 1
                                                                                    2 , and, by continuity of the second derivative, also
in the neighborhood of                           =1
                                                  2.


Proof of Proposition 4. The main argument is described in the text. Here we ...ll in the remaining
details. Notice that (10) depends on m only via t = q + (1                                                  q ) (q; m), and the dependence is of
                            N           1
                                                                                                     1
the form (t (1        t))           2       . Therefore, if feasible, the optimal m is such that t = 2 . Plugging in the
expression for        (q; m) from (2):
                                                                                                   q
                                                                         1 2q                        (z         1)2 + 4q 2 z      1
                            (1                  q ) (1         (q; m)) =   +                                                    =
                                                                         2                           2 (z 1)                      2
                                                                       ) z2 2 1                      2q 2 z + 1                2
                                                                                                                             4q = 0;                     (35)

                                2
                   m        N       1
where z           1 m                   . Eq. (35) is a quadratic equation, whose only positive root is z = 1                                            4q 2 .
                                            2
                         m              N       1
Equating it to          1 m                          implies that the optimal posterior is (13).
       In the example with the power distribution, H (x) = x , so

                                                                         f                                  1
                                                    q=1                                ) f = (1        q ) V (q; S ) :
                                                                      V (q; S )




                                                                                       45
                                                                                     1
Thus, the maximization problem for q is maxq q (1                               q ) , yielding

                                                        1
                                          1      q          q =0 )q =                                :
                                                                                               +1


Proof of Proposition 5. By contradiction, suppose there is an imperfectly informative research
report that is optimal. Then, there must be                       s   and q at which a shareholder'
                                                                                                  s willingness to pay
for the imperfectly informative research report is higher than for a fully revealing research report.
    Consider an arbitrary research report R. Divide the set of signals R into subsets

                                 R0             fr 2 R : Pr (a (r;              s)   = 0) = 1g ;
                                 R1             fr 2 R : Pr (a (r;              s)   = 1) = 1g ;
                                Rm              fr 2 R : Pr (a (r;              s)   = 1) 2 (0; 1)g :

Intuitively, R0 (R1 ) is the set of signals in the research report that induces all subscribers to vote
for "against" ("for"), and Rm is the set of signals in the research report that induces subscribers
to mix between voting "for" and "against." Let W (R;                              s; q)        denote the value of research report R
conditional on      s   and q . The value of the research report conditional on r 2 Rm is zero, since a
subscriber is indi¤erent between voting for and against in this case. Therefore,

                                      X                                                                                     1
                 W (R;    s; q) =             Pr (rj    s ) Pr (P iv jq; r;              s)    Pr ( = 0jr;        s)
                                                                                                                            2
                                      r2R0
                                          X                                                                                      1
                                      +          Pr (rj     s ) Pr (P iv jq; r;               s)    Pr ( = 1jr;        s)                 :
                                                                                                                                 2
                                          r2R1


Since for any r 2 R0 the voting strategy of subscribers is the same, Pr (P iv jq; r1 ;                                      s)   = Pr (P iv jq; r2 ;          s)
for any r1 ; r2 2 R0 . Similarly, Pr (P iv jq; r1 ;          s)   = Pr (P iv jq; r2 ;                s)   for any r1 ; r2 2 R1 . Therefore,

                                                                                                                                          1
        W (R;     s; q)   = Pr (P iv jq; r 2 R0 ;           s ) Pr (r      2 R0 j        s)        Pr ( = 0jr 2 R0 ;            s)
                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                              1
                              + Pr (P iv jq; r 2 R1 ;         s ) Pr (r      2 R1 j           s)     Pr ( = 1jr 2 R1 ;               s)               :
                                                                                                                                              2

First, notice that it is without loss of generality to combine all r 2 R0 into one signal, denoted
r = 0, and all r 2 R1 into the other signal, denoted r = 1. Second, notice that all else equal
W (R;    s; q)   is higher if Pr (r = 0j        s)   + Pr (r = 1j          s)   = 1, i.e, if set Rm is empty. Thus, we can
focus on binary signals.
                                                                                                                                                  N       1          N       1
    Denote p1       Pr ( = 1jr = 1;        s)   and p0 = Pr ( = 0jr = 0;                           s ).   Also, denote P (x) = CN 2 1 (x (1                    x))       2       .


                                                                      46
We have:

                                                                        1                                                           1
     W (R; s; q) = P ((1          q) ) Pr (r = 0j s) p0                      + P (q + (1      q ) ) Pr (r = 1j          s)   p1
                                                                        2                                                           2

Bayes' rule implies:

                                  p1 Pr (r = 1j     s)    + (1      p0 ) Pr (r = 0j    s)    =      s

                                                 Pr (r = 1j        s)   + Pr (r = 0j   s)    = 1;

or

                                                                             s   (1 p0 )
                                              Pr (r = 1j     s)    =
                                                                             p1 + p0 1
                                                                              p1    s
                                              Pr (r = 0j     s)    =
                                                                            p1 + p0 1

Hence,

                                          p1        s               1                                  s   (1 p0 )                  1
  W (R;       s; q)   = P ((1    q) )                       p0              + P (q + (1      q) )                            p1          :
                                        p1 + p0         1           2                                  p1 + p0 1                    2
                                                                                                                                        (36)
Next, we have the indi¤erence condition of non-subscribers:

           Pr (r = 1jq;    s ; P iv ) Pr (    = 1jr = 1;      s)   = Pr (r = 0jq;      s ; P iv ) Pr (          = 0jr = 0;   s) ;


where
                                                                    Pr(P ivi jr=1;q; s ) Pr(r=1j s )
                                                                    Pr(P ivi jr=0;q; s ) Pr(r=0j s )
                                Pr (r = 1jq;     s ; P iv ) =     Pr(P ivi jr=1;q; s ) Pr(r=1j s )
                                                                                                            :
                                                                  Pr(P ivi jr=0;q; s ) Pr(r=0j s ) +    1

Rewriting:

                  Pr (r = 1jq; s ; P iv )               Pr (P ivi jr = 1; q;     s ) Pr (r = 1j     s)           Pr ( = 0jr = 0;        s)
                                                =                                                        =
                  Pr (r = 0jq; s ; P iv )               Pr (P ivi jr = 0; q;     s ) Pr (r = 0j     s)           Pr ( = 1jr = 1;        s)
     Pr (P ivi jr = 1; q; s ) Pr (r = 1)                p0
                                                =          :
     Pr (P ivi jr = 0; q; s ) Pr (r = 0)                p1
                                     p0
Notice that for a given ratio        p1 ,    it is optimal to increase p0 and p1 as much as possible. Thus, either
p1 = 1 and p0          1, or p0 = 1 and p1          1.
      Consider the case of p0 = 1 and p1                      1. The case of p1 = 1 and p0                          1 is analogous by




                                                                   47
symmetry. Then, (36) simpli...es to

                                                                                      s        1                                                           1
             W (R;            s; q)       = P ((1        q) ) 1                                  + P (q + (1                q) )          s        1            :
                                                                                     p1        2                                                          2p1

Consider the indi¤erence condition of non-subscribers:

                                                                                     s
                                            P ((1       q) ) 1                             = P (q + (1                    q) )       s:
                                                                                 p1

Then,
                                                                                                                      3      1
                                            W (R;       s; q)    = P (q + (1                     q) )        s
                                                                                                                      2     2p1
Di¤erentiate with respect to p1 :

                                                            d                    3         1                                                        1
                             P 0 (q + (1           q) )                  s                         + P (q + (1                  q) )           s
                                                            dp1                  2        2p 1                                                     2p21

Note that                                                                                  q
                                                       zs (1         2q )            1+     (zs         1)2 + 4q 2 zs
                                                   =                                                                             ;
                                                                             2 (zs         1) (1        q)
                                  2
                   p1         N       1
where zs          p1
                        s
                                          . Hence,
                         s

                                                                                 q
                                                                     1            (zs            1)2 + 4q 2 zs             2q     1
                                          q + (1       q)        =     +                                                         > :
                                                                     2                          2 (zs       1)                    2

                                                                                                                                          1
Hence, since P (x) is inverted U-shaped with the maximum at x =                                                                           2,   P 0 (q + (1          q ) ) < 0.
Furthermore,
                                                            p1                                          2
                                                                 s                                      s
                                                   d                         =dp1 =                               2   < 0:
                                                       p1            s                           (p 1        s)
            d           d dzs
Therefore   dp1    =    dzs d s           < 0. Therefore,

                                                       d                     3        1                                                        1
                        P 0 (q + (1           q) )               s                               + P (q + (1               q) )           s        > 0:
                                                       dp1                   2       2p1                                                      2p21

Hence, p1 = 1 is optimal.


Proof of Proposition 6. Proven in the main text.


Proof of Proposition 7. We apply the Topkis'
                                           s theorem (Topkis, 1978) to (21). The cross-partial


                                                                                          48
derivative of the objective function (q  ~ (1 q ) in q and is h
                                        )h                    ~ 0 (1 q ) > 0. Therefore, function
(q    )h~ (1 q ) is submodular. Therefore, by Topkis's theorem, qe ( ) is increasing in . Hence,
both the ratio (17) and the di¤erence (18) of the frequency of recommendations against the prior
(relative to the probability that the state is di¤erent from the prior) increase.




                                                 49
