                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE DECLINE OF DRUDGERY AND THE PARADOX OF HARD WORK

                                       Brendan Epstein
                                       Miles S. Kimball

                                      Working Paper 29041
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29041


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




The authors are thankful, without implicating, for comments by seminar participants at the
University of Colorado at Boulder and the University of Michigan, for comments received during
visits to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Brown University, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond and McMaster University, and also for comments and suggestions by Martin Boileau,
Mike Elsby, Brian Jacob, Alessandro Peri, and Jeff Smith. All errors are the authors' own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Brendan Epstein and Miles S. Kimball. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Decline of Drudgery and the Paradox of Hard Work
Brendan Epstein and Miles S. Kimball
NBER Working Paper No. 29041
July 2021
JEL No. J22,J24,J28,J31,O4

                                        ABSTRACT

We develop a theory that focuses on the general equilibrium and long-run macroeconomic
consequences of trends in job utility--the process benefits and costs of work. Given secular
increases in job utility, work hours per population can remain approximately constant over time
even if the income effect of higher wages on labor supply exceeds the substitution effect. In
addition, secular improvements in job utility can be substantial relative to welfare gains from
ordinary technological progress. These two implications are connected by an equation flowing
from optimal hours choices: improvements in job utility that have a significant effect on labor
supply tend to have large welfare effects.


Brendan Epstein
University of Massachusetts, Lowell
Department of Economics
epsteinb@gmail.com

Miles S. Kimball
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
miles.kimball@colorado.edu
1         Introduction
In his 1930 essay, "Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren," Keynes predicted that a
large increase in leisure would take place over the following century, but at the aggregate
level robust signs of such a leisure boom have failed to materialize.1 As shown in Figure 1, for
a large set of OECD countries, from 1960 through 2019 aggregate (real) private consumption
per capita more than tripled, while (total) work hours per population have been relatively
at. Indeed, compared to 1960, in 2019 work hours in the US were a tad higher (thirteen
percent) while work hours in the other OECD countries in our sample were a tad lower
(...fteen percent). This means that in absolute value terms changes in work hours were only
about ...ve percent of the changes in consumption.




Figure 1: (Data are normalized at 1960.) Hours worked per population (H/P) and private real consumption
per capita (C/P)-- data are from the Conference Board'   s Total Economy Database and the OECD (VPVO-
                        2
BARSA consumption) -- for the US and (a large number of non-U.S.) OECD countries (simple average of
country-speci...c ratios over Australia, Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom).


        It is not unreasonable to think, as Keynes did, that the extent to which real consumption
has increased, along with long-run growth in real wages, should have led to a prominent
trend of declining work hours driven by the income e¤ect overtaking the substitution e¤ect.
Why are people still working so hard? And, what are the welfare implications of this paradox
    1
    As related to the US, see for example Neville and Ramey, 2009.
    2
    Conference      Board:          https://www.conference-board.org/data/economydatabase/        OECD:
https://stats.oecd.org/



                                                    1
of hard work ?3
       In principle there are ...ve alternative, but not mutually exclusive, explanations through
which the paradox of hard work can be explained theoretically. To frame these alternative
                                                                                             1
                                                                                      C1     s
explanations, consider the following simple utility function, u (C; H ) =             1     1    v (H ), where
                                                                                            s

C is real consumption, H is labor hours, s is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
                                                                                                       1
(EIS), v 0 > 0 and v 00 > 0. Household optimization implies W =                       uH =uC = C s v 0 (H ).
                                                                     (W H=Y ) 1   1
Rearranging and manipulating, this implies in turn that               (C=Y )
                                                                             C    s   = Hv 0 (H ) =        (H ),
          WH                                      C
where      Y
               is the labor share      H,   and   Y
                                                      is the consumption-to-output ratio         C:   It follows
               0            1                                                         1
that H =           H
                       C1   s   . Because   is monotonically increasing, so is            . Therefore, with an
                   C

approximately constant labor share and an approximately constant consumption-to-output
ratio (which are empirical regularities), s < 1, and increasing real consumption, H should
be decreasing. That is what Keynes predicted. Given the other assumptions, with s < 1
and C increasing, the only way to avoid decreasing labor hours H is to have have constant
increases in W N=C , which is not easy in general equilibrium.
       What are possible ways out of this box?

   1. Assuming the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) is large -- close to 1 or
         greater than 1. This is a possibility-- and the explanation most often resorted to (at
         least implicitly). But as we discuss later in this Introduction and the Appendix, on net,
         extensive empirical studies using various approaches and data suggest the contrary.

   2. An increasing ratio of e¤ective marginal wages to consumption. This could be the re-
         sult, for instance, of a reduction in the progressivity of the tax system, an intensi...cation
         of competition for promotions within ...rms, and increasing educational debts.4

   3. Anything that keeps the marginal utility of consumption high. This could be, for exam-
         ple, because of habit formation, "keeping up with the Joneses," and the introduction
   3
     A well known parallel strand of literature is motivated by cross-country di¤erences in hours worked per
population. This literature includes, among others, Prescott (2004), Alesina et al. (2005), Rogerson (2006,
2007, and 2009), Faggio and Nickell (2007), Ljungqvist and Sargent (2006), Ohanian et al. (2008), Shimer
(2009), McDaniel (2011), and Epstein et al. (2021). Prescott (2004) and Ohanian et al. (2008) argue that
in Europe a large fraction of the trend decline in work hours can be attributed to secular increases in labor
taxes.
   4
     For additional discussion, see, for instance, Kimball and Shapiro (2008).



                                                         2
         of new goods.5

   4. The income and substitution e¤ects are both basically equal to zero. This, of course, is
         consistent with very curved disutility of labor and, ultimately, with at work hours.
         However, in the literature there is wide disagreement about the relative size of income
         e¤ects.

   5. Anything that serves to keep the marginal disutility of work low. This includes some
         kinds of technological progress in household production, non-separability between con-
         sumption and leisure,6 and jobs getting more pleasant.

       Of these possible explanations for the paradox of hard work, in this paper we focus on
jobs becoming more pleasant-- one of the factors that can keep the disutility of work hours
down. Economists have long understood that cross-sectional di¤erences in job utility give
rise to compensating di¤erentials. We develop a theory that focuses on a less-studied topic:
the long-run macroeconomic consequences of trends in job utility.
       We propose an intertemporal framework for thinking about the causes and e¤ects of
secular increases in job utility, that is, of jobs getting nicer. Our framework is a natural,
but novel, extension of the static theory of compensating di¤erentials, which was spelled out
originally in the ...rst ten chapters of Book I of "The Wealth of Nations"(Smith, 1776) and
for which a standard modern reference is Rosen (1986).
       In our model, as is standard in macroeconomics, individuals obtain utility from consump-
tion and non-work time. Our additional assumption is that work also has process bene...ts
and process costs-- what we call "job utility."Job utility depends on work e¤ort and ameni-
ties in the workplace, as well as on the nature of the job itself. Our de...nition of these
variables is very broad, going beyond how they are usually understood.7 Moreover, ...rm-
side "job-enjoyment technology"a¤ects the mapping of e¤ort and amenities into overall job
utility.
   5
     See, for instance, Abel (1990), Fuhrer (2000), Luttmer (2005), Rayo and Becker (2007), and Struck
(2014). We view external habit formation as a version of "keeping up with the Joneses."
   6
     See, among others, King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988) and Basu and Kimball (2002).
   7
     In a narrower sense than our interpretation of amenities, a strand of literature shows that amenities
are important. See, for instance, Coulibaly (2006), Becker (2011), Sullivan and To (2014), Taber and Vejlin
(2016), Hall and Mueller (2018), and Sorkin (2018).


                                                    3
   Some of the questions that our framework provides answers to, with clear intertemporal
implications, are the following.

     How do e¤ort, amenities, job-enjoyment technology, and labor-augmenting technology
     interact?

     What are the key determinants of long-run labor supply in the light of job utility?

     How does job utility matter for ...rms'optimization problems and ...rms'ongoing ability
     to operate, attract workers, and establish job parameters given long-run changes in
     labor-augmenting technology and job-enjoyment technology?

     What are the long-run welfare e¤ects of changes in job utility?

   In turn, the answers to these questions lead to two contributions to the macro and labor
economics literatures. First, we show that secular improvements in job utility-- the decline
of drudgery -- can cause work hours to remain approximately constant over time even if
the income e¤ect of higher wages on labor supply exceeds the substitution e¤ect of higher
wages. Therefore, the paradox of hard work is not necessarily evidence that the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution is large, that preferences are strongly non-separable, or that
preferences have some other feature such as habit formation (though each of these might be
part of the explanation of the paradox). Second, we argue that secular improvements in job
utility can be substantial even in comparison to the welfare gains from ordinary (say, labor-
augmenting) technological progress. These two implications are connected by an equation:
improvements in job utility that have a signi...cant e¤ect on labor supply tend to have large
welfare e¤ects. It is worth noting that our theoretical analysis also yields many insights if,
for instance, the income e¤ect is less than the substitution e¤ect, so we make a substantial
theoretical contribution regardless of one'
                                          s speci...c views on parameter values.
   Empirical evidence on the income e¤ect on labor supply-- as measured by the (negative)
marginal propensity to earn (MPE)-- is subject to two key concerns. First, short-run frictions
such as the costs of negotiating with an employer for di¤erent hours can depress measures
of the absolute value of the marginal propensity to earn from short-run natural experiments
and arti...cial experiments. By contrast, our theory is focused on the long-run, de...ned as a

                                              4
period of time long enough that a worker is likely to have changed jobs in any case, giving
the worker a chance to reect any change in preference ranking of types of jobs in actual
job choice. Second, theory suggests that the income e¤ect as measured by the marginal
propensity to earn should become substantially larger as an individual approaches his or her
intended retirement age. As a result, estimates of the marginal propensity to earn should
depend to an important degree on the age of those for whom it is being measured. For a
more extensive discussion of the literature on the MPE up to 2008, we refer readers to Miles
Kimball and Matthew Shapiro (2008), "Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution
E¤ects Both Large or Both Small?" Subsection 6.2.3.8 Kimball and Shapiro (2008), using
hypothetical choices that arguably abstract from short-run frictions, and a sample of older
individuals, ...nd an MPE of        :37.
       Studies that use data on unconditional cash transfers (for example Jones and Marinescu,
2018) and lottery wins (for instance, Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote, 2001) often ...nd small
MPEs. But unconditional cash transfer results can be a¤ected by income e¤ects from the cash
transfers and macro labor-demand e¤ects having opposite signs. Moreover, research using
   8
     Here is the relevant subsection in full: "Evidence on the MPE from the literature is also disparate.
Pencavel cites estimates ranging from zero to -0.7, though he discounts the larger ones. Ashenfelter and
Heckman (1973) report a median estimate of -0.27, not too far from what we ...nd. These estimates are
typically based on the role of non-labor income in labor supply, which is typically hard to measure and
relatively small. Evidence from tax changes, especially the British studies discussed by Pencavel (1986) and
Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), show larger MPEs.
   In contrast, negative income tax experiments typically ...nd small MPEs. Given that income and substitu-
tion e¤ects go in the same direction in these experiments, this evidence points away from elastic behavior.
   There are a few studies that look at how wealth windfalls a¤ect labor supply. Joulfaian and Wilhelm
(1994) study the role of inheritances on consumption and labor supply. They ...nd that inheritances have
only a small e¤ect on consumption and an even smaller e¤ect on labor supply. There are reasons to believe,
however, that these estimates are attenuated relative to true utility function parameters. As they point out,
but cannot fully correct for, inheritances may be anticipated. Moreover, they are typically very small, so
small as to not overcome the frictions a¤ecting behavior discussed in the next section.
   In an important study that closely parallels our design, Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote (2001) survey state
lottery winners about their labor supply. This study has the important features that we advocate, i.e., an
experimental design with large shocks (for at least some of the respondents). They also take into account
the fundamental nonlinearity owing to quits by including a quadratic term. Their headline results seem
to suggest relatively low MPEs, but these include values of zero for the non-workers. Additionally, unlike
our structural estimates that take into account the di¤erences in the cost of quitting as a function of time
to retirement, it is hard to compare their results across ages. The raw MPE in the Imbens, Rubin, and
Sacerdote results for the 55 to 65 age group, which substantially overlaps the HRS sample, is -0.291 (=
-0.124-0.167, p. 791), which is only a little smaller than our comparable ...gure of -0.373. They ...nd smaller
MPEs for younger workers. Hence, the ...ndings from the hypothetical sweepstakes are quite similar to those
of the actually lottery winners. They also ...nd little di¤erence between men and women. As the discussion
in the previous section shows, these ranges of estimates imply high structural elasticities of labor supply."



                                                      5
lottery wins results often has a relatively small (and arguably unrepresentative) treatment
group.
      Recent studies that focus on social insurance programs and their associated labor supply
and program substitution e¤ects ...nd comparatively larger MPEs in absolute value terms.
For instance, Gelber et al. (2016, 2017) examine the 1977 Social Security Act amendments on
the employment decisions of older individuals. This policy resulted in marked changes in the
Social Security Old-Age and Survivors Insurance depending on date of birth. The authors
...nd an upper bound for the MPE of men equal to about              0:6 for and     0:9 for women.
In addition, Guipponi (2019) uses data on policy changes in the Italian survivor insurance
program, and ...nds an MPE close to          1. That is, survivors fully o¤set an implemented
reduction of surviving spousal bene...ts, doing so mainly through labor force participation.9
      Turning to the EIS, it is well known that this parameter is a critical parameter for
macroeconomic models, since it governs the extent to which consumption responds to changes
in the real interest rate. It is also well known that in order to explain the data, in general,
macroeconomic models require that the EIS be at least equal to 1. Given the fundamental
importance of the EIS for macroeconomic modeling, there is a vast literature that focuses
on estimating this parameter. A majority of results imply an EIS that is less than 1, and
many of these studies suggest that the EIS is very small or statistically insigni...cant. We
review representative research in the Appendix.
      At this point, though it is important to note that a recent meta-analysis by Havránek
(2015) ...nds that the mean estimate of the EIS across the literature is 0.5 and that a major-
ity of research on the EIS reports values less than 1. Moreover, he concludes that calibra-
tions with values of the EIS greater than 0.8 are inconsistent with the empirical evidence.
Havránek'
        s meta-analysis is based on a large number of published papers that provide esti-
mates of the EIS (in fact, 2,735 estimates of the EIS across 169 publications that use data
from 104 countries and di¤erent time periods). He studies the dependence of these reported
estimates on method choices and on "selective reporting."
      Havránek develops an analytical framework to get at these issues and applies it em-
  9
    Guipponi (2019) earned the Best Paper Award on Gender Economics 9th Edition, UniCredit Foundation
and the Young Economist Award from European Economic Association.



                                                 6
pirically to assess the EIS estimates from published papers that he studies. He assesses
selective reporting by exploiting the fact that the ratio of the point estimate of the EIS to
its standard error has a t-distribution, which implies that estimates should not be correlated
with their standard errors. However, in running regressions of EIS point estimates on these
standard errors Havránek ...nds a coe¢ cient of about 2 across many speci...cations. Havránek
argues that this ...nding is consistent with authors giving preference to reporting positive and
statistically signi...cant estimates of the EIS.
   Turning to the impact of method choices, for each estimate of the EIS in the literature
that Havránek assesses, he gathers information on methodological techniques, ranging from
the utility function used to characteristics of the data used for analysis and even publication
characteristics, such as journal impact factor. Then, Havránek assesses the impact of method
choices by regressing EIS estimates on these characteristics of methodology.
   All told, Havránek argues that his results reveal a considerable amount of "upward bias,"
which he argues is consistent with selective reporting: researchers prefer not to report results
that are small and insigni...cant. In addition, his results also suggest that selective reporting
bias is considerably stronger than bias owing to method choices. Finally, Havránek argues
that once selective reporting bias and biases owing to method choices are controlled for,
the implied EIS across published papers is statistically signi...cant and, on average, equal
to about 0.3 (over a third lower than the average point estimate in the literature, which
Havránek reports is equal to 0.5).
   This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 relates our work to the static theory of com-
pensating di¤erentials. Section 3 provides a general overview of our framework. Section
4 discusses the variables we focus on and how our formulation maps into the real world.
Sections 5 and 6 focus, respectively, on the optimization problems of individuals and ...rms.
Section 7 highlights certain implications from our theory. Section 8 deals with the economy'
                                                                                           s
general equilibrium. Section 9 addresses the welfare consequence of changes in job utility.
Section 10 concludes.




                                                   7
2     The Static Theory of Compensating Di¤erentials
The natural point of reference for our analysis is the theory of compensating di¤erentials,
spelled out originally in the ...rst ten chapters of Book I of "The Wealth of Nations"(Smith,
1776). A standard modern reference on compensating di¤erentials is Rosen (1986).


2.1     Worker and Firm Choices

The solid line in the left panel of Figure 2 is a wage/job-utility frontier: jobs o¤ering lower
job utility will, in principle, compensate by o¤ering higher real wages (in the ...gure W is
the real wage and J is job utility). Thus, all else equal, individuals face a trade-o¤ between
these two variables. Conditional on individual preferences, a particular worker optimizes by
choosing a feasible point on the (solid) frontier in the (W; J ) plane.
    The solid line in the right panel of Figure 2 is a job-utility/output frontier: in order to
improve job utility ...rms must divert part of their resources away from the production of
output (Y ). Given its idiosyncratic costs of job utility in terms of output, a particular ...rm
optimizes by choosing a feasible point on the (solid) frontier in the (Y; J ) plane.




Figure 2: Theory of compensating di¤erentials and beyond. Left panel: real wage (W ) / job utility (J )
frontier faced by workers. Right panel: job utility / output (Y ) frontier faced by ...rms.




                                                  8
2.2    Movements Along the Frontiers

Suppose higher output and higher real wages came from movements along the solid frontiers
(a to b in the left panel and c to d in the right panel). As argued in Kimball and Shapiro
(2008), income e¤ects on labor supply are substantial. So, the higher real wage implied by
moving from point a to point b would tend to reduce work hours. In addition, if work hours
are increasing in job utility, then the lower job utility implied by moving from point a to
point b also puts downward pressure on work hours.


2.3    Movements of the Frontiers

However, the frontiers themselves can shift (the dashed lines in Figure 2). As the economy'
                                                                                          s
choice set expands, optimal choices can entail moving to points such as a0 and c0 , in which case
job utility, output, and real wages all rise, and increases in job utility emerge as potentially
o¤setting to income e¤ects.
   The theory we develop in this paper focuses attention on understanding the dynamic
general equilibrium implications and endogenous foundations of such intertemporal changes
in the economy'
              s choice set. This understanding is complementary to the long-standing
static, partial equilibrium microeconomic framework of compensating di¤erentials.
   Although we focus in this paper on the decline of drudgery over time, it is worth noting
that cross-sectional di¤erences in job utility can be helpful in explaining why di¤erences are
as small as they are in working hours for workers at di¤erent wage levels, even if income e¤ects
exceed substitution e¤ects. Firms, in their e¤orts to provide workers a reservation utility
level at minimum cost, are likely to o¤er both higher wages and pleasant job attributes
to higher skill workers and both lower wages and unpleasant job attributes to lower skill
workers. When the pleasantness of a job tends to covary positively with a job'
                                                                             s wage, the
pleasantness of a job can help keep a worker willing to work longer hours despite an income
e¤ect that exceeds the substitution e¤ect of the higher wage.




                                               9
3     The Social Planner'
                        s Perspective
There are no distortions in our model; therefore, the planning version of the economy is
equivalent to a decentralized economy with perfect competition. Both perspectives are valu-
able. We begin with the social planning perspective.
    Consider individuals who obtain utility from consumption and non-work time. A stan-
dard assumption is that any time devoted to work subtracts from leisure time, with leisure
a good in the utility function. Our alternative assumption is that in addition to the e¤ect of
work on leisure time, work has process bene...ts and process costs-- what we call "job utility."
    The problem that an idealized social planner would face helps summarize our overall
framework. The social planner'
                             s problem involves choosing consumption, capital, work hours
devoted to particular jobs, e¤ort demands by a particular job (per hour of work), and
amenities provided by a particular job, in order to maximize a household'
                                                                        s lifetime utility
given ...rms'production structures and other standard constraints.


3.1    Baseline Assumptions

We consider a small open economy in which agents can freely borrow and lend at an ex-
ogenously determined real interest rate r (equal to , the rate at which all economic agents
discount the future). Capital is freely mobile across ...rms and borders. We assume that all
bene...ts and costs to ...rms and workers other than the utility from leisure and consumption
are proportional to work hours. These assumptions plus the assumption of full information
for all parties jointly guarantee that there will never be any disagreement between workers
and ...rms about job parameters other than the wage. Furthermore, given fully mobile cap-
ital and the exogenous world interest rate, one can focus on steady state analysis since the
absence of state variables implies that changes between steady states occur instantaneously.
The model is cast in continuous time (we omit time indices in order to avoid notational
clutter).




                                              10
3.2    Individuals and Firms

The economy is inhabited by i = 1,...,I ...rms, all of which are producers of the same ...nal
good and a continuum of individuals whose mass is normalized to one. Households each have
only one individual, so we will use the terms household and worker interchangeably.
    Utility depends on consumption, the division of time between work time and non-work
time, and job utility per hour of work. Job utility depends on e¤ort, amenities, and job-
enjoyment technology (we elaborate on all of these further below).
    Firms produce output using capital and e¤ective labor input (the product of hours, e¤ort
and labor-augmenting technology), and can vary in their real wage and job utility o¤erings.


3.3    Planning Problem

Table 1 below lays out our notation. In that notation, the planning problem is:
                                            Z
                                                    t
                                                                         P
                           max                  e       U (C; T     H;   i   Hi Ji (Ei ; Ai ;   i ))dt
                    C , Hi , Ei , Ai , Ki

                                 P                                       _                      P
                such that            i   Yi (Ki ; Zi Ei Hi ) +       =C +K             K+        i   Ai H i ,
                                                            P
                                                    and       i   Hi = H .

                     _ refers to its change over time.
For any variable X , X
                                       Table 1: Variables and Parameters
         Variable              Description                Parameter              Description
            C       Total consumption of ...nal output        Ji     Job utility function
           Hi       Work hours devoted to ith ...rm                  associated with the ith ...rm
           Ei       E¤ort demands of ith ...rm                 i     Job-enjoyment technology
           Ai       Amenities provision of ith ...rm                 of ith ...rm
           Ki       Capital use of ith ...rm                  Yi     Final output of ith ...rm
                    Discount rate                            Zi      Labor-augmenting technology
            t       Time                                             of ith ...rm
            U       Instantaneous utility                            Non-labor, non-interest income
            T       Time endowment                                   (including from foreign sources)
            H       Total work hours                                 Depreciation rate


4     From the Planning Problem to the Real World
Our objective is to deal with many real world features of jobs without adding too much
to the complexity of our model. So, we have a broad interpretation of consumption, work


                                                              11
hours, e¤ort, amenities, and job utility that allows each to address multiple dimensions of
the real world. For example, job-enjoyment technology is meant to capture both innovations
in the nature of work proper and innovations in the nature of the work environment.


4.1     Consumption and Work Hours

4.1.1   Consumption

Consumption, C , is meant to capture all the richness of how resources other than time a¤ect
life outside of working hours. For instance, a broad notion of consumption must take into
account fringe bene...ts.


4.1.2   Work Hours

Work hours, H , is meant to capture every way in which a person'
                                                               s job interferes with
the quantity and enjoyment of non-work time and home production. For example, if an
individual is unable to stop thinking about work issues while at home and this interferes
with other activities at home, then that can be considered an e¤ective reduction in leisure--
and hence an increase in H . Also, consider time spent away from home due to work-related
travel. Travel may boost the utility of non-work time if it provides pleasant and interesting
experiences. However, work-related travel can also hamper the enjoyment of non-work time
because of being away from friends and family. In either case, an adjustment to H may be
warranted.


4.2     Job Utility

4.2.1   E¤ort

E¤ort, E , is meant to capture all aspects of a job that generate proportionate changes
in e¤ective productive input from labor. E¤ort has many dimensions. For example, the
intensity of a worker'
                     s concentration on a task while at his or her work station, the amount
of time spent at the water cooler or in other forms of on-the-job leisure, own time spent
cleaning and beautifying the work place, time spent in o¢ ce parties or morale building


                                             12
exercises during work hours, and amount of time spent pursuing worker interests that have
some productivity to the ...rm but would not be the boss'
                                                        s ...rst priority, are all positive or
negative dimensions of e¤ort.


4.2.2     Amenities

Amenities, A, are job characteristics whose cost to the ...rm is in terms of goods. The
real-world characterization of amenities is just as rich as the characterization of e¤ort. For
instance, amenities include the number of parking spots, the quality of air conditioning, and
the quality and capacity relative to number of employees of the o¢ ce gym.


4.2.3     Job-Enjoyment Technology

Job-enjoyment technology a¤ects the mapping of e¤ort and amenities into overall job util-
ity. Therefore, changes in job-enjoyment technology can be interpreted as capturing both
innovations in the nature of work proper and innovations related to the work environment.


Innovations in the Nature of Work Proper Innovations in the nature of work proper
come in many forms. For example,

        working in groups,

        establishing clear guidelines about what is expected from the worker,

        allowing workers to have greater discretion in the way projects are carried out,

        developing creative ways to give workers feedback on their performance (including
        constructive criticism techniques rather than, say, yelling at the worker about what he
        or she is doing wrong),

        improving the organizational structure of the ...rm in terms of who does what, how
        they do it and when they do it,

        allowing individuals greater exibility in determining the time during which work is
        carried out.

all count historically as innovations in the nature of work proper.

                                               13
Innovations in the Nature of the External Work Environment Innovations related
to the external work environment come in many forms as well. In particular, think of

        the advent of air conditioning,

        the provision of on-site childcare, exercise, and laundry facilities,

        the institution of measures to reduce the incidence of sexual harassment.

    There is also one set of innovations that have had an important e¤ect on both the nature
of work proper and on the work environment:

        the distribution, design, and allocation of physical work space (such as cubicalization
        or open o¢ ce environments).


4.2.4     Interpretation of the Job Utility Function

The job utility function Ji itself is the optimum over many possible ways of doing things.
For example, consider two production techniques, as shown in Figure 3 in (E; J ) space.
Production technique 1, yielding Ji1 , results in relatively higher job utility at lower levels of
e¤ort, while production technique 2, yielding Ji2 , results in relatively higher job utility at
higher levels of e¤ort. Then, Ji itself is the upper envelope (bold) of these two techniques.
The analytical framework that we develop is robust to such non-concavities in job-utility
functions.




Figure 3: The job-utility function, Ji , as the upper envelope of the two di¤erent production techniques Ji1
and Ji2 .

                                                    14
4.2.5    Reducing the Number of Dimensions for the Arguments of Job Utility

The function Ji = Ji (Ei ; Ai ;      i)   maps Ei , Ai , and         i   into the hourly utility associated with
being at work. Ei is a vector describing aspects of e¤ort-- all dimensions of what the average
hour of work is like that a¤ect productivity (including the fraction of time spent in each
di¤erent activity at work). Ai is a vector of aspects of amenities.                     i   is job-utility technology
as above. Ei and Ai are determined optimally by ...rms.
    The reduced form job utility function comes from maximizing over these vectors, subject
to keeping e¤ort-related productivity and the cost of amenities the same, that is,


                                 Ji (Ei ; Ai ;   i)   = max fJi (Ei ; Ai ;       i )g
                                                         Ei , Ai



                             such that Ei = Ei (Ei ) and Ai = pAi Ai ,

where pAi is a vector of real amenity prices. So, the number Ei -- hourly e¤ort per worker--
gives e¤ective productive input from an hour of labor before multiplication by labor-augmenting
technology, while the number Ai summarizes the expenditure on amenities per hour of work.10
    We allow for the possibility of Ji being either positive or negative and for the possibility
that job utility is increasing in e¤ort at relatively small levels of e¤ort.11 However, we assume
it must be decreasing in e¤ort at relatively high levels of e¤ort if only because physical and
mental exhaustion eventually push Ji toward                   1 (otherwise there would be no upper limit
to feasible Ei ). We also assume that @Ji =@Ai > 0 and @Ji =@                    i   > 0.
  10
     Thus, using a vertically integrated perspective, we treat the relative price of amenities as part of the
job-employment technology i . Think of production of ...rm i'  s k th ammenity as
                                                            k K
                                                  Ak
                                                   i =      i Yi ,

where k                       K
       i is technology and Yi is the amount of the ...rm's total output, Yi , devoted to producing the amenity.
Then, the ...rm's total expenditure on amenity k is (1= k     k
                                                         i )Ai = Yi
                                                                    K
                                                                      and we de...ne pk  Ai   (1= k
                                                                                                  i ). Thus, for
                                                          k
instance, an improvement in the amenity technology i decreases the relative price of the k th amenity.
Except when the real prices of amenities are visible in markets it might be impossible to distinguish between
an improvement in job-enjoyment technology and a fall in the price of an amenity.
  11
     We consider this to be the more intuitive case for many jobs, although our results are unaltered by
assuming that job utility is always decreasing in e¤ort.




                                                         15
5       The Household

5.1     Optimization

We now focus on the decentralized version of the representative worker'
                                                                      s optimization prob-
lem. We show that this problem can be broken into three optimization subproblems that
jointly answer the following question: Once job utility is accounted for, what are the key
determinants of labor supply?


5.1.1    Main Problem

We assume the household utility is additively separable between consumption C and all
the dimensions of labor (in the Appendix we show that our main messages are robust to
relaxing this assumption). Given ...nancial wealth M and job opportunities, the worker
chooses consumption C , total work hours H , and work hours devoted to each job Hi , to
maximize utility                    Z
                                            t
                                                                              P
                          max           e       [U (C ) +    (T       H) +        i   Hi Ji ]dt,
                         C; H; Hi

                                       _ = rM +                       P
                             such that M                          +    i   W i Hi          C,              (1)
                                        P
                                            i   Hi = H , and Hi             0.

   Overall   ow utility comes from consumption utility U , utility from o¤-the-job leisure ,
                                                                 P
and the job utility from each job multiplied by hours on that job i Hi Ji . Wi is the real wage
o¤ered by the ith job, which the worker takes as given. We assume that U 0 > 0, U 00 < 0,
 0              00
     > 0, and        < 0. The choice of job is represented simply as the choice of whether to
devote strictly positive work hours to any one job in particular.


5.1.2    Optimization Subproblems

The current-value Hamiltonian associated with the worker'
                                                        s problem is

                                          P
                 H = U (C ) + (T H ) + i Hi Ji
                            P         P                                           P
                   + b(H     i Hi ) +  i i Hi + (rM +                         +        i   W i Hi   C ).


                                                        16
This maximization problem can be broken down into three optimization subproblems:


                       max H = max fU (C )               C g + (rM + )
                                       C

                                + maxf (T        H ) + bH g
                                       H
                                      P                  P                             P
                                + maxf i      i Hi   +            Hi (Ji + Wi )    b           H i g.
                                    Hi                        i       | {z }               i
                                                                        =Bi


Above,       is the costate variable giving the marginal value of real wealth; the Euler equation
is _ =          r = 0. b is the multiplier on the overall time constraint.             i   is the multiplier on the
nonnegativity constraint for hours at each possible job.12 Finally, Bi denotes the marginal
hourly net job bene...ts associated with a job of type i. In the order we will discuss them, the
three optimization subproblems nested within the overall maximization of the current-value
Hamiltonian are: (1) the consumption decision; (2) job choice and the decision about work
hours for each job; and (3) the overall hours decision.
       In the additively separable case here we can normalize the accounting between Ji and
so that     0
                (T ) = 0.13 Given this normalization, Ji > 0 means that a worker would be willing
to spend at least some time on a job even if unpaid, should that be the only job available.
On the other hand, Ji < 0 means that a worker would never do such a job unless paid.


Choice of Consumption As shown in the left panel of Figure 4, the solution to the ...rst
optimization sub-problem, max fU (C )                C g, is to choose consumption to satisfy the ...rst
                                   C
order condition U 0 = .
  12
     The worker's problem would be dramatically di¤erent if it were possible to devote negative work hours
to unpleasant, badly paid jobs.
  13
     Consider U + ~ + H J
                        ~i with ~ 0 (T ) = , where is a constant. De...ne (X ) = ~ (X ) X and Ji = J ~i + .
Then, 0 (T ) = 0, and
                                                       P
                             U = U + ~ (T H ) + i Hi J        ~i   T
                                                       P                 P
                                 = U + (T H ) + i Hi Ji + (H                 Hi ).
                                                                   |     {z i }
                                                                              =0




                                                         17
Figure 4: Household solution to choice of consumption, C , and total work hours, H .


Choice of Jobs and Hours at Each Job Job choice involves surveying all possible job
types and choosing the job or jobs with the highest Bi . At an optimum B = max Bi .
                                                                                              i
It follows that if total work hours are spread across more than one job type each job with
positive hours for the individual must be o¤ering the same level of (hourly marginal net)
job bene...ts-- although they need not be o¤ering the same combination of real wage and job
utility. We elaborate on the fraction of time devoted to each job later.


Choice of Overall Work Hours Combining job choice with the choice of work hours at
each job, optimization requires Hi = 0 if Ji + Wi < b and Ji + Wi = b when Hi > 0.
This implies that b = B : the marginal bene...t of overall work hours is equal to the marginal
bene...t of hours at the job with the highest job bene...ts. Therefore, total work hours should
                          0
be chosen to satisfy          = B . In words, at the optimal level of work hours, the marginal
utility from o¤-the-job leisure is equal to the job bene...ts B of the most attractive job. The
right panel of Figure 4 shows the determination of the optimal choice of H . Note that the
                                    0
labor-hours supply function is          , and the equivalent to a market clearing price for work hours
is job bene...ts B . (We postpone discussion of the determination of the general equilibrium
value of B to Section 8.)




                                                     18
6     Firms
In the decentralized version of the optimization problem for ...rms, the ...rms are price takers
in the product market. Each ...rm'
                                 s production function takes as inputs capital and e¤ective
labor input (the product of hours, e¤ort, and labor-augmenting technology). The ...rm rents
capital at an exogenous rental rate (determined by the international real interest rate). The
hourly cost of labor is captured by the inclusive wage : the sum of the real wage and the
hourly cost of amenities. That is, writing Wi for the inclusive wage, Wi = Wi + Ai . As
such, in payment for their labor, workers receive the real wage Wi (which includes fringe
bene...ts), and as indirect payment-- through job utility-- amenities Ai . The solution to the
...rm'
     s cost minimization problem implies that its cost function can be stated as a function of
the rental rate of capital and the e¤ective wage: the ratio of the inclusive wage to e¤ective
labor productivity (the product of e¤ort and labor-augmenting technology). Minimization
of the e¤ective wage is the focus of the ...rm'
                                              s optimization subproblems.


6.1    Cost Minimization

Consider a representative ...rm providing a job with job-enjoyment technology       i.   The ...rm'
                                                                                                  s
production function is Yi = Ki (Zi Ei Hi )1        , where capital'
                                                                  s share is   2 (0; 1) and other
variables are as de...ned earlier. Let R denote the rental rate of capital, which is exogenous
to the ...rm. (There are no adjustment costs, so R = r + ).
    For any output level Yi a ...rm'
                                   s cost minimization problem involves choosing capital Ki ,
and total work hours Hi , to minimize total cost RKi + Wi Hi subject to Ki (Zi Ei Hi )1       = Yi .
    The solution to the ...rm'
                             s cost minimization problem is standard. The ...rm'
                                                                               s total cost
is a function of the desired level of output, Yi , the rental rate of capital, R, and the e¤ective
wage, ! i . The e¤ective wage ! i is equal to the inclusive wage per labor e¤ectiveness: ! i =
Wi = (Zi Ei ). Thus, the ...rm'
                              s cost function is


                           C (! i ; R; Yi ) = R ! 1
                                                  i     Yi =(   (1   )1   ).                    (2)




                                                   19
6.2     Optimization Subproblems for Firms

The rental rate of capital is exogenous, but the e¤ective wage is a function of the real wage,
e¤ort, and amenities, all of which are choice variables: How should the ...rm analyze its
decision? First, unless the ...rm is going to shut down, the ...rm must choose the e¤ective
wage so that the job bene...ts the ...rm o¤ers are at least as high as equilibrium job bene...ts.
Then, two nested subproblems follow. The ...rst subproblem involves the choice of amenities.
Given the optimal choice of amenities, the ...rm then faces a decision about the real wage
and e¤ort. The solution to both of these nested subproblems can be represented as tangency
conditions.


6.2.1   Central Subproblem: Minimizing the E¤ective Wage

Given equation (2), any ...rm continuing to operate should minimize its e¤ective wage subject
to the constraint on job bene...ts:


                                           min ! i = Wi = (Zi Ei )
                                       Wi , Ei



                        such that           (Wi    Ai ) + Ji (Ei ; Ai ;       i)         B,
                                       |                {z                     }
                                                          =B i

where we have substituted in Wi             Ai for Wi .
   In solving this optimization subproblem, ...rms take the marginal value of wealth , the
rental rate of capital R, and equilibrium job bene...ts B , as given. However, both the inclusive
real wage Wi and amenities Ai , are choice variables. For simplicity, let us assume here
additive separability in job utility between e¤ort and amenities:

                                                           E                       A
                       Ji (Ei ; Ai ;   i)   = Fi Ei ;      i     + G i Ai ;        i ; pA i   ,                        (3)

        E                                                                                 A
where   i   captures innovations in the nature of work proper and                         i   captures innovations in
                                                                             E       A                  A        A
the nature of the work environment. We will write                   i   =(   i ;     i ; pA i )   and   i   =(   i ; pAi ).




                                                     20
6.2.2    First Nested Subproblem: Choice of Amenities

By the de...nitions of the inclusive and e¤ective wages Wi =                         (Wi    Ai ) so Wi = (! i Zi Ei    Ai ).
Substituting this last equation into the ...rm'
                                              s problem of meeting the market level of B so
it can attract workers (which must bind at the optimal solution) it follows that

                                                    E                       A
                          ! i Zi Ei + Fi (Ei ;      i )   + Gi (Ai ;        i )        Ai = B .
                                      |                   {z                 }
                                                 =Ji (Ei ;Ai ;   i)



                                                                      A
This implies the nested subproblem: max G(Ai ;                        i )         Ai . Thus, the choice of amenities
                                               Ai
should satisfy the tangency condition @Gi =@A =                         . This optimality condition is shown
graphically in (A; G) space in the left panel of Figure 5.




Figure 5: Solution to a representative ...rm's optimization subproblems.

                                   A                             A
It is helpful to de...ne S     ;   i     max G(Ai ;              i )        Ai : the individual surplus received
                                          Ai
from the ...rm'
              s optimal choice of amenities. Note that S < 0 by the envelope theorem.
Thus, the lower the marginal value of wealth (intuitively, the richer a worker is), the greater
the surplus from amenities.




                                                          21
6.2.3   Second Nested Subproblem: Choice of E¤ort

Given the optimal choice of amenities, the ...rm'
                                                s problem of minimizing the e¤ective wage
reduces to a second nested subproblem:

                                                         Wi
                                         min ! i =
                                         Wi , Ei        Zi Ei

                                                         E                     A
                       such that ! i Zi Ei + F (Ei ;     i )   +S         ;    i       = B,    (4)
                                             |                 {z                  }
                                                        Ji (Ei ; ;   i)


where Ji is the net job utility function (net of the costs of amenity provision measured in
utils). Rearranging,
                                  B      Zi ! i Ei = Ji (Ei ; ;           i)                   (5)

and the objective is to ...nd a feasible value of Ji corresponding to the lowest ! i . In E; J
space equation (5) traces out all e¤ort and job-utility combinations that are consistent with
any given e¤ective wage: the ...rm'
                                  s isocost lines are shown as downward sloping lines in the
right panel of Figure 5. In that same panel the job utility function is shown as a concave
curve. The ...rm'
                s objective is to ...nd the tangency that yields an isocost line with the
intercept at B and minimum negative slope that touches the job utility curve.
   In other words, given B , the solution to the ...rm'
                                                      s optimization subproblem is implic-
itly captured by the isocost line that has the attest (algebraically greatest) feasible slope.
Feasibility is determined by the net job utility function, which captures all net job utility
and e¤ort combinations that a ...rm is able to o¤er. As seen in the right panel of Figure
5, ! 00          0
                                       s optimal e¤ective wage: it can do better than ! 00
     i > ! i > ! i and ! i is the ...rm'                                                i,

and although ! 0i is preferred to ! i , the former is not feasible given the ...rm'
                                                                                  s net job utility
function.


6.2.4   Why Increased E¤ort is Unpleasant at the Optimum

Despite the fact that job utility can be increasing in e¤ort for some part of the range, the
tangency condition shown in the right panel of Figure 5 implies that additional e¤ort will




                                                   22
be unpleasant at the optimum. Indeed, at the optimum:


             @ Ji =@Ei =    Zi ! i = @Ji =@Ei =) @Ji =@Ei Ei =         (Wi + Ai ) .


Then,     > 0 and Ei > 0 imply that for positive wages (and nonnegative amenities),
@Ji =@Ei < 0 at the optimal choice of e¤ort. That is, the optimal choice of e¤ort occurs
where job utility is decreasing in e¤ort. In other words, since e¤ort is productive it would
make no sense to limit e¤ort when additional e¤ort is also pleasant. E¤ort should be increased
until additional e¤ort is painful enough that it counterbalances the extra productivity.



7       Implications
We now address three important questions. First, how do long-run changes in work hours
depend on job utility? Second, assuming there is more than one viable employment opportu-
nity available (that is, assuming more than one ...rm is able to o¤er the highest job bene...ts),
how does the worker allocate work hours between jobs? Third, how do short-run changes in
work hours depend on job utility?


7.1     Long Run Labor Supply

Kimball and Shapiro (2008) argue that income e¤ects on labor supply are likely to be sub-
stantial. They then look at what that would imply for the Frisch (marginal value of wealth
held constant) labor supply elasticity if income and substitution e¤ects on labor supply can-
celed out. But, our framework allows for work hours to remain relatively constant even if
the income e¤ect dominates the substitution e¤ect. Consider the e¤ects when consumption
and real wages rise.
    Recall that B = Wi + Ji , and that work hours are increasing in B (as shown in the
right panel of Figure 4). If the income e¤ect dominates the substitution e¤ect, then Wi is
decreasing (Wi is growing, but     is declining with increases in consumption at a faster rate
than Wi increases). All else equal that makes B -- and therefore work hours-- decrease as
well.


                                               23
     But if job utility, Ji , is rising su¢ ciently, then the income e¤ect seen in the fall in                          can
be counterbalanced by the combination of the increase in Wi and the increase in Ji .
     There is another surprising implication. Even if                                Wi ! 0 because the income e¤ect
overwhelms the substitution e¤ect ( declines more quickly than Wi increases), work hours
will tend to some constant H > 0 as long as job utility Ji tends to some positive constant
           0
Ji >           (0) = 0. That is, even if people face quickly declining marginal utility for additional
consumption, a positive asymptote for work hours can exist if there are jobs people enjoy as
much as the marginal non-work activity they would otherwise ...ll out their days with.


7.2            Job Choices

If two jobs have both the same wages and the same job utility, the division of time between
them can only be pinned down by general equilibrium forces. But, when two jobs have the
same net job bene...ts but di¤erent combinations of wages and job utility, the endogenous
determination of              can lead to a determinate interior optimum based on worker optimization
alone. Suppose B1 = B2 with W1 > W2 but J1 < J2 . That is, job 1 is higher paid but job
2 is more pleasant. Let                  be the fraction of total work hours that the worker devotes to
working for ...rm 1. At an interior optimum for a worker


                                         B1 = W1 + J1 =                    2 W2   + J2 = B2 ,

               J2 J1
so     =       W1 W2
                     .Given     the labor-hours supply function, the optimal level of work hours satis...es
                  0   1
H=T                       (B ). Substituting into the worker'
                                                            s budget constraint implies that

                                              0   1
                              C= T                    (B )    ( W1 + (1              ) W2 ) + rM + ,


which after rearrangement yields

                                                  1          U0   1
                                                                      ( )     rM
                                     =                                      0 1
                                                                                           W2 .
                                         W1           W2          T            (B )

     It follows that for any given marginal value of wealth                                     and job bene...ts B , higher
exogenous wealth is associated with greater work hours being devoted to jobs with higher

                                                                      24
job utility and lower wages. Alternatively, at any given set of wages and equilibrium job
bene...ts, the higher               is the more work hours are devoted to the job with the higher wage.
         In the event that more than two jobs have the same net job bene...ts, any but the extremes
of this set of jobs-- the one with the highest wage and lowest job utility and the one with the
lowest wage and highest job utility-- is equivalent from the worker'
                                                                   s perspective to a convex
combination of time devoted to the extreme jobs. Therefore, the analysis for three or more
jobs is essentially the same as for two jobs. (Note that we are assuming for simplicity no
...xed costs of going to work. If there are tiny ...xed costs per job, the worker might slightly
prefer an in-between job and would never choose three jobs.)


7.3           Short Run Labor Supply

At any given level of job bene...ts B , having a more pleasant, lower-paying job will result in
a lower (Frisch) labor supply elasticity. To see this, rewrite B = Wi + Ji as (Wi (1                                  i )),

where          i       Ji = Wi is the fraction of the wage that is a compensating di¤erential for
a job being unpleasant. De...ne the elasticity of work hours with respect to B by                                       =
    0 (T     H)
H    00 (T    H)
                 .   Then d ln H =            d ln B . Holding everything constant except wages, d ln B =
                           14
d ln Wi = (1           i ).     So, with Ji and            held constant the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is

                                                d ln H    d ln H d ln Bi
                                        i   =           =                 =                           .               (6)
                                                d ln Wi   d ln Bi d ln Wi   (1                   i)


Thus, high job utility tends to make for a lower labor supply elasticity with respect to
temporary changes in the real wage and low job utility tends to make for a high labor supply
elasticity with respect to the real wage. The intuition is that if much of a wage is just making
up for it being an unpleasant job, a 1% higher wage makes net job bene...ts more than 1%
    14
         Alternatively, note that
                                                                    dBi   Wi dWi   dBi   Wi dWi
                         B = Wi + Ji ! dB = dWi !                       =        !     =
                                                                     Bi   Bi Wi    Bi    Bi Wi
                                                                                                      1
                                                Wi                                W i + Ji
                                ! d ln Bi =              d ln Wi ! d ln Bi =                               d ln Wi
                                                W i + Ji                          Wi
                                                              1
                                                      Ji                                     1
                                ! d ln Bi =     1+                d ln Wi ! d ln Bi =         Ji
                                                                                                          d ln Wi .
                                                     Wi                                 1+   Wi




                                                                    25
higher. On the other hand, if much of the attraction of a job is in its non-wage features, a
1% increase in the wage leads to less than a 1% increase in job bene...ts.
    The results about multiple jobs in Section 7.2 suggest that as economies become richer,
workers are likely to switch to jobs with higher job utility. Therefore, if                   as determined
by the curvature of     stays relatively constant as an economy gets richer, the volatility of
work hours will fall relative to the volatility of temporary changes in the real wage. Cross-
sectionally, according to the same logic, workers employed in jobs that they "hate" should
have a higher Frisch labor supply elasticity if the relevant curvature of                   is similar across
workers in these di¤erent jobs.



8     Equilibrium
The next question is: How are equilibrium job bene...ts and the marginal value of wealth
determined?


8.1     Job Bene...ts

Perfect competition in both product and capital rental markets equalizes across ...rms not
only prices but also the e¤ective wage ! i for all ...rms with positive output. From any ...rm'
                                                                                              s
point of view the ...rm-speci...c e¤ective wage, ! i , must equal the prevailing market value
of the e¤ective ! for the ...rm to have positive output. Perfect competition in the product
market implies that, in equilibrium, each ...rm'
                                               s marginal cost is equal to the price of ...nal
output-- which is normalized to 1. Given the cost function in equation (2), that means ...rms
with positive output must have


                                1 = R =(      (1     )1      1
                                                          ) !i          ,

                                                                            !1=(1   )
                                  W i + Ai                (1       )1
                    which implies          =                                            .
                                   Zi Ei                       R
                                  | {z   }   |                     {z               }
                                      =!  i
                                                                   =!

    Figure 6 extends the intuition from Figure 5 to this case in which, as far as a representative


                                               26
...rm is concerned, the slope of an isocost line          Zi ! is exogenously determined. Because
cost minimization must hold, optimality continues to require being at a point of tangency
between the net job utility function and an isocost line. Amenities Ai are determined as
earlier.
   Given the values of , Zi , and ! the ...rm faces, the left panel of Figure 6 shows optimal
e¤ort requirements, Ei , and net job utility, Ji . These determine the optimal real wage
Wi = !=Zi Ei        Ai , and job utility Ji .




Figure 6: Determination of total work hours under perfect competition.


The intersection of the ...rm'
                             s isocost line with the horizontal axis now determines equilibrium
job bene...ts B . Given this equilibrium level of B , the right panel of Figure 6 shows the
determination of total work hours, H . This logic can be expressed by the functions Ei =
Ei (! Zi ; ;   i)   and Bi = Bi (! Zi ; ;       i)   (where the appearance of   is only about the
amenities choice). Note that the ...rms that are able to o¤er the highest job bene...ts are the
...rms that implicitly set the economy'
                                      s equilibrium level of job bene...ts.


8.2        The Marginal Value of Wealth

8.2.1      The Labor Earnings Functions

Our small open economy general equilibrium framework has r = , so C is constant at
                    P
C = rM + + H i i Wi , where i is the fraction of total work hours that the individual
                    P                 P
devotes to ...rm i ( i i = 1). Let W = i i Wi denote the wage averaged across jobs. Given


                                                     27
the individual'
              s ...rst-order condition for consumption, a labor-earnings demand function
(LE D ) can be de...ned as follows:


                                    WH = U 0    1
                                                    ( )       rM               = LE D .                             (7)


Since Wi = Zi !Ei            Ai , a labor-earnings supply function (LE S ) can be de...ned thus:

                     P                                                 A
          WH =           i   Zi ! Ei (! Zi ;   i)        Ai    ;       i       Hi (B (! Zi ;     i ))   = LE S ,    (8)


where once again we have made use of the de...nition of the average wage and, also, we used
the fact that Hi is a function of B : Hi (B ( )) in LE S .


8.2.2    Graphing Labor-Earnings Demand and Labor-Earnings Supply

Labor-Earnings Demand U 0 ( ) is decreasing in C . Therefore, equation (7) implies a
negative relationship between            and labor-earnings demand as measured by WH . Thus, in
(WH; ) space the labor earnings demand function is downward sloping.


Labor Earnings Supply For labor earnings supply consider ...rst the case in which only
clones of ...rm i exist. Then, LE S is given by

                                                                           A
                WH = Zi ! Ei (! Zi ;                i)    Ai       ;       i     Hi (B (! Zi ;      i )) .



Showing that in (WH; ) space labor-earnings supply is downward sloping requires answering
the following three questions.
   (a) What does a change in              imply for amenities ? Suppose that the marginal value of
                     0
wealth    rises to       . Then, as shown in the left panel of Figure 7, amenities decrease. This
                                                                                               A
means that the surplus from amenities received by individuals, S                          ;    i    , declines, which--
as shown in the right panel of Figure 7-- induces a parallel downward shift in the net job
utility function in E; J space.




                                                          28
Figure 7: Derivation of labor earnings supply curve.


       (b) What does a change in             imply for the isocost lines ? The right panel of Figure 7
                          0
shows that higher             implies a steeper isocost line, which in turn leads to a decline in net job
utility and a rise in e¤ort. Also, although the change can seem ambiguous, job bene...ts rise
to B 0 , which leads to higher work hours.15 dB=d > 0 means that the H in WH goes up.
       (c) How do real wages factor in ? If all ...rms are identical W is trivially equal to Wi . The
analysis behind Figure 7 shows that the consequences of higher marginal value of wealth
include lower amenities, Ai , and higher e¤ort, Ei . ! is unchanged, and since Wi = Zi !Ei Ai


                                     dWi =d = Zi !dEi =d        dAi =d > 0.
  15
       Firms maximize net job bene...ts given the constraints they face. In particular,
                                       n                                           o
                           Bi = max        !Zi Ei + F Ei ; Ei   +   Ai ; A
                                                                         i      A i .
                                    Ei; Ai

The envelope theorem implies that when           changes

                                 dBi = (!Zi Ei   Ai ) d = (Wi   Ai ) d = Wi d > 0

whenever Wi > 0. Since this is true for all jobs, the maximum Bi over all i must also increase.
  The fact that dB=d > 0 highlights an interesting role for amenities. Consider a decline in the marginal
value of wealth. In the absence of amenities, in E; J space the job utility function would remain ...xed
while isocost curves became less steep and job bene...ts declined. Yet, once amenities are considered, a lower
marginal value of wealth shifts the net job utility function shifts up in E; J space. Because of the logic
of the envelope theorem job bene...ts must still decline, but not as much as they would in the absence of
amenities. Thus, endogenous provision of amenities blunts the e¤ect of lower . In other words, changes in
amenities serve as endogenous bu¤ers to income e¤ects on labor supply.


                                                           29
   Taken together, the answers to these three questions imply that labor earnings is increas-
ing in   so that LE S is upward sloping in (WH; ) space.


Determination of the Marginal Value of Wealth Figure 8 shows LE D and LE S , and
the determination of equilibrium           and labor earnings WH when all ...rms are identical.
   What about the determination of the marginal value of wealth and labor earnings when
...rms with a range of wage/e¤ort combinations are operational? For simplicity, consider the
case of two types of ...rms indexed by i = 1; 2, which, as noted in Section 7.2, can be thought
of as the relevant extremes.




Figure 8 (left panel): Equilibrium labor earnings and the marginal value of wealth using labor-earnings
supply and demand. Figure 9 (right panel): Labor earnings supply and demand with two ...rms.


   Suppose these two types of ...rms have job utility functions given by J1 = J1 and J2 = J2
as depicted in Figure 3. Then, what is relevant is the upper envelope of these job utility
                                                                            0
functions. For a su¢ ciently low marginal value of real wealth, say             , ...rm 1 is able to o¤er
the highest marginal net job bene...ts and type 2 ...rms do not operate. For a higher marginal
                              00       0
value of real wealth, say,         >       both type 1 and type 2 ...rms are able to o¤er the same
marginal net job bene...ts and workers allocate hours across ...rms according to the logic in
                                                                                              000       00
Section 7.2. Finally, for even higher marginal values of real wealth such as, say,                  >        --
type 2 ...rms are able to o¤er the highest marginal net job bene...ts, and type 1 ...rms are
unable to operate.
   Market equilibrium can be shown in the labor-earnings supply and demand diagram.


                                                    30
LE D is a simple extension of what we derived above. In particular, labor earnings demand
is described by
                               = U 0 (rM +    +(   1 W1   + (1         1 ) W2 ) H ) ,


where      1   is the fraction of total work hours devoted to ...rms of type 1.
      The appropriate version of labor-earnings supply, however, has a new wrinkle. For su¢ -
ciently low values of       only ...rms of type 1 operate and the associated real wages, marginal
net job bene...ts, and work hours are relatively low. Therefore, in terms of labor earnings
                                                                                                  00
supply, low values of       are associated with low labor earnings. At the critical value              noted
above both types of ...rms are operational. Figure 9 shows an equilibrium in which both types
of ...rms are operational. Wages, marginal net job bene...ts, and hours are higher than under
 0                                                               00
     -- and therefore so are labor earnings. However at               any level of labor earnings within a
certain range is on the labor earnings supply curve, implying a perfectly elastic portion of
the labor-earnings supply curve. In this region, an increase in non-labor income that shifts
LE D out leads to the allocation of more hours to the more pleasant job without changing .
Finally, for higher values of , only ...rms of type 2 are operational. This is associated with
higher wages, marginal net job bene...ts, and hours. Thus, in terms of labor earnings supply
high values of        are associated with high values of labor earnings.


8.3       Further Implications

Our framework allows us to address several additional questions. For instance: How does
a ...rm'
       s overall technology matter for its competitiveness? What are the e¤ects of changes
in labor-augmenting technology and job-enjoyment technology on labor earnings and the
marginal value of wealth? Which changes in technology are consistent with higher real
wages and trendless labor hours if the income e¤ect outweighs the substitution e¤ect?
      In the Appendix, we show the following. First, within our framework, di¤erences in
job-enjoyment technology between ...rms can counterbalance di¤erences in labor-augmenting
technology, and vice versa. In particular, a ...rm that falls behind in labor-augmenting
technological progress can keep up its ability to attract workers even with lower wages if its
job enjoyment technology advances su¢ ciently. Second, within our framework, each of (a) a


                                                   31
permanent increase in labor augmenting technology, (b) a permanent positive innovation in
the nature of work proper, or (c) a permanent positive innovation in the nature of the work
environment can lead simultaneously to higher (i) labor earnings, (ii) a lower marginal value
of real wealth, and (iii) trendless or nearly trendless work hours. In essence, then, anything
that "regular"technology can do, job enjoyment technology can do as well.16



9      Welfare
We argue above that an upward trend in job utility makes it possible for work hours to remain
approximately constant over time even if the income e¤ect of higher real wages on labor
supply exceeds the substitution e¤ect of higher real wages. The question that immediately
follows is: "What are the welfare e¤ects of such changes?" In this section, we elaborate on
the relationship between job utility and welfare, point to ways theoretical relationships can
be operationalized and give a numerical example for the potential welfare gains associated
with secular changes in job utility.


9.1      Measuring Welfare

Because transitions between steady states are instantaneous, changes in welfare induced by
changes in exogenous parameters are well assessed via comparative steady-state analysis. In
steady state, given r = , an individual'
                                       s problem is equivalent to the static optimization
problem
                                                                              P
                                    max U (C ) + (T                    H) +     i   H i Ji
                                 C , H , Hi 0
                                                            P                                P
                        such that C = rM +              +        i   Wi Hi , and H =         i   Hi .

Given the multipliers        and b, let

                                            P                           P                               P
L =       max         fU (C )+ (T    H )+       i   Hi Ji + b (H          i   Hi )+ (rM +           +   i   W i Hi   C )g.
       C , H , Hi 0

  16
    To the extent that higher job utility matters for competitiveness, it is even plausible that ...rms might set
what would otherwise be slightly above-optimal e¤ort requirements in order to induce workers themselves
to think of ways to increase job utility. This amounts to a low cost form of research and development in job
enjoyment technology.


                                                            32
Recall that the optimal choice of Hi yields two cases: Hi = 0 and Ji + Wi < b, or Hi > 0
and Ji + Wi = b. Therefore, b = B , where, B denotes the economy'
                                                                s level of equilibrium
marginal net job bene...ts.
   Using the envelope theorem,

                        1             1   P            P
                            dL =          i Hi dJi +   i   Hi dWi + d ( + rM ) .         (9)


Above, each of the three terms on the right-hand side highlights distinct ways in which the
economy'
       s opportunity set becomes larger. Changes in welfare from changes in job utility
are captured by the ...rst term; changes in welfare from changes in wages are reected in
the second term; and changes in welfare from changes in exogenous wealth appear in the
                          P
last term. The ...rst term i Hi dJi = can be interpreted as the portion of the change in the
maximized value of utility that answers the question: "How much would the worker have to
be paid per year in order to be willing to go back to working in yesterday'
                                                                          s conditions?"


9.2    Towards Pinning Down the Implied Increase in Welfare

To better understand the implications of the envelope theorem as laid out in equation (9),
note that the second term on the right-hand side of equation (9 is the change in wages for
narrowly de...ned job categories and satis...es

                              P                P               P
                               i   Hi dWi = d ( i Hi Wi )        i   Wi dHi .


Therefore, to gauge this component of welfare, we need to adjust the change in overall labor
earnings by subtracting not only extra earnings from people working longer hours overall,
but also extra earnings coming from people switching towards jobs that are more highly
paid and have lower job utility. If W is moving down, then the overall trend should involve
compositional shifts toward jobs with higher job utility and relatively lower pay than other
available jobs. This means that the increase in labor earnings will tend to understate the
true increase in welfare (leaving aside changes in overall hours, which obviously need to be
accounted for).


                                                  33
     To understand the remaining terms for the change in welfare, note that since B = Ji + Wi
implies
                                             dB = dJi + dWi + Wi d .                                                             (10)

                                        1                1                 1
                                            dJi =            dB                Wi d            dWi .

Pinning down dJi calls for looking at labor hours (to gauge dB ), consumption (to gauge
d = ), and hourly wages. Substituting this last equation into equation (9) and rearranging
yields
                                  dL            H      dB                       d        d ( + rM )
                                 P          =P                                          + P           .                          (11)
                                   i Hi W i   i Hi W i                                       i Hi W i

The last term on the right-hand side-- the value of extra non-labor income-- is easy to un-
derstand. Hence, we will focus on getting measures for the ...rst two terms on the right-hand
side of equation (11).
     De...ne   =       CUCC =UC . (That is, 1= is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution).
Then d =       =            dC=C . Moreover, as discussed earlier (recall equation (6), which was
derived for multiple jobs), for any i                i    = = (1                 i ),    where         i   is the Frisch elasticity of
labor supply,      i   is the fraction of the wage that is a compensating di¤erential, and                                          =
 0                     00
     (T   H ) = (H          (T   H )). Also, the de...nition of                     i   as the fraction of the wage that is a
                                                                       B
compensating di¤erential can be rewritten as                           W
                                                                           =1             i.   It follows that

                                                    ((1           i)   Wi )
     dB=B = (1= ) dH=H =) dB =                                                 dH=H =) dB= = (Wi = i ) dH=H .


Substituting the appropriate expressions into equation (11) and simplifying yields

                                  dL         (Wi = ) dH    dC d ( + rM )
                                 P          = P i        +   + P           .                                                     (12)
                                   i Hi W i     i Hi W i   C      i Hi W i


The intuition for equation (12) is that (in the additively separable case)                                           tells how many
times bigger the income e¤ect is than the substitution e¤ect. If hours are relatively constant
despite increasing wages, then there must be substantial increases in job utility to counteract
the income e¤ect associated with increases in consumption. On the other hand, if hours H
move in the direction indicated by the income e¤ect it gives less hint of improvements in job


                                                                  34
utility. (If   = 1, income and substitution e¤ects cancel, but increases in consumption still
have the usual e¤ect on welfare.)


9.3     Calibrating         from job choices

In addition to evidence from the e¤ects of interest rates on the path of consumption, in
principle evidence about     can be found from workers'job choices. Consider an individual
working two jobs satisfying J2 > J1 . Then, W1 + J1 = W2 + J2 , meaning that

                           J2       J1    d   dJ1         dJ2    dW1       dW2
                       =               =)   =                                  .
                           W2       W1         J1         J2      W1       W2

For any individual with dJ1         dJ2 = 0, for example, dJ1 ; dJ2 = 0,

                                1
                                    d =    (dW1    dW2 ) = (W1    W2 ) ,


and using d = =        dC=C it follows that


                            = [(dW1        dW2 ) = (W1   W2 )] = (dC=C ) .


That is, the elasticity with respect to consumption of a within-person compensating di¤er-
ential relative to its initial size is equal to . Crucially, this means that if    > 1, economic
growth will tend to make compensating di¤erentials larger as a fraction            of the relevant
wages. Thus, if income e¤ects exceed substitution e¤ects, we can look forward to a future in
which compensating di¤erentials become a more and more important aspect of labor mar-
kets. Conversely, if, in general, compensating di¤erential between pairs of (possibly therefore
unusual) jobs that are as nearly unchanging as possible are growing faster than the wages--
and therefore the consumption that can be supported by those jobs-- it provides important
evidence that     > 1, with all that implies.




                                                  35
9.4    Illustrating the Calculation of Welfare Gains

It is helpful to work with a numerical example. (The derivations below are also helpful
in doing other numerical examples.) Suppose that the long-run elasticity of intertemporal
substitution is 0.5, in which case      = 2. Using this value for              along with equation (12)
implies that for d   = 0, dM = 0, and dH = 0, PdL
                                                                 = 2 dC
                                                                     C
                                                                        and, therefore, a 1% increase
                                                          HW
                                                         i i i
in consumption would be associated with a welfare increase of 2%.
   A natural question that follows is what fraction of welfare gains are attributable to higher
job utility. To see this, continue to assume that d = dM = 0. Moreover, allow for dH 6= 0.
                             P
Dividing equation (9) by i Hi Wi and using equation (12) on can arrive at the following
expression:             P             P
                           Hi dJi      i Hi dWi   (Wi = ) dH    dC
                        Pi
                                    + P          = P i        +    .
                           i Hi W i     i Hi W i     i Hi W i   C
Using the identity
                            P                   P              P
                             i   d (Hi Wi ) =   i   Wi dHi +      i   Hi dWi                       (13)

to substitute out the second term in the left-hand side of the preceding equation we obtain,
after rearranging,
              P             P                            P
               i Hi dJi      i Wi dHi           dC        i d (Hi Wi )  (Wi = ) dH
              P             P          =                  P            + P i        .              (14)
                 i Hi W i     i Hi W i          C            i Hi W i      i Hi W i


On the left hand side of this equation the ...rst term indicates changes in job utility from
particular jobs becoming more pleasant, while the second term indicates the additions to job
utility coming from switching between jobs (since willingness to take lower wages indicates
higher job utility in the new jobs), both measured in relation to total labor income. For
convenience, the right-hand side of this equation can be thought of as having two terms:
the term in square brackets and the term with dH . Suppose that consumption and labor
income are increasing at the same rate. Then, the term in square brackets is                1 times this
rate of change. It follows that this term in brackets is the change in the marginal rate of
substitution between labor and consumption that one would expect if                 6= 1 and there were




                                                    36
no improvement in job utility. Indeed, in this case equation (14) becomes
                                                           P
                           (Wi = i ) dH
                            P
                                                 dC
                                                            Pi d (Hi Wi )
                                        =                                   :
                              i Hi W i           C              i Hi W i
                                             |              {z            }
                                                      =(    1)dC=C


That said, in the case in which labor hours are approximately trendless, meaning that dH =
0, then the term in square brackets indicates how great a change in job utility is needed to
explain the behavior of labor hours. In this case equation (14) becomes
                      P               P                              P
                      Pi Hi dJi       Pi Wi dHi            dC
                                                                      Pi d (Hi Wi )
                                                 =                                                       (15)
                         i Hi W i       i Hi W i           C               Hi W i
                                                      |               {z i          }
                                                                =(    1)dC=C


In words: given approximately trendless labor hours,                    1 times the rate of increase of
consumption and labor income must be accounted for by improvements in job utility. (The
welfare e¤ects of this change in job utility are measured in terms of consumption that would
yield the same amount of extra utility.)
   Coming full circle with our numerical example, we began this section of the paper noting
that with   = 2 along with d        = 0, dM = 0, and dH = 0, then PdL
                                                                                            = 2 dC
                                                                                                C
                                                                                                   and welfare
                                                                                i
                                                                                    Hi Wi
gains were 2 percent. Continuing to assume that the rate of increase of consumption and
labor income is the same, inspection of equation (15) implies that in this case improvements
in job utility account for half of the increase in total welfare (1 percentage point of the 2%).
   Here, we emphasize trends in how pleasant jobs are as an explanation for why labor hours
might be trendless even if income e¤ects are stronger than substitution e¤ects. Bringing other
explanations into the picture would change the calculations; but what is likely to remain true
in extensions of the model designed to allow for other possible explanation is the idea that
it is di¢ cult for a trend in the pleasantness of jobs to have a big e¤ect on the trend in labor
hours without also having a big e¤ect on the trend in welfare.




                                                 37
10     Conclusions
The paradox of hard work is this: for decades, work hours per population among adults
have remained roughly trendless, despite strong trends in consumption and real wages. In
principle, the paradox of hard work can be rationalized in several di¤erent ways. Of these
alternatives, we focus on the general equilibrium e¤ects of secular changes that make work
more pleasant. Economists have long understood that cross-sectional di¤erences in job utility
at a particular time give rise to compensating di¤erentials. In this paper, we develop a theory
that focuses on the less-studied long-run macroeconomic consequences of trends in job utility.
   Our theory allows for the interaction between work hours -- which stands in for all aspects
of the job that interfere with leisure and home production-- and e¤ort-- which stands in for
all aspects of a job whose cost is in terms of proportionate changes in e¤ective productive
input per labor hour. We also consider the role of amenities -- which we de...ne to be job
characteristics whose cost is in terms of goods-- and the role of secular increases in job
utility-- that is, secular declines in drudgery, which can stem from changes in standard
notions of technology, such as labor-augmenting technology, and also from changes in job-
enjoyment technology. General equilibrium can be analyzed through two curves we de...ne:
labor-earnings supply and labor-earnings demand.
   Two key implications emerge. First, secular improvements in job utility imply that
work hours can remain approximately constant over time even if the income e¤ect of higher
wages on labor supply exceeds the substitution e¤ect of higher wages. Second, secular
improvements in job utility can themselves be a substantial component of the welfare gains
from technological progress. These two implications are connected by an equation owing
from optimal hours choices: improvements in job utility that have a signi...cant e¤ect on
labor supply tend to have large welfare e¤ects.


References
 [1] Abel, Andrew B. 1990. "Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up With
       the Joneses." American Economic Review, 80(2): 38-42.
 [2] Alesina, Alberto F., Edward L. Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote. 2005. "Work and Leisure
        in the U.S. and Europe: Why So Di¤erent?" In NBER Macroeconomics Annual,


                                              38
       Volume 20, edited by Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogo¤. MIT Press.
 [3] Ashenfelter, Orley, and Mark W. Plant. 1990. "Nonparametric Estimates of the Labor-
        Supply E¤ects of Negative Income Tax Programs." Journal of Labor Economics,
        8(1): 396­ 415.
 [4] Atkeson, Andrew, and Masao Ogaki. 1996. "Wealth-varying Intertemporal Elasticities
        of Substitution: Evidence from Panel and Aggregate Data." Journal of Monetary
        Economics 38, no. 3: 507-534.
 [5] Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber. 1993. "Consumption Growth, the Interest
        Rate, and Aggregation." The Review of Economic Studies 60, no. 3: 631-649.
 [6] Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber. 1995. "Is Consumption Growth Consis-
        tent with Intertemporal Optimization?" Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure
        Survey." Journal of Political Economy, 103(6): 1121-1157.
 [7] Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
        "Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach
        in the Health and Retirement Study." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no.
        2: 537-579.
 [8] Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball. 2002. "Long-Run Labor Supply and the Elasticity
        of Intertemporal Substitution for Consumption." Boston College and University of
        Michigan. Mimeo.
 [9] Beaudry, Paul, and Eric Van Wincoop. 1996. "The Intertemporal Elasticity of Substi-
        tution: An Exploration Using a US Panel of State Data." Economica : 495-512.
[10] Becker, Dan. 2011. "Non-wage Job Characteristics and the Case of the Missing Margin."
        Available at SSRN 1805761.
[11] Best, Michael Carlos, James Cloyne, Ethan Ilzetzki, and Henrik Kleven. 2018. "Esti-
        mating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution Using Mortgage Notches." No.
        w24948. National Bureau of Economic Research.
[12] Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1989. "Consumption, Income, and Interest
       Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence." NBER Macroeconomics Annual
       4: 185-216.
[13] Cashin, David, and Takashi Unayama. 2016. "Measuring intertemporal substitution in
        consumption: Evidence from a VAT increase in Japan." The Review of Economics
        and Statistics 98(2): 285-297.
[14] Coulibaly, Brahima. 2006. "Changes in Job Quality and Trends in Labor Hours." In-
        ternational Finance Discussion Papers 882. Washington: Board of Governors of the
        Federal Reserve System.
[15] Deshpande, Manasi, 2016. "Does welfare inhibit success? The long-term e¤ects of re-
        moving low-income youth from the disability rolls." American Economic Review,
        106(11): pp.3300-3330.
[16] Engelhardt, Gary V., and Anil Kumar. 2009. "The Elasticity of Intertemporal Substi-
        tution: New Evidence from 40(k) Participation." Economics Letters, 103(1): 15-17.

                                           39
[17] Epstein, Brendan, Alan Finkelstein Shapiro, Rahul Mukherjee, and Shanthi P. Ram-
        nath. 2021. "What Drives Trends in Employment and Hours Worked per Worker?
        A Cross Country Analysis."Mimeo.
[18] Faggio, Giulia and Stephen Nickell. 2007. "Patterns of Work Across the OECD." The
        Economic Journal, 117 (521): F416-F440.
[19] Francis, Neville and Valerie Ramey. 2009. "A Century of Work and Leisure." American
        Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1 (2): 189-224.
[20] Fuhrer, Je¤rey C. 2000. "Habit Formation in Consumption and its Implications for
        Monetary Policy Models." American Economic Review, 90 (3): 367-390.
[21] Gelber, Alexander M., Adam Isen, and Jae Song. 2016. "The e¤ect of pension income
        on elderly earnings: Evidence from social security and full population data." NBER
        Working Paper.
[22] Gelber, Alexander, Adam Isen, and Jae Song. 2017. "The role of social security bene-
        ...ts in the initial increase of older women'
                                                    s employment: Evidence from the social
        security notch."In Women Working Longer: Increased Employment at Older Ages,
        pp. 239-268. University of Chicago Press.
[23] Giupponi, G., 2019. "When income e¤ects are large: labor supply responses and the
        value of welfare transfers." Bocconi University mimeo.
[24] Gruber, Jonathan. 2013. "A tax-based estimate of the elasticity of intertemporal sub-
        stitution." The Quarterly Journal of Finance 3, no. 01: 1350001.
[25] Hahm, J.H., 1998. "Consumption Adjustment to Real Interest Rates: Intertemporal
       Substitution Revisited." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 22(2), pp.293-
       320.
[26] Hall, Robert E. 1988. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption."Journal of Political
        Economy, 96: 339-357.
[27] Hall, Robert E., and Andreas I. Mueller. 2018. "Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior:
        The Importance of Nonwage Job Values." Journal of Political Economy 126, no. 4:
        1594-1637.
[28] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1983. "Stochastic consumption, risk
       aversion, and the temporal behavior of asset returns." Journal of Political Economy
       91, no. 2: 249-265.
[29] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1996. "E¢ cient Estimation of Linear
       Asset-Pricing Models with Moving Average Errors." Journal of Business & Eco-
       nomic Statistics 14, no. 1: 53-68.
[30] Havránek, Tomás  . 2015. "Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The Importance of
        Method Choices and Selective Reporting." Journal of the European Economic As-
        sociation 13(6): 1180-1204.
[31] Hum, Derek, and Wayne Simpson. 1993. "Economic Response to a Guaranteed An-
       nual Income: Experience from Canada and the United States." Journal of Labor
       Economics, 11(1): 263­296.

                                            40
[32] Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote. 2001. "Estimating the
        E¤ect of Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence
        from a Survey of Lottery Players." American Economic Review, 91(4): 778­794.
[33] Jones, Damon, and Ioana Marinescu. 2018. "The Labor Market Impacts of Universal
        and Permanent Cash Transfers: Evidence from the Alaska Permanent Fund."NBER
        Working Paper 24312.
[34] Keynes, John Maynard. 1930. "Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren."Printed
        in Vol. IX of The Collected Writings of JM Keynes, 1973. London: Macmillan for
        The Royal Economic Society.
[35] Kimball, Miles S., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2008. "Labor Supply: Are the Income
        E¤ects Both Large or Both Small?"NBER Working Paper No. 14208.
[36] Kimball, Miles S., Matthew D. Shapiro, and Claudia Sahm. 2019. "Measuring the In-
        tertemporal Elasticity of Substitution with Internet Surveys."Mimeo.
[37] King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio R. Rebelo. 1988. "Production, Growth
        and Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model." Journal of Monetary Eco-
        nomics 21: 195-232.
[38] Lawrance, Emily C. 1991. "Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from
        Panel Data." Journal of Political Economy 99, no. 1: 54-77.
[39] Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent. 2006. "Do Taxes Explain European Em-
        ployment? Indivisible Labor, Human Capital, Lotteries, and Personal Savings."
        In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 21, edited by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogo¤,
        and M. Woodford, 181-246. The MIT Press.
[40] Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2005. "Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being."
        The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (3): 963-1002.
[41] McDaniel, Cara. 2011. "Forces Shaping Hours Worked in the OECD, 1960-2004."Amer-
       ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3 (4): 27-52.
[42] Mulligan, Casey B. 2002. "Capital, interest, and aggregate intertemporal substitution."
       No. w9373. National Bureau of Economic Research.
[43] Ogaki, Masao, and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1998. "Measuring intertemporal substitution:
       The role of durable goods." Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 5: 1078-1098.
[44] Ohanian, Lee, Andrea Ra¤o and Richard Rogerson. 2008. "Long-Term Changes in La-
       bor Supply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004." Journal of
       Monetary Economics, 55 (8): 1353-1362.
[45] Okubo, Masakatsu. 2008. "Intertemporal substitution and nonhomothetic preferences."
       Economics Letters 98, no. 1: 41-47.
[46] Patterson, Kerry D. and Bahram Pesaran. 1992. "The Intertemporal Elasticity of Substi-
        tution in Consumption in the United States and the United Kingdom." The Review
        of Economics and Statistics, 74 (4): 573-584.
[47] Prescott, Edward C. 2004. "Why do Americans Work so Much More than Europeans?"
        NBER Working Paper No. 10316.

                                            41
[48] Rayo, Luis, and Gary S. Becker. 2007. "Habits, Peers, and Happiness: An Evolutionary
        Perspective." American Economic Review, 97 (2): 487-491.
[49] Rogerson, Richard. 1988. "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium." Journal of
        Monetary Economics, 21 (1): 3-16.
[50] Rogerson, Richard. 2006. "Understanding Di¤erences in Hours Worked."Review of Eco-
        nomic Dynamics, 9 (3): 365-409.
[51] Rogerson, Richard. 2007. "Taxation and Market Work: Is Scandinavia an outlier?"
        Economic Theory, 32 (1): 59-85.
[52] Rogerson, Richard. 2009. "Market Work, Home Work and Taxes: A Cross-Country
        Analysis." Review of International Economics, 17 (3): 588-601.
[53] Rosen, Sherwin. "The Theory of Equalizing Di¤erences."1986. Handbook of Labor Eco-
        nomics, 1: 641-692.
[54] Shea, John. 1995. "Union contracts and the life-cycle/permanent-income hypothesis."
        American Economic Review : 186-200.
[55] Shimer, Robert. 2009. "Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge."American
        Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 1 (1): 280-297.
[56] Skinner, Jonathan. 1985. "Variable lifespan and the intertemporal elasticity of consump-
        tion." The Review of Economics and Statistics : 616-623.
[57] Smith, Adam. 1776. "An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of The Wealth of Nations."
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976. Edwin Cannan, Ed.
[58] Sorkin, Isaac. 2018. "Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference."The Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 133(3), pp.1331-1393.
[59] Struck, Clemens C. 2014. "Habit persistence and the long-run labor supply." Economics
        Letters 124, no. 2: 243-247.
[60] Sullivan, Paul, and Ted To. 2014. "Search and Nonwage Job Characteristics." Journal
        of Human Resources 49, no. 2: 472-507.
[61] Summers, Lawrence H. 1982. "Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and Savings." NBER
       Working Paper No. 995.
[62] Taber, Christopher, and Rune Vejlin. 2016. "Estimation of a Roy/Search Compensating
        Di¤erential Model of the Labor Market. No. w22439. National Bureau of Economic
        Research.
[63] Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette. 2002. "Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elastic-
        ity of Intertemporal Substitution" Journal of Political Economy, 110 (4): 825-853.
[64] Yogo, Motohiro. 2004. "Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution When
        Instruments are Weak." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86 (3): 797-810.
[65] Zeldes, Stephen P. 1989. "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical In-
        vestigation." Journal of Political Economy 97, no. 2: 305-346.




                                             42
                                       Appendix

A      The Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution
A series of studies makes use of aggregate data and suggest that the EIS is quite small.
Most prominently, Hall (1988) estimates the EIS using econometric speci...cations based on
a representative agent consumption Euler equation. His study uses data on consumption of
nondurable goods (excluding services) and standard measures of the nominal interest rate--
data on stock prices and Treasury bills. Hall'
                                             s EIS estimates are not statistically signi...cant
and imply that the EIS is not above 0.2. Of note, Hall argues that in light of his analysis,
previous studies that ...nd values of the EIS close to 1, such as Hansen and Singleton (1983)
and Summers (1982), do so in part because of the particular time period over which their
data spans and also because they use instruments that are correlated with the innovation in
their measures of real returns.
    More recent work emphasizes the extent to which estimation methodology and assump-
tions on the utility function can impact estimates of the EIS. On net, these studies also
report values of the EIS that are fairly small. Related to estimation methodology, Hansen
and Singleton (1996) revisit the framework in Hall (1988) using a proposed e¢ cient gen-
eralized methods of moments estimator that is scale invariant and asymptotically e¢ cient.
Using this estimator, they ...nd that the EIS can be signi...cantly di¤erent than zero, as large
as 0.6, but as small as 0.08. That said, in general, they do not ...nd much evidence against
the null that the EIS is zero.
    Regarding the role of utility speci...cations, Basu and Kimball (2002) use King-Plosser-
Rebelo preferences as their benchmark utility speci...cation and various econometric tech-
niques. They ...nd, on net, a statistically signi...cant value of the EIS equal to about 0.5. Of
note, Basu and Kimball argue that including data on labor is important, since it improves
the empirical performance of the permanent income hypothesis substantially and, therefore,
considerably weakens arguments against this hypothesis proposed by studies such as Camp-
bell and Mankiw (1989). Also, Okubo (2008) studies the extent to which the assumption of
homotheticity can bias estimates of the EIS and ...nds that homotheticity is strongly rejected.


                                              43
Okubo argues that given nonhomotheticity the EIS is about 0.2 and statistically signi...cant.
   As generally related to both estimation methodology and utility speci...cations, Atkenson
and Ogaki (1996) develop and estimate a model with preference heterogeneity: low-income
consumers can have a lower EIS compared to high-income consumers. Using Indian panel
data on food consumption they report a mean low-income EIS equal to 0.5 and a mean
high-income EIS equal to 0.8. In turn, using aggregate Indian data they ...nd a mean EIS
equal 0.3, and applying their model to the US, also using aggregate data, they ...nd a mean
EIS equal to 0.4. Ogaki and Reinhart (1998) propose a two-step estimation process in which
the ...rst step is a cointegration regression that estimates the utility function, and the second
step is generalized method of moments applied to the Euler equation. They ...nd an EIS that
is statistically signi...cant and equal to about 0.4. Moreover, Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) ...nds
that the EIS is statistically signi...cant and between 0.3-0.4 for stock-holding households, and
statistically signi...cant and between 0.8-1 for bond-holding households. She also ...nds that
the EIS is larger for households with larger asset holdings.
   Other studies emphasize how the type of data used a¤ects estimates of the EIS. EIS
estimates from these studies range from being quite small to considerably large. As an
example of this research ...nding EIS values on the smaller side, Barsky et al. (1997) use
survey data in which individuals respond to hypothetical situations and they ...nd a signi...cant
EIS that is, on average equal to about 0.2. Hahm (1998) argues that the housing component
of consumption of nondurable goods should not be included in estimates of the EIS, since
intertemporal substitution of housing is extremely costly. Excluding this component Hahm
estimates a statistically signi...cant EIS equal to about 0.3. Also, Cashin and Unayama
(2016) use data from Japan to estimate the EIS in order to exploit a natural experiment: a
preannounced increase in Japan'
                              s consumption tax rate against the backdrop of no change
in other factors that a¤ect the real interest rate. They ...nd the EIS to be about 0.2, but not
statistically signi...cant, and furthermore that the EIS is signi...cantly less than 1. Best et al.
(2018) use data from the UK, where banks o¤er notched mortgage interest rate schedules,
interest rates jump considerably at each notch, and there is considerable "bunching" below
every notch-- which is intuitively in line with individuals smoothing consumption just below
each notch in order to remain at a lower interest rate. They ...nd a statistically signi...cant


                                                44
value for the EIS equal to about 0.1. Moreover, also using survey data like Barsky et al.
(1997), Kimball et al. (2019) ...nd a highly signi...cant value for the EIS of approximately
0.09.
   Some literature that also highlights the role of data reports more medium-sized EIS
estimates. For example, Skinner (1985) argues that for an individual with no bequest motive
a change in the mortality probability should be equivalent to the substitution e¤ect of an
equal change in the interest rate. Using data on mortality probabilities, Skinner'
                                                                                 s estimates of
the EIS are statistically signi...cant and suggest that the EIS can be as high as 0.6. Attanasio
and Weber (1993) contrast EIS estimates obtained using U.K. average cohort consumption
growth rates versus EIS estimates obtained using aggregate consumption data. Aggregate
results suggest an EIS somewhat above 0.3 and not always signi...cant. However, results using
cohort data suggest that the EIS can be as high as 0.8 and signi...cant. Attanasio and Weber
(1995) use U.S. micro data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey survey and ...nd that the
EIS can be as high as 0.7 and signi...cant. Also, Engelhardt and Kumar (2009) estimate the
EIS using a life-cycle consistent econometric model and Health and Retirement Study data.
They report a signi...cant EIS that is equal to roughly 0.75.
   Literature highlighting the role of data also reports considerably larger estimates of the
EIS. For instance, Beaudry and van Wincoop (1996) use state-level panel data, which they
argue has the ability to bypass asset return measurement problems, and ...nd a statistically
signi...cant EIS equal to about 1. Mulligan (2002) argues that the relevant interest rate for
estimating the EIS is the expected return on a representative piece of capital, and that tax
policy changes can help disentangle the demand for capital from intertemporal preferences.
Using these data, Mulligan ...nds EIS estimates that are, on net, statistically signi...cant and
greater than 1. Moreover, his analysis suggests that the EIS can be as high as 2. More
recently, Gruber (2013) argues that time series on interest rates are correlated with variables
that cause changes in consumption and savings, and that standard instruments-- such as
lagged interest rates-- cannot assess this problem. Gruber instruments using the interest
rate with cross-section data and time series variation in capital taxation, and he ...nds a
statistically signi...cant value of the EIS equal to about 2. Moreover, Gruber argues that
earlier work that used income taxation to estimate the EIS (such as, for example, Zeldes,


                                              45
1989, Lawrance, 1991, and Shea, 1995) su¤ers from various limitations, such as the precision
of estimates depending on year dummies, identi...cation, and type of data used.
    Of course, in light of the earlier research noted as well as the results from Havránek (2015)
highlighted in the Introduction, results from Beaudry and van Wincoop (1996), Mulligan
(2002), and Gruber (2013) can be thought of as being outliers. Regarding Beaudry and
Wincoop, with two decades of additional data since their publication, it would be timely to
reassess the robustness of their results by using an out-of-sample methodology. Regarding
the work of Mulligan and Gruber, it is important to know that in their papers values of the
EIS less than 1 cannot be rejected. Moreover, it is not clear that tax changes are exogenous
preference shocks, since, for example, if the average level of patience for US households
increased (which would tend to raise the expected growth rate of consumption), there might
well be political pressures for lower capital taxation.



B      The Role of Technology

B.1     Competitiveness

Across ...rms, di¤erences in job-enjoyment technology can counterbalance di¤erences in labor-
augmenting technology, and vice versa. To see this, consider ...rms 1 and 2 as shown in
Figure A1, where      2   <       1,   Z2 > Z1 , so that ...rms di¤er in their net job utility curves.
As depicted, although ...rm 1 has lower labor-augmenting technology, given its higher job-
enjoyment technology it is the one that would implicitly set the economy'
                                                                        s equilibrium level
of job bene...ts (recall that, all else equal, higher      i   shifts the job utility curve up). Because
workers take jobs with the highest B , ...rm 2 is unable to attract workers-- and therefore
must shut down.
    For a higher value of     2   (which would shift J2 su¢ ciently high up) or a higher Z2 (which
would make ...rm 2'
                  s isocost lines su¢ ciently steep) ...rm 2 could o¤er the exact same level of
job bene...ts as ...rm 1-- in which case both ...rms would be able to operate-- or even higher
job bene...ts-- in which case ...rm 2 would be the one to implicitly establish economy-wide
equilibrium B , and ...rm 1 would be unable to attract workers.



                                                      46
Figure A1: A di¤erence in job utility overwhelming a di¤erence in labor-augmenting technology.



B.2      Labor Earnings and the Marginal Value of Wealth

For the sake of intuition, throughout the remainder of this section we make four simplifying
assumptions. 1) We revert to assuming that there is only one ...rm and therefore avoid i
                                                                                   E
indexes. 2) For the e¤ects of changes in the nature of work proper,                    , three possibilities
                                            E                 E                    E                    E
emerge depending on whether @FE =@              = 0, @FE =@       < 0, or @FE =@        > 0. @FE =@         =
                              E                                                                E
0 means that changes in           do not a¤ect how onerous extra e¤ort is. @FE =@                  < 0 means
                E                                                     E                                     E
that higher         makes extra e¤ort more onerous. @FE =@                > 0 means that higher
                                                                          E
makes increases in e¤ort less onerous. We focus on @FE =@                     0 since it is the most
                                                                                          A
intuitively appealing possibility. 3) We focus on cases in which @GA =@                       > 0 or which
         A
@GA =@       > 0. The strict inequality corresponds to an innovation in amenities increasing
the marginal bene...t from spending on amenities. 4) We continue to assume the additively
separable case J = F + G. Relaxing these assumption leads to interesting analysis but not
quite interesting enough to include here.


B.2.1    The E¤ect of a Rise in Z on              and WH

                                                        ~ > Z . The left panel of Figure
Suppose labor-augmenting technology increases from Z to Z
A2 shows that, all else equal, higher Z leads to higher job bene...ts (meaning higher work
hours) and higher e¤ort, which leads to higher real wages because the e¤ective wage is
constant. These changes jointly imply higher WH . Now, consider the implications of higher

                                                   47
WH . LE S shifts out because at any given             higher Z is consistent with higher labor earnings.
This outward shift in LE S implies a decrease in equilibrium             and an increase in equilibrium
WH (the lower         induces changes exactly opposite to those in the left panel of Figure 8 in
the main text).




Figure A2: E¤ects of increase in labor-augmenting technology (left) and e¤ects of positive innovation in the
nature of work proper (right).


                                      E
B.2.2     E¤ect of a Rise in              on       and WH
                                      E
Consider an increase in       E
                                  to ~ >       E
                                                   (that is, a positive innovation in the nature of work
                                                                             E
proper). Start from the right panel of Figure A2, where @FE =@                   > 0 is assumed: all else
                  E
equal, higher         is consistent with higher job bene...ts (meaning higher work hours) and
higher e¤ort (meaning-- because the e¤ective wage is an exogenous constant-- higher real
                       E                       E
wages). If @FE =@          = 0 the new             e¤ort remains unchanged but job bene...ts rise. In
either case, labor earnings rise. All other changes are then analogous to those in Section
B.2.1.

                                      A
B.2.3     E¤ect of a Rise in              on       and WH

             A               A
If @GA =@        > 0 and          rises (that is, an innovation expands the scope for amenities to
make things better for the worker), the optimal level of amenities rises as shown in the left
panel of Figure A3. This induces an upward shift in the net job utility function akin to that



                                                       48
shown in the right panel of Figure 8 in the main text, but without any accompanying change
in the slope of isocost lines. Therefore, e¤ort remains ...xed. Because the e¤ective wage is
an exogenously determined constant, all else equal, higher amenities imply that real wages
must decline. Thus, although job bene...ts are higher, the net e¤ect on labor earnings, WH ,
is ambiguous. In this case, the increased scope for valuable amenities acts much like the
introduction of new goods, keeping           from falling as much as it otherwise would.
                          A             E
   If instead @GA =@          = 0 and       rises, as shown in the right panel of Figure A3 the level
of amenities remains ...xed, but the surplus from amenities rises. This induces an upward
shift in the net job utility function, which is consistent with e¤ort remaining ...xed and job
bene...ts rising. Because the e¤ective wage must remain constant, real wages rise, and all
other change are analogous to those in Section B.2.1.




                                                                                            A
Figure A3: E¤ect of positive innovation in the nature of the work environment with @GA =@       > 0 (left)
             A
and @GA =@       = 0 (right).


B.3     Real Wages and Trendless Work Hours

B.3.1    Unaltered Slope of Net Job Utility

Consider an initial equilibrium such as point A in the left panel of Figure A4, which corre-
sponds to an isocost line with slope           Z! . Then, if labor-augmenting technology rises, or
                                                                                 E
there is a positive innovation in the nature of work proper and @FE =@               = 0, or there is a
                                                                                 A
positive innovation in the nature of the work environment and @GA =@                 = 0, as shown in


                                                    49
Section B.2 labor earnings rise and the marginal value of wealth decreases. And, at lower
  amenities are optimally higher, and the surplus from amenities is also higher-- which is
consistent with an upward shift in the net job utility function (with no change in its slope)
and less steep isocost lines. If there is no change in labor hours, then the new equilibrium
must be at a point such as A'in the left panel of Figure A4. There, e¤ort is lower but the
e¤ective wage ! = (W + A) = (EZ ) is unchanged.17




Figure A4: Impact of technological changes.


Increase in Labor-Augmenting Technology In the case in which Z rises, because
e¤ort declines and amenities rise, the real wage can only be higher after the increase in
labor-augmenting technology if the product EZ is higher and greater enough to pay for the
increase in amenities. Formally, because the e¤ective wage must remain constant, then a
rise in Z triggers a rise in real wages only if

                                                A
                                  d ln Z >         d ln A       d ln E .
                                              W +A

In this case, after the rise in Z real wages are higher and job utility are higher. It is possible
for work hours to remain constant as a result of the rise in job utility countervailing the
income e¤ect'
            s outweighing of the substitution e¤ect. So, an increase in labor-augmenting
  17
       Note that
                                                       W              A
                         d ln ! + d ln E + d ln Z =        d ln W +      d ln A
                                                      W +A          W +A



                                                      50
technology can indeed be consistent with higher real wages and trendless labor hours (and
higher e¤ective labor productivity).


Positive Innovations in Job-Enjoyment Technology If labor-augmenting technology
                                                                                      E
rises, or there is a positive innovation in the nature of work proper and @FE =@          = 0, or
                                                                                          A
there is a positive innovation in the nature of the work environment and @GA =@               = 0,
then, again, at point A'e¤ort is lower. Because amenities are higher and the e¤ective wage
must remain constant, then given that the product EZ is lower real wages must decline.
This decline must exactly satisfy

                                        W +A
                             d ln W =        d ln E      A d ln A.
                                         W

                                                                                               E
Thus, all else equal, neither a positive innovation in the nature of work proper with @FE =@       =
                                                                                      A
0 nor a positive innovation in the nature of the work environment with @GA =@             = 0 are
consistent with both trendless work hours and higher real wages.


B.3.2    Altered Slope of Net Job Utility

Consider an initial equilibrium such as point A in the right panel of Figure A5, which
corresponds to an isocost line with slope        Z! . Then, given a positive innovation in the
                                        E
nature of work proper with @FE =@           > 0, as shown in Section B.2.2 labor earnings rise
and the marginal value of real wealth decreases. At lower      amenities are optimally higher,
and the surplus from amenities is also higher-- which is consistent with an upward shift in
                                                                              E
the net job utility function (with change in slope as implied by @FE =@           > 0) and less
steep isocost lines. If there is no change in labor hours but the income e¤ect outweighs the
substitution e¤ect, then the new equilibrium must be at a point such as A'in the left panel
of Figure A4-- job utility must be higher. At point A0 e¤ort is higher but the e¤ective wage
! = (W + A) = (EZ ) must remain unchanged. Because amenities are also higher, real wages
are higher only if
                                                W
                                    d ln E >        d ln A.
                                               W +A




                                                51
                                                                                                           E
So, when positive innovations in the nature of work proper make e¤ort less taxing, a rise in
can indeed be consistent with higher real wages and trendless labor hours (and higher e¤ective
labor productivity) if e¤ort rises enough due to complementarity between the improvement
                                               E
in intrinsic job employment technology             and e¤ort.


B.3.3     Technological Equivalence

Comparison of the left and right panels of Figure A4 along with results from Sections B.3.1
and B.3.2 imply that the e¤ects of a positive innovation in the nature of work proper can be
qualitatively similar to an increase in labor-augmenting technology.



C       Welfare Under Non-separability
Suppose that
                                                         P
                                     U = U (C; H ) +       i   H i Ji ,

where UC > 0, UH < 0, and UCH > 0. Then, an individual'
                                                      s problem involves choosing C ,
                                                 P                            P
H , and Hi 0 to maximize U such that C = rM + + i Wi Hi and total hours H = i Hi .
    Let

                               P                               P                             P
     L = max U (C; H ) +         i   Hi Ji + (rM +        +        i   W i Hi   C ) + B (H   i   Hi ) .
           C , H , Hi



Then,
                                P
                         dL =        i   Hi (dJi + dWi ) + (d + rdM ) .

Using equation (10) from the main text, summing over hours, and dividing by                         C the
previous can be stated as

                                               P
             dL = C = (H=C ) dB=              ( i Hi Wi =C ) d = + (d + rdM ) =C .                        (1)


    Other than dB= and d = , it is straightforward to obtain empirical counterparts to all
variables on the right-hand side of the equation (1). Thus, it is of interest to ...nd expressions



                                                    52
for dB= and d = that can be operationalized. To this end, de...ne


                                     V ( ; H ) = max U (C; H )                                  C                                     (2)
                                                              C



and
                                                          P                                         P
                           max V ( ; H ) + (H                     i       i Wi   + )+H                  i   i Ji ,                    (3)
                            H


where   i   is the fraction of total hours that the individual spends on job i. Note that

                             P                  P                          P
                      H(         i   i Wi   +   i    i Ji )   =H                 i   i   ( Wi + Ji ) = HB

                                                              P
since in equilibrium B = Wi + Ji , and also                           i   i   = 1. Therefore, the statement in equation
(3) becomes
                                                              P                          P
                           max V ( ; H ) + H (                        i   i Wi       +     i   i Ji )   +      .
                            H


The ...rst-order condition is         VH ( ; H ) = B . Hence, dB =                                  VHH dH           VH d . If d = 0,
then
                      dB=B =          (VHH H=B ) dH=H = (VHH H=VH ) dH=H ,

where the second equality follows from the earlier FOC. It follows that,


                                (dB=B ) = (dH=H ) = (VHH H=VH ) = 1= ,


where       is de...ned as the -held-constant elasticity of H with respect to B . Given


                                            dB =       VHH dH                    VH d ,


as shown in the appendix


                            dB= = (1                i ) Wi =              dH=H            VH        d = ,


where   i   =   Ji =Wi :
   Let the Frisch elasticity of labor supply for any job i be given by                                                 i   =   = (1   i ).




                                                               53
Therefore the previous can be stated as,


                             dB= = (Wi = i ) dH=H             VH       d = .                         (4)


The ...rst term on the right-hand side above has straightforward empirical counterparts.
However, we still require an expression for d = , and are now also in need of one for VH .
Note from the expression in (2) that V =          C ( ; H ) and V       H   =   CH ( ; H ). Furthermore,
as shown in in the appendix


                         dC=C = (V      =V ) d = + (V         H H=V    ) dH=H .


De...ne   1= = V     =V and       =V    H H=V    . That is,     = d ln C=dH for constant . Then,


                                 d = =      (     dH=H        dC=C ) .                               (5)


A value for   can be estimated by noting that


                                   ln C +       + r+         ln H + ".


Basu and Kimball (2002) suggest that a higher-end estimate for                   is 0.3. Moreover,


                          =V    H H=V   =   V   H H=C   =)         V   H   =    C=H


Substituting into equation (4),


                   dB=      =     (Wi = i ) dH=H        VH      d =

                           =)     dB= = (Wi = i ) dH=H + ( C=H ) d = .                               (6)


We set out to search for empirical counterparts to d = and dB= for use in equation (1),
which we now have in equations (5) and (6). Combining these three equations, as shown in




                                                  54
the appendix it now follows that
                                     P
             dL   Wi dH                i   Hi W i        dH   dC         (d + rdM )
                =       +                                            +              .       (7)
              C    i C                     C             H    C              C

      Consider an example. Suppose dC=C = 1%, dH = 0,         = 0:3,     = 2. Moreover, suppose
P
  i   Hi Wi = C so that there is no non-labor income, and d   = dM = 0. Then, using equation
(7)
                             dL = C = (:3       1) 2 ( 1%) = 1:4%.

Hence, in this case .4 percentage points beyond the welfare increase stemming from the
increase in consumption owes to changes in on-the-job utility. Note that in terms of welfare
there is no fundamental di¤erence between increases in J from compositional e¤ects and
increases in J in any given job - it is only a matter of how detailed the de...nitions of jobs
are.


References
[1] Abel, Andrew B. 1990. "Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up With the
     Joneses." American Economic Review, 80(2): 38-42.
[2] Alesina, Alberto F., Edward L. Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote. 2005. "Work and Leisure in
      the U.S. and Europe: Why So Di¤erent?"In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume
      20, edited by Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogo¤. MIT Press.
[3] Ashenfelter, Orley, and Mark W. Plant. 1990. "Nonparametric Estimates of the Labor-
      Supply E¤ects of Negative Income Tax Programs." Journal of Labor Economics, 8(1):
      396­415.
[4] Atkeson, Andrew, and Masao Ogaki. 1996. "Wealth-varying Intertemporal Elasticities
      of Substitution: Evidence from Panel and Aggregate Data." Journal of Monetary
      Economics 38, no. 3: 507-534.
[5] Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber. 1993. "Consumption Growth, the Interest
      Rate, and Aggregation." The Review of Economic Studies 60, no. 3: 631-649.
[6] Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber. 1995. "Is Consumption Growth Consistent
      with Intertemporal Optimization?"Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey."
      Journal of Political Economy, 103(6): 1121-1157.
[7] Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
      "Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in
      the Health and Retirement Study." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no. 2:
      537-579.

                                                    55
[8] Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball. 2002. "Long-Run Labor Supply and the Elasticity
      of Intertemporal Substitution for Consumption." Boston College and University of
      Michigan. Mimeo.
[9] Beaudry, Paul, and Eric Van Wincoop. 1996. "The Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitu-
      tion: An Exploration Using a US Panel of State Data." Economica : 495-512.
[10] Becker, Dan. 2011. "Non-wage Job Characteristics and the Case of the Missing Margin."
      Available at SSRN 1805761.
[11] Best, Michael Carlos, James Cloyne, Ethan Ilzetzki, and Henrik Kleven. 2018. "Es-
      timating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution Using Mortgage Notches." No.
      w24948. National Bureau of Economic Research.
[12] Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1989. "Consumption, Income, and Interest
      Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4:
      185-216.
[13] Cashin, David, and Takashi Unayama. 2016. "Measuring intertemporal substitution in
      consumption: Evidence from a VAT increase in Japan." The Review of Economics and
      Statistics 98(2): 285-297.
[14] Coulibaly, Brahima. 2006. "Changes in Job Quality and Trends in Labor Hours." In-
      ternational Finance Discussion Papers 882. Washington: Board of Governors of the
      Federal Reserve System.
[15] Deshpande, Manasi, 2016. "Does welfare inhibit success? The long-term e¤ects of
      removing low-income youth from the disability rolls." American Economic Review,
      106(11): pp.3300-3330.
[16] Engelhardt, Gary V., and Anil Kumar. 2009. "The Elasticity of Intertemporal Substi-
      tution: New Evidence from 40(k) Participation." Economics Letters, 103(1): 15-17.
[17] Epstein, Brendan, Alan Finkelstein Shapiro, Rahul Mukherjee, and Shanthi P. Ram-
      nath. 2021. "What Drives Trends in Employment and Hours Worked per Worker? A
      Cross Country Analysis."Mimeo.
[18] Faggio, Giulia and Stephen Nickell. 2007. "Patterns of Work Across the OECD." The
      Economic Journal, 117 (521): F416-F440.
[19] Francis, Neville and Valerie Ramey. 2009. "A Century of Work and Leisure." American
      Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1 (2): 189-224.
[20] Fuhrer, Je¤rey C. 2000. "Habit Formation in Consumption and its Implications for
      Monetary Policy Models." American Economic Review, 90 (3): 367-390.
[21] Gelber, Alexander M., Adam Isen, and Jae Song. 2016. "The e¤ect of pension income
      on elderly earnings: Evidence from social security and full population data." NBER
      Working Paper.
[22] Gelber, Alexander, Adam Isen, and Jae Song. 2017. "The role of social security bene...ts
      in the initial increase of older women'
                                            s employment: Evidence from the social security
      notch."In Women Working Longer: Increased Employment at Older Ages, pp. 239-268.
      University of Chicago Press.

                                             56
[23] Giupponi, G., 2019. "When income e¤ects are large: labor supply responses and the
      value of welfare transfers." Bocconi University mimeo.
[24] Gruber, Jonathan. 2013. "A tax-based estimate of the elasticity of intertemporal sub-
      stitution." The Quarterly Journal of Finance 3, no. 01: 1350001.
[25] Hahm, J.H., 1998. "Consumption Adjustment to Real Interest Rates: Intertemporal
      Substitution Revisited." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 22(2), pp.293-
      320.
[26] Hall, Robert E. 1988. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption."Journal of Political
      Economy, 96: 339-357.
[27] Hall, Robert E., and Andreas I. Mueller. 2018. "Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior:
      The Importance of Nonwage Job Values." Journal of Political Economy 126, no. 4:
      1594-1637.
[28] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1983. "Stochastic consumption, risk
      aversion, and the temporal behavior of asset returns." Journal of Political Economy
      91, no. 2: 249-265.
[29] Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1996. "E¢ cient Estimation of Linear
      Asset-Pricing Models with Moving Average Errors." Journal of Business & Economic
      Statistics 14, no. 1: 53-68.
[30] Havránek, Tomás  . 2015. "Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The Importance of
      Method Choices and Selective Reporting." Journal of the European Economic Associ-
      ation 13(6): 1180-1204.
[31] Hum, Derek, and Wayne Simpson. 1993. "Economic Response to a Guaranteed Annual
      Income: Experience from Canada and the United States."Journal of Labor Economics,
      11(1): 263­296.
[32] Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote. 2001. "Estimating the
      E¤ect of Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence
      from a Survey of Lottery Players." American Economic Review, 91(4): 778­794.
[33] Jones, Damon, and Ioana Marinescu. 2018. "The Labor Market Impacts of Universal
      and Permanent Cash Transfers: Evidence from the Alaska Permanent Fund." NBER
      Working Paper 24312.
[34] Keynes, John Maynard. 1930. "Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren."Printed
      in Vol. IX of The Collected Writings of JM Keynes, 1973. London: Macmillan for The
      Royal Economic Society.
[35] Kimball, Miles S., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2008. "Labor Supply: Are the Income
      E¤ects Both Large or Both Small?"NBER Working Paper No. 14208.
[36] Kimball, Miles S., Matthew D. Shapiro, and Claudia Sahm. 2019. "Measuring the In-
      tertemporal Elasticity of Substitution with Internet Surveys."Mimeo.
[37] King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio R. Rebelo. 1988. "Production, Growth
      and Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model." Journal of Monetary Eco-
      nomics 21: 195-232.

                                            57
[38] Lawrance, Emily C. 1991. "Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from
      Panel Data." Journal of Political Economy 99, no. 1: 54-77.
[39] Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent. 2006. "Do Taxes Explain European Employ-
      ment? Indivisible Labor, Human Capital, Lotteries, and Personal Savings."In NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 21, edited by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogo¤, and M. Wood-
      ford, 181-246. The MIT Press.
[40] Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2005. "Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being."
      The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (3): 963-1002.
[41] McDaniel, Cara. 2011. "Forces Shaping Hours Worked in the OECD, 1960-2004."Amer-
      ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3 (4): 27-52.
[42] Mulligan, Casey B. 2002. "Capital, interest, and aggregate intertemporal substitution."
      No. w9373. National Bureau of Economic Research.
[43] Ogaki, Masao, and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1998. "Measuring intertemporal substitution:
      The role of durable goods." Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 5: 1078-1098.
[44] Ohanian, Lee, Andrea Ra¤o and Richard Rogerson. 2008. "Long-Term Changes in Labor
      Supply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004." Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 55 (8): 1353-1362.
[45] Okubo, Masakatsu. 2008. "Intertemporal substitution and nonhomothetic preferences."
      Economics Letters 98, no. 1: 41-47.
[46] Patterson, Kerry D. and Bahram Pesaran. 1992. "The Intertemporal Elasticity of Sub-
      stitution in Consumption in the United States and the United Kingdom." The Review
      of Economics and Statistics, 74 (4): 573-584.
[47] Prescott, Edward C. 2004. "Why do Americans Work so Much More than Europeans?"
      NBER Working Paper No. 10316.
[48] Rayo, Luis, and Gary S. Becker. 2007. "Habits, Peers, and Happiness: An Evolutionary
      Perspective." American Economic Review, 97 (2): 487-491.
[49] Rogerson, Richard. 1988. "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium." Journal of
      Monetary Economics, 21 (1): 3-16.
[50] Rogerson, Richard. 2006. "Understanding Di¤erences in Hours Worked."Review of Eco-
      nomic Dynamics, 9 (3): 365-409.
[51] Rogerson, Richard. 2007. "Taxation and Market Work: Is Scandinavia an outlier?"
      Economic Theory, 32 (1): 59-85.
[52] Rogerson, Richard. 2009. "Market Work, Home Work and Taxes: A Cross-Country
      Analysis." Review of International Economics, 17 (3): 588-601.
[53] Rosen, Sherwin. "The Theory of Equalizing Di¤erences."1986. Handbook of Labor Eco-
      nomics, 1: 641-692.
[54] Shea, John. 1995. "Union contracts and the life-cycle/permanent-income hypothesis."
      American Economic Review : 186-200.



                                            58
[55] Shimer, Robert. 2009. "Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge."American
      Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 1 (1): 280-297.
[56] Skinner, Jonathan. 1985. "Variable lifespan and the intertemporal elasticity of consump-
      tion." The Review of Economics and Statistics : 616-623.
[57] Smith, Adam. 1776. "An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of The Wealth of Nations."
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976. Edwin Cannan, Ed.
[58] Sorkin, Isaac. 2018. "Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference."The Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, 133(3), pp.1331-1393.
[59] Struck, Clemens C. 2014. "Habit persistence and the long-run labor supply." Economics
      Letters 124, no. 2: 243-247.
[60] Sullivan, Paul, and Ted To. 2014. "Search and Nonwage Job Characteristics." Journal
      of Human Resources 49, no. 2: 472-507.
[61] Summers, Lawrence H. 1982. "Tax Policy, the Rate of Return, and Savings." NBER
      Working Paper No. 995.
[62] Taber, Christopher, and Rune Vejlin. 2016. "Estimation of a Roy/Search Compensating
      Di¤erential Model of the Labor Market. No. w22439. National Bureau of Economic
      Research.
[63] Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette. 2002. "Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elas-
      ticity of Intertemporal Substitution" Journal of Political Economy, 110 (4): 825-853.
[64] Yogo, Motohiro. 2004. "Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution When
      Instruments are Weak." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86 (3): 797-810.
[65] Zeldes, Stephen P. 1989. "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical In-
      vestigation." Journal of Political Economy 97, no. 2: 305-346.




                                             59
