                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE DAMAGES AND DISTORTIONS FROM DISCRIMINATION IN THE RENTAL
                          HOUSING MARKET

                                       Peter Christensen
                                      Christopher Timmins

                                      Working Paper 29049
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29049


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank seminar participants at Arizona State University, the Kelley Business School, the
University of California at Berkeley, the University of California at San Diego, the University of
California at Santa Cruz, the University of Chicago, the Duke-Kunshan University, the University
of Miami, the University of Nevada at Las Vegas, the University of Pennsylvania, the University
of Pittsburgh, the University of Wisconsin, and participants at the AEA 2021 Meeting and the
UEA 2020 Virtual Meeting for their excellent comments. We also thank students in the
University of Illinois Big Data and Environmental Economics and Policy (BDEEP) Group and
the Duke Environmental Justice Lab for research assistance. We acknowledge generous support
from the National Science Foundation Economics Program and the Russell Sage Foundation
Social, Political and Economic Inequality Program. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Peter Christensen and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Damages and Distortions from Discrimination in the Rental Housing Market
Peter Christensen and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 29049
July 2021
JEL No. Q51,Q53,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

By constraining an individual's choice during a search, housing discrimination distorts sorting
decisions away from true preferences and results in a ceteris paribus reduction in welfare. This
study combines a large-scale field experiment with a residential sorting model to derive utility-
theoretic measures of renter welfare loss associated with the constraints imposed by
discrimination in the rental housing market. Results from experiments conducted in five cities
show that key neighborhood amenities are associated with higher levels of discrimination. Results
from the structural model indicate that discrimination imposes costs equivalent to 4.7% of annual
income for renters of color, and that search behavior results in greater welfare costs for African
Americans as their incomes rise. Renters of color must make substantial investments in additional
search to mitigate the costs of these constraints. We find that a naïve model ignoring
discrimination constraints yields significantly biased estimates of willingness to pay.


Peter Christensen
Agriculture and Consumer Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
431 Mumford Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
pchrist@illinois.edu

Christopher Timmins
Department of Economics
Duke University
209 Social Sciences Building
P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
christopher.timmins@duke.edu
1        Introduction

By constraining an individual's choice during a search process, discrimination can distort
decisions away from true preferences and result in a ceteris paribus reduction in the wel-
fare of those that face it. Decades after the passage of the Fair Housing Act, evidence from
both audit and correspondence studies indicates that housing market discrimination con-
tinues to constrain the choices of people of color in the United States and steer them into
neighborhoods that confer disadvantage (Christensen and Timmins, 2018, Ewens et al.,
2014, Carlsson and Eriksson, 2014, Hanson and Hawley, 2011, Ahmed and Hammarstedt,
2008). However, inferences about impacts of experimentally identified constraints are
limited by the fact that researchers never observe how search constraints ultimately bind
on the decisions of fictitious buyers and renters (Neumark, 2018, Guryan and Charles,
2013, Heckman, 1998).
      The present study combines a large-scale field experiment with structural methods to
examine the effects of discrimination in the housing market. A key innovation involves the
integration of a correspondence experiment in a welfare-theoretic framework, which we use
to estimate damages to African American and Hispanic/LatinX renters. The approach is
motivated by the basic insight that the damages from discriminatory constraints depend
on the value that an individual places on the set of choices that are made inaccessible as a
consequence of discriminatory behavior. Since discrimination may differentially constrain
access to choices with certain attributes or in certain neighborhoods, an estimate of the
welfare cost to a renter or buyer requires understanding how households value the different
attributes of each housing choice.
      We develop a correspondence research design to measure within-property variation in
housing choices that are made available (or not) by property managers in response to
renter inquiries. Our experimental sample is obtained through interactions on a major
online search platform and includes the entire set of listings for three-bedroom, two-
bathroom rental units in each of five different major U.S. metropolitan housing mar-
kets: Atlanta, GA; Houston, TX; Philadelphia, PA; Cleveland, OH; and San Jose, CA.1

1
    Specifically, markets are defined using the Metropolitan Statistical Area definition and are sampled from

                                                       2
Reduced-form tests reveal that minority identities in our sample have a 31% lower like-
lihood of response indicating that a rental property is available for rent. Discriminatory
constraints vary substantially by race group and across MSAs, with the lowest relative
response rates found in Philadelphia (52.7%) and the highest found in Cleveland (74.5%).
   Our reduced-form tests reveal four additional facts that have implications for damages.
First, discriminatory constraints are positively correlated with neighborhood amenity lev-
els. These results are consistent with findings on discriminatory steering by real estate
agents in the buyer market (Christensen and Timmins, 2018). Research in both settings
reveals that African American households in particular face strong frictions when search-
ing for housing in high-amenity neighborhoods. Unlike discriminatory steering by real
estate agents in the buyer market, however, choice constraints in the online rental market
are mediated by direct interactions with property managers and cannot be circumvented
by shifting to a different agent. In the rental markets that we study, discriminatory con-
straints are particularly strong for properties with access to higher school quality and
lower toxic air concentrations, but the pattern holds for neighborhood-level murder rates
and access to cafes, which proxy for a range of retail amenities (Glaeser et al., 2018,
Papachristos et al., 2011).
   Second, we find that renters of color face less discrimination in neighborhoods with
higher shares of African American or Hispanic/LatinX households, while they face greater
discrimination in neighborhoods with higher shares of white households. This fact is con-
sistent with prior correspondence literature and suggests that the damages of discrimina-
tory constraints may be somewhat lower for renters with strong homophily preferences.
Third, discriminatory constraints are significantly higher among properties that have re-
cently entered the market (listed for fewer than 3 days), indicating that constraints are
stronger in neighborhoods with strong rental demand. Finally, discriminatory constraints
facing minority identities become significantly stronger when a property manager receives
inquiries from other identities in our sample, suggesting that discriminatory behavior in

the list of 28 metro areas used in recent paired-actor research by HUD/Urban Institute (Turner et al.,
2013). Metropolitan Statistical Areas: Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell, GA; Houston-The Woodlands-
Sugar Land, TX; Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington PA-NJ-DE-MD; Cleveland-Elyria, OH; and San
Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA.

                                                  3
tight markets is exacerbated by competition among renters.
    The reduced-form results suggest that discriminatory constraints are not uniform in
the housing market. Damages will depend on how they interact with the preferences and
incomes that also vary across renters. Building on recent applications of the consideration
sets method (Abaluck and Adams, 2016, Gaynor et al., 2016) and a growing literature
that combines experimental and structural approaches (Galiani et al., 2015, Todd and
Wolpin, 2020), we introduce a structural sorting model that uses experimentally identified
variation in discriminatory behavior at the level of the census tract in combination with
data from InfoUSA's Residential Historical Database on the location decisions of renting
households in the 5 MSAs between 2016-2018.2 The sorting model recovers estimates of
utility parameters that are statistically different in economically important ways from the
estimates recovered from a naive model that ignores discriminatory constraints.
    We then use the estimated utility function to generate welfare estimates of the impact
of discriminatory search constraints on minority renters. For the average renter in our five
cities, the magnitude of the damages from discriminatory constraints ­ i.e., the constraints
faced by a renter of color over and above those faced by a white renter with the same
income ­ are equivalent to 4.6% and 4.7% of the annual incomes for African American and
Hispanic/LatinX renters, respectively. These damages increase substantially at higher
levels of income ­ African American renters face damages greater than 7% of income
at income levels above $100,000 per year. Heterogeneity in income results from two
interacting factors: (1) stronger discriminatory constraints in high amenity and high price
neighborhoods (as shown in the reduced form results) and (2) higher marginal utility from
those amenities at higher levels of income. The first factor results in pronounced impacts
on African American renters.
    Discriminatory behavior has been shown to introduce group-specific search frictions
in a wide variety of settings, including in the labor market (Lang and Lehmann, 2012),


2
 InfoUSA's Residential Historical Database tracks 120 million households, including renters, between
2006 and 2019. Data are compiled using 29 billion records from 100 sources including census statistics,
billing statements, telephone directory listings, mail order purchases and magazine subscriptions. Data
include information about gender, ethnicity, age, address, renter/owner status and estimated household
income.

                                                  4
housing and mortgage markets (Christensen et al., 2020, Ouazad and Ranci`
                                                                        ere, 2019,
Hanson et al., 2016), and consumer markets (Edelman et al., 2017, List, 2004). A mostly
separate literature on neighborhood effects has emphasized the role of housing search
constraints in impeding moves to high-opportunity neighborhoods (Bergman et al., 2019,
Aliprantis et al., 2018, Ioannides, 2011). The present findings indicate that discrimina-
tion directly restricts access to the very neighborhoods that provide the greatest utility
to economically mobile minority households. By directly affecting residential location
decisions, housing discrimination could create a potential barrier to intergenerational in-
come mobility (Chetty et al., 2018, Graham, 2018). We use our model to describe the
extent to which increased search activity can be used to offset the detrimental effects
of discrimination. Our results suggest that at moderate levels of search activity, renters
of color need to expend approximately 10-30% more effort on search than their white
counterparts to achieve the same level of utility.
   The final section of the paper contributes to a long-standing literature on the rela-
tionship between preferences revealed by sorting in the housing market and the efficient
allocation of local public goods (Epple et al., 1984, Tiebout, 1956). By constraining an
individual's choice set, discrimination can drive a wedge between true amenity preferences
and those revealed in a (constrained) search. We examine the effects of market distor-
tions introduced by discrimination in the markets that we study. Allowing for racial
heterogeneity in preferences, we find that a naive model that ignores constraints im-
posed by discrimination significantly understates African American and Hispanic/LatinX
willingness-to-pay for average school quality and to avoid toxic air pollution. This sug-
gests that the discriminatory constraints can distort revealed preferences in ways that
have important effects on the interpretation of revealed preference estimates and on the
local provision of public goods (Kuminoff et al., 2013, Bayer et al., 2007).
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes a number of relevant literatures
on housing discrimination and location choice. Section 3 describes the research design
of our correspondence study. In Section 4, we develop a model of housing search to
characterize the welfare effects of discrimination. Section 5 describes our data, Section 6


                                             5
reports results, and Section 7 concludes.


2     The Impacts of Discriminatory Constraints
Disentangling the impact of discriminatory constraints from other factors affecting the
sorting behavior of minority households such as income disparities, housing or neigh-
borhood preferences, or other differences is critical for understanding persistent dispari-
ties between racial groups (Christensen et al., 2020, Chetty et al., 2018, Graham, 2018,
Aliprantis et al., 2018, Ioannides, 2011, Bayer and McMillan, 2008). Recent experimental
evidence indicates that barriers in the search process, rather than differences in neighbor-
hood preferences, may be the key driver of segregation processes (Bergman et al., 2019).
To the extent that they reduce the access of certain groups to beneficial neighborhood
effects, the choice constraints encountered during a search could directly impact the long-
run accumulation of human capital. Discriminatory behavior against housing voucher
holders may also reduce the efficacy of programs that are designed to reduce barriers in
moving to opportunity (Aliprantis et al., 2019).

2.1    Discrimination Experiments and Renter Welfare
Mounting experimental evidence indicates that racial discrimination continues to con-
strain the choice sets of people of color during search in the rental or owner-occupied
housing markets in the United States (Ewens et al., 2014, Carlsson and Eriksson, 2014,
Hanson and Hawley, 2011, Ahmed and Hammarstedt, 2008, Christensen and Timmins,
2018). Furthermore, discrimination is not uniform across choices in the housing mar-
ket, such that buyers or renters with heterogeneous preferences and incomes will face
different constraints. Interactions between a household's search parameters and the dis-
criminatory behavior that they face in any given market are critical for understanding
when and how discriminatory constraints will bind, since this is the margin where house-
holds ultimately make rental or purchase decisions (Heckman, 1998). However, since
audit/correspondence designs reveal behavior toward fictitious renters/buyers and are
transactions that are never fully executed, it has been difficult to examine the interaction
between choice constraints and household search behavior.


                                             6
   To address this issue, the current paper examines the evidence from a correspondence
experiment within a residential choice model. As shown for buyers in Christensen and
Timmins (2018), by constraining an individual's set of choices during a search, housing
discrimination distorts the sorting outcome away from that associated with true pref-
erences and results in a ceteris paribus reduction in welfare. Whereas prior work has
focused on defining the conditions under which discriminatory constraints will reduce the
welfare of minority households, the current paper quantifies the magnitude of damages
in the rental market and examines effects on other (partial equilibrium) outcomes.

2.2    Residential Sorting with Discriminatory Constraints
Just as sorting and search processes have often been overlooked in experimental studies
of housing market discrimination, discriminatory constraints have remained largely ab-
sent from the residential sorting literature despite their implications for a fundamental
assumption: freedom of choice with respect to location.
   Beginning with the seminal work of Tiebout (1956), who showed that households
express their demand for local public goods by "voting with their feet," revealed pref-
erence models have focused on capturing a households' willingness to trade-off outside
consumption for desirable amenities through higher rents, purchase prices, or property
taxes. These tradeoffs have become the basis for valuing non-marketed local attributes
like environmental quality, public safety, and school quality (Epple and Sieg, 1999).
   A now long-standing literature in public economics has illustrated how the aggregation
of individual locational choices made in housing markets influences the provision of local
public goods such as pollution abatement, policing/public safety, and the quality of public
education (Kuminoff et al., 2013). Methodological advances in empirical modeling of the
residential sorting process have increased their use by researchers and policymakers in
determining the value of local public goods and amenities (Bayer et al., 2007, Palmquist,
2005). Together with findings from reduced form hedonic methods (Chay and Green-
stone, 2005, Gibbons, 2004, Champ et al., 2003, Black, 1999), these revealed preferences
estimates play an important role in determining the budgets for these key public services
in cities throughout the United States and other countries.


                                            7
    In order to express their demand for local public goods and influence the level of service
provision by local governments, households must be free to choose from all of the available
housing options in a local housing market.3 By imposing constraints on the choice set,
discriminatory behavior creates a key challenge for revealed preference studies of housing,
labor and other markets. While there has been some recognition of this issue, empirical
researchers have not incorporated data on discriminatory constraints with information
about buyer or renter outcomes (Christensen and Timmins, 2018, Graham, 2018). An
exception is Li (2019), who develops a model of location decisions of households in the
1940's using the assumption that constraints on purchasing were binding in any census
tract that did not contain at least one African American owner.
    The current study examines the process by which discriminatory constraints can drive
a wedge between the preferences of minority households and the location outcomes that re-
sult from their search. In contrast to the approach developed by Li (2019), the current pa-
per uses experimentally identified estimates of discriminatory constraints to model choice
constraints in a residential choice model. We introduce a novel structural framework that
explicitly accounts for the effects of discriminatory constraints in housing search, allow-
ing us to: (1) recover utility parameters that may be affected by choice constraints and
examine how they differ from a model that is naive to discrimination; (2) derive utility-
based welfare impacts of discrimination over multi-attribute residential units, which are
expressed in terms of equivalent variation in income; and (3) study interactions between
individual heterogeneity in preferences and income that can interact to either mitigate
its welfare impacts or make them worse.

2.3     Consideration Sets
Over the past three decades, a large literature has emerged to model the constraints on
consumers when choosing among large sets of goods or services. This work is motivated
by the seminal finding from Stigler (1961), which demonstrates that the costs of search

3
 This includes the option to move to another local market, which creates an equilibrium in which multiple
local governments compete to attract residents by adjusting the provision of local spending according to
the demand that is signaled by the population (Epple et al., 1984). Prior empirical evidence indicates
that segregation can directly result in lower levels of public goods provision (Trounstine, 2016, Alesina
et al., 1999).

                                                   8
increase while the expected utility of the choice set decreases with every new product that
enters a consumer's choice set. The consideration sets literature argues that consumers
will rationally constrain the set of options they consider before expending energy in a
careful search (Pancras, 2010, Draganska and Klapper, 2011, Kim et al., 2010). The
consideration sets model has provided an approach for applying bounded rationality and
rational inattention models in revealed preference settings (Caplin et al., 2019, Manzini
and Mariotti, 2014, Masatlioglu et al., 2012, Eliaz and Spiegler, 2011). To identify the
effects of constraints on a consumer's choice set, empirical studies typically introduce
an instrument that plausibly affects consumers' attention to different products without
affecting the utility generated from consuming it,4 or some auxiliary data source that
identifies the actual choice sets, such as marketing surveys.5
    We draw upon the techniques developed in this literature, which provide a tractable
approach for empirical estimation of the effects of choice set constraints. However, as
opposed to standard applications where constraints arise as a result of cognitive limits
among buyers, we use this approach to examine discriminatory constraints that are ex-
ogenous to buyer attention or processing, arising instead from discriminatory behavior
on the part of property managers. In particular, in the current setting, discriminatory
behavior among property managers imposes an ex ante restriction on the housing choices
in sets considered by renters.6 The closest existing application of the consideration sets
model may be Gaynor et al. (2016), who examined changes in the elasticity of demand
with respect to quality of health care in the wake of a reform that exogenously expanded
patient choice sets.
    The consideration sets estimator in the present study identifies preference parame-
ters in the context of experimentally-identified differences in the probability that choices
will be made available to renters in different race groups from a correspondence study.


4
  See Goeree (2008), Moraga-Gonz´ alez et al. (2015), Koulayev (2009), and Gaynor et al. (2016).
5
  Abaluck and Adams (2016) consider an identification strategy based on asymmetric cross derivatives.
6
  In particular, we do not consider the constraints that individuals might impose upon themselves in
response to costly search, assuming that search is relatively easy in the online environment that we focus
on and that individuals can continue to send inquiries until they have found a suitable residence. To the
extent that search costs matter in this environment, our results will present a lower bound on welfare
effects.

                                                    9
This method provides an approach for integrating the results from audit/correspondence
research to search and discrete choice models in a variety of settings.


3     Correspondence Experiment
3.1     Sampling Frame and Data Collection
Our study was executed using a bot designed to collect comprehensive, real-time data
on rental housing listings on a major online realty platform and while sending inquiries
from racially distinct renter identities.7 The bot compiled information for all 3 bed-
room, 2 bathroom rental listings that appeared in five major Metropolitan Statistical
Areas: Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Roswell, GA, Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land, TX,
Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington PA-NJ-DE, San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara CA, and
Cleveland-Elyria OH. The sampling design ensures that estimates reflect differences across
the full set of housing options advertised to prospective renters at the time of an experi-
mental trial, simulating the set of options available to a prospective renter that is searching
on the platform at that time.
    We focus on this market segment as one that corresponds to the choices of renter
families who are considering key neighborhood amenities such as pollution exposures
(Currie et al., 2015) and school quality (Bayer et al., 2007). In addition to housing
features such as monthly rent, square footage, house type, bedrooms, bathrooms, the bot
collected neighborhood characteristics that are visible to renters on the search platform:
average school quality (elementary, middle and high school), the number of local cafes,
and an index of the number of recent murders.8
    The bot also collected data on the ambient concentrations of chemical toxic pollution
at the location of each listing as reported by the EPA's Risk-Screening Environmental In-

7
  The design was implemented with a software stack and compute infrastructure designed by Christensen's
team at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications.
8
  We construct a single aggregate index of school quality using the geometric average of the elementary,
middle and high school scores presented for each listing. This aggregate measure to addresses collinearity
between the three school quality measures. Similarly we use a single measure of crime (murders) rather
than multiple measures (e.g., murders, burglaries, etc.) and a single measure of retail (cafes) rather
than additional measures (e.g., groceries, nightlife) to avoid problems of collinearity. Murder rates have
been shown in other work to capture the dominant and most salient form of crime in revealed preference
studies of damages in the housing market Albouy et al. (2020).

                                                   10
dicators (RSEI) model. The RSEI model accounts for differential releases, meteorological
conditions such as wind speed and direction, decay rates, and other key characteristics
of emissions that can affect exposures (EPA, 2018).9 Recent work provides evidence that
minority renters face discriminatory constraints in neighborhoods with lower levels of
concentration (Christensen et al., 2020).
    The top panel of Table 1 reports summary statistics for key characteristics for each
rental listing. We find substantial variation in rent and neighborhood characteristics both
between and across the five cities in the sample. The average monthly rent in San Jose,
CA ($2,137 per month) is more than double the size of rents in Cleveland, OH ($995 per
month). But even within San Jose, the standard deviation of rents ($513 per month) is
substantial. There is similar heterogeneity across MSA's in air quality, with a mean RSEI
concentration over 37,000 in Houston, while that in San Jose is only 114. As found in a
larger set of rental housing markets with industrial facilities, there is substantial within-
MSA heterogeneity in RSEI (Christensen et al., 2020). Average school quality can range
from 0 to 10. The mean value in San Jose (6.81) contrasts with that in Philadelphia (3.43).
We see similar heterogeneity in the murders index, with a high of 298.89 (Philadelphia)
and a low of 44.98 (San Jose), and cafes, with a high of 47.05 (Philadelphia) and a low
of 5.63 (Houston).
    In order to characterize the racial composition of each census tract in the study, we
collect data from the 2013-17 five-year average ACS, a 1% sample of the total population
(Ruggles et al., 2017). We limit the sample to data describing household heads who are
renters from the five cities. White households constitute the largest group across tracts
in each city, ranging from a high of 70% in Cleveland to 33% in Houston. The second
largest group varies by city ­ Hispanic/LatinX at 35% and 22% in Houston and San Jose,
respectively, and African Americans at 41%, 30% and 19% in Atlanta, Philadelphia and
Cleveland.


9
  The EPA's Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators (RSEI) model uses three primary data sets: Chem-
ical toxicity data, TRI release and transfer quantities, and the location of facilities. RSEI uses the
American Meteorological Society/EPA Regulatory Model (AERMOD). The model incorporates infor-
mation about facilities (location, stack height, etc.), meteorology (wind, wind direction, and ambient
temperature), and chemical specific decay rates to calculate toxic concentrations in a given grid.

                                                 11
3.2      Correspondence Design and Randomization
In a correspondence study, fictitious applicants correspond by mail or via online platform
Bertrand and Duflo (2017). Correspondence studies have analyzed the role of race and
ethnicity (Ewens et al., 2014, Carlsson and Eriksson, 2014, Ahmed and Hammarstedt,
2008, Ahmed et al., 2010, Hanson and Hawley, 2011, Hanson et al., 2011, Carpusor and
Loges, 2006), LGBT status (Ahmed and Hammarstedt, 2009), and immigrant status
(Baldini and Federici, 2011, Bosch et al., 2010) in rental housing markets.
     Two recent experiments study the racial perceptions of names used in correspondence
research by quantifying the congruence between the occurrence of distinctly African
American, Hispanic/LatinX, and white names and the rate of identification (cognitive
association with each group) among survey respondents in the United States (Gaddis,
2017a,b).10 Using the results from Gaddis (2017a,b), we constructed 18 pairs of first and
last names that have the highest probability of identification as belonging to each race
group. The resulting set of fictitious renter identities consisted of 6 distinct first-last name
pairs for each of the three groups. A question that has emerged in prior correspondence
studies using racialized names is the possibility that any given name may signal race
as well as other unobserved characteristics such as income (Guryan and Charles, 2013,
Fryer Jr and Levitt, 2004). To test this empirically, we stratify the sample of first names
using statistical distribution of maternal educational attainment (low, medium, and high)
and gender (male and female) reported in Gaddis (2017a,b). The resulting name groups
consists of three male and three female names, one drawn from each of three levels of
maternal educational attainment (high/medium/low).
     Each rental apartment received a sequence of three separate inquiries directly through
the online platform in the course of an experimental trial. Names were drawn randomly
from the full set of six for each race group. Inquiries for the same listing were never sent
from the same identity or from two different identities on the same day.11 Randomization
of the timing, sequence, and gender/maternal education associated with each inquiry


10
   See Appendix Section A for detail on name selection and the identification rates for each of the names
 in this study.
11
   Balance tests are reported in Table C1.

                                                   12
should guarantee that these characteristics are balanced across the inquiries for each
group. Differences in name pairs or timing could occur, for example, if a listing is taken
offline in the midst a trial. Appendix Table C1 reports balance statistics for the matched
response dataset. We do not find any evidence of differences in the sequence of inquiries,
the day the week that an inquiry is sent, or the frequency of inquiries made from a given
race-gender or race-education pair.
     As it executed each experimental trial, the bot collected data on the exact location,
sequence, and timing of responses. Responses to inquiries were coded using two criteria
that determine whether or not a housing choice is made available: (1) a response was
received within 7 days of the associated inquiry and (2) the response indicated that the
property is available for rent.12 Figure 1 maps raw response data for the listings in each of
the five cities, illustrating the locations where a trial yielded responses to 0, 1, 2, or all 3
of the matched sets of inquiries for a given listing. Figure A.1 graphs the average response
times for the different inquiries. We find that when property managers operating on this
search platform respond, they generally do so within a day of receiving an inquiry. We
received 82% of responses within the first 24 hours, 94% within the first three days, and
97% within the first 5 days of an inquiry.

3.3      Estimating Choice Constraints
The experimental designed yields tests of discriminatory constraints, which are expressed
in terms of within-property relative response rates. As described in the previous section,
each rental apartment receives an inquiry from each of the racial groups in three separate
days. For example, on day one, the manager of the unit could receive an inquiry from
the white identity, then from an African American identity on day two, and from a
Hispanic/LatinX identity on day three. Based on this design, we observe a sequence
of binomial decisions, where the landlord-listing i decides whether to respond (yij = 1,
j = 1, 2, 3) or not if her underlying utility is positive13 :



12
   The 7-day cutoff was used to restrict responses that may be received weeks or months after an inquiry
 and are not counted as choices in the study.
13
   See Appendix B for more details.

                                                   13
                         uij = M inorityj + Xj + i +             ij   j = 1, 2, 3                      (1)


where uij is the utility of the landlord i from inquiry j and         ij   follows a logistic distribution.
Therefore:


                          P (yij = 1|X,  ) = F (M inorityj + Xj + i )                                  (2)


F is the logistic cumulative distribution function. M inorityj is an indicator that takes
the value one if the race group associated with the identity is either African American or
Hispanic/LatinX; and is zero if it is the White identity. Xj is a vector of renter-specific
control variables: gender, education level and the order in which the inquiry was sent.
Assuming that names are drawn randomly and balanced across gender, education level,
and inquiry order, estimates of kj should be robust to the inclusion/omission of Xj . In
Appendix Table C2, we further show that experimental estimates are not sensitive to the
inclusion of these controls.14


3.4     Experimental Findings: Choice Constraints

Experimental Findings: Choice Constraints

Table 2 reports estimates for each of the five housing markets (MSAs) included in the
study, as well as for the full sample. The top row reports estimates for minority identities,
which combines both African American and Hispanic/LatinX identities. The following
two rows report separate estimates for the two minority race groups. At the bottom of
the table, the average response rate for white identities (comparison group) are reported,

14
  Table C2 reports estimates with increasing controls for tester attributes (i.e. gender and education) in
columns 1-4. Randomization of the inquiry process across the 18 identities in the sample ensures that the
only difference between white and non-white testers is in the information conveyed by names. Attribute
controls should have no effect. Estimates for minority identities indicate that estimates are robust across
the sets of controls, including when broken out for African American or Hispanic testers. Attribute
controls do increase the precision of estimates and are used throughout the analysis. A comparison
of estimates on columns 4 and 5 indicates that within-listing estimates of relative response rates are
slightly, but not significantly, different from response rates estimated from between-listing (using only
first inquiries).

                                                    14
along with the total observations (inquiries) and number of observations associated with
properties that yielded an asymmetric response.
     These estimates reveal evidence of discriminatory constraints facing both minority
groups in each of the markets in the sample. We estimate that relative response rates
for minority identities are 68.7%, indicating that minority identities in our sample have
a 31% lower likelihood of accessing a rental property that is listed in the 5 MSAs that
we study at the time of our experiment. This is relative to a 43.4% response rate for
inquiries from white identities. Estimates reported in columns 2-6 indicate substantial
heterogeneity both in baseline response rates and in discriminatory constraints across
MSAs, with the lowest relative response rates (52.7%) found in Philadelphia and the
highest found in Cleveland (74.5%).
     We observe even greater heterogeneity in response rates by race group, with the lowest
and highest relative response rates observed for inquiries from African American renters
­ 35.8% in Philadelphia and 88.8% in Houston. Three of the group-specific estimates are
not statistically significant when broken out by minority group. In Houston and Atlanta,
relative response rates are higher on average for African American than Hispanic/LatinX
identities. In Philadelphia, Cleveland, San Jose, they are higher for Hispanic/LatinX
identities.

Heterogeneity in Choice Constraints: Neighborhood Characteristics

The estimates above indicate that discriminatory constraints vary substantially across
MSAs in the United States. In this section, we report the results of reduced form tests
that examine within-MSA heterogeneity in constraints. In particular, estimates plotted
in Figure 3 examine whether discriminatory constraints reduce the access of minority
renters to property choices that confer higher levels of key neighborhood amenities.15
Each subfigure plots a smoothed function describing the average difference between the
response to a White renter minus that to a renter of color (stacking the data to consider
both differences between white and African American renters and between white and

15
 Refer to figure D.1 for estimates of heterogeneous effects by neighborhood amenity levels for each race
group.

                                                  15
Hispanic/LatinX renters) using the model:

                                N
                            1                                         xi - x0
                 g (x0 ) =            [(Wi - AAi ) + (Wi - HLi )] f                     (3)
                           2N   i=1
                                                                        hx

where Wi , AAi and Li take the value 1 or 0 depending upon whether the white, African
American, or Hispanic/LatinX renter inquiring at property i received a positive response
or not. A function value at x0 equal to 1 would indicate that, at that level of the amenity,
white renters always received responses while renters of color never did. A value of -1
would indicate the opposite. Averages of this discrimination index are smoothed using a
Gaussian kernal, f (.) with a smoothing parameter h equal to five-times Silverman's rule
of thumb (Silverman, 1986). Bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals are displayed around
each function.
   While the study was not designed to guarantee statistically powered tests of differences
in response rates at high versus low amenity levels, these estimates suggest that discrim-
inatory constraints are stronger among properties that have higher rental prices, highly
rated schools, fewer local point sources of chemical toxics (plants reporting emissions to
the EPA Toxics Release Inventory), and lower murder rates in the neighborhood. On
average, there is little evidence of differences in discriminatory constraints with high/low
numbers of cafes, though the standard errors are very high in high cafe neighborhoods,
suggesting that this may be driven by variation across the MSAs.

Heterogeneity in Choice Constraints: Listing Age

A possible explanation for the findings above is that discriminatory constraints are
stronger in neighborhoods with strong demand. In markets with excess demand, models
of animus-based, taste-based, and attention discrimination all predict that it could be
more costly to respond uniformly to all applicants and the opportunity cost associated
with losing a prospective applicant may be lower. Estimates reported in Table 4 compare
response rates for properties that have been on the market for 0-3 days, 3-7 days, and 7+
days. For both minority groups, we find evidence of stronger discriminatory constraints
when sending inquiries to recently listed properties. Among properties that have been



                                                 16
listed for less than 3 days, the relative response rate to an inquiry from a minority identity
is 45.1%. It increases to 70% between 3-7 days and 77.5% after 7 days. Estimates and
column 2 indicate that the patterns are similar across both of the minority race groups.

Heterogeneity in Choice Constraints: Inquiry Order

In Table 3, we further examine heterogeneity in response rates across trials where a
minority identity sends the first, second, or third inquiry (these are each compared to
the response rate for a white identity that sends a first inquiry). Estimates reported in
column 1 indicate that relative response rates to inquiries sent from minority identities fall
substantially when preceded by another inquiry ­ from 55.3% when first, to 36.0% when
second, to 25.2% when third in the sequence. Columns 2 and 3 show that this pattern
is consistent across neighborhoods with above-median shares of white and above-median
shares of minority households, although discriminatory constraints are always stronger in
neighborhoods with higher shares of white households. These results are consistent with
the results on listing age and suggest that competition for housing could be a mechanism
through which response rates for minority applicants diminish in tight housing markets.


4     Neighborhood Sorting with Choice Constraints
In this section, we integrate the experimentally identified estimates of discriminatory
constraints with a structural sorting model, allowing us to study the extent to which
discriminatory constraints imposed during the search process affect both the quantity
and also the quality of options that end up in the renter's post-search choice set. There
may be trade-offs between housing attributes that renters are considering in the context of
discriminatory constraints. For example, a unit may provide a high level of public safety
but poor schools. In order to study the cumulative impact of constraints on neighborhood
choices, we require a set of utility weights. These are provided by the estimates from the
residential sorting model.




                                             17
4.1    Neighborhood Choice Model
We model residential location choices for renters who vary in income and preferences for
key neighborhood attributes. Renters optimally choose a housing unit within a census
tract based on individual incomes and preferences for neighborhood attributes that vary
across tracts. This approach accounts for impacts of discrimination on multiple neigh-
borhood characteristics that may be traded-off for one another in the minds of renters.
   We estimate utility function parameters for neighborhood attributes using InfoUSA's
residential historical dataset, which provides a large panel of the incomes and (ulti-
mate) location decisions of households who moved into rental properties during 2018.
InfoUSA's consumer database tracked 120 million households and 292 million individ-
uals between 2006-2019, and is maintained using 29 billion records from 100 sources
including census statistics, billing statements, telephone directory listings and mail or-
der buyers/magazine subscriptions. Household-level identifiers provide information on
the gender, race/ethnicity, age, address, renter/owner status and estimated household
income of renters that made a move in 2018.
   The bottom panel of Table 1 summarizes these data by MSA. In each city, white
renters have the highest mean income, although the difference between white renters and
renters of color differs greatly across cities. In addition, the ordering of mean income
across groups differs by MSA, with African Americans having the second highest income
in Atlanta, Houston and Philadelphia. Hispanic/LatinX renters have the second highest
income on average in San Jose, and the two groups of color have roughly the same mean
income in Cleveland. Compared to the Census ACS population shares, the InfoUSA
sample of renters has a higher representation of white households, but otherwise follows
the general demographic patterns observed across MSA's. Figure 2 maps the response
rates in each of the five MSAs across the set of census tracts for renter moves were
observed during 2018 in InfoUSA.
   While models of residential location choice (including property-value hedonic models)
typically assume that individuals have the entire range of options available to choose
from in a given market, the experimental evidence reported in Section 3.2 indicates that


                                           18
this assumption is violated in all five of the MSAs that we study. We build constraints
into our structural model directly, allowing experimental variation in choice constraints
across census tracts to differentially constrain the choice sets of the renters observed in
the panel. We begin by considering the utility of renter i choosing to live in tract j :

                                                                  2
                    Ui,j = ln(Ii - Rj ) + Xj i + 1,g g(i),j + 2,g g (i),j +       i,j         (4)


where Ii is the monthly income of renter i (in $1000's), Rj is the monthly rent (in $1000's)
associated with housing units in tract j , Xj captures other attributes of tract j , g(i),j
measures the share of tract j population in group g corresponding to race of renter i,
and   i,j   is an idiosyncratic utility shock for renter i associated with census tract j . The
g(i),j parameter captures the effect of race-specific preferences for local public goods
and amenities that might determine differential sorting patterns. Importantly, the g(i),j
parameter will capture any differences in unobserved neighborhood characteristics such
as retail establishments, churches, and schools that may have an association with the
sorting patterns of a particular racial/ethnic group in the sample. In the absence of
preferences for unobserved neighborhood characteristics that are specific to a given racial
group, g(i),j captures homophily preferences ­ a preference to live near others who are
of the same race. We include a quadratic polynomial in g(i),j to allow for a bliss-point
in own-race.
   Assuming that           i,j    i.i.d. Type I Extreme Value, the probability that renter i will
choose location j is given by:

                                                                           2
                                 exp ln(Ii - Rj ) + Xj  + 1,g g(i),j + 2,g g (i),j
                  Pi,j =                                                                      (5)
                                                                              2
                                 k exp ln(Ii - Rj ) + Xk  + 1,g g (i),k + 2,g g (i),k



The choice probability of any consideration set for renter i is given by i :

                                                                            2
                                  exp ln(Ii - Rj ) + Xj  + 1,g g(i),j + 2,g g (i),j
               Pi,j |i =                                                                      (6)
                                                                                2
                                 ki exp ln(Ii - Rj ) + Xk i + 1,g g (i),k + 2,g g (i),k



The choice of j  (i) renter i must be an element of i . We simulate Ns consideration sets


                                                     19
and take the associated expected probability:

                                                                                      
                                                                    2
                Ns        exp ln(Ii - Rj ) + Xj  + 1,g g(i),j + 2,g g (i),j
  E [Pi,j ] =                                                                          Wi,s    (7)
                                                                            2
                s=1      ki,s exp ln(Ii - Rk ) + Xk i + 1,g g (i),k +   2,g g (i),k


where
                                                     P (i,s )
                                     Wi,s =       Ns
                                                                                               (8)
                                                  m=1   P (i,m )

and
                                                             1-i,j,s
                              P (i,s ) = J      i,j,s
                                         j =1 i,j (1 - i,j )                                   (9)


If j is included in the simulated choice set s for renter i, then i,j,s = 1. The parameter
i,j measures the probability that a renter i in each race/ethnic group can access a choice
in tract j . The weight parameter Wi,s reflects the likelihood that consideration set s
with choice probability i,s is available to renter i. We then maximize the log-likelihood
function based on these probabilities:
                                              N
                                      L=          lnE [Pi,j  (i) ]                            (10)
                                           i=1

where j  (i) refers to the observed census tract choice of individual i. Our analysis pools
data from the five different metropolitan areas in order to increase the external valid-
ity and to provide greater variation in the neighborhood attributes that individuals are
choosing over. Importantly, while we estimate a common set of preference parameters
across markets, we restrict the choice set available to an individual to only include the
tracts in their associated MSA.

4.2     Structural Model Estimates
Table 5 reports the results of our model of residential location choice, incorporating the
choice set constraints imposed by discrimination. Column 1 reports parameter estimates,
all of which are statistically significant. For each of the primary neighborhood attributes,
Column 2 reports measures of marginal willingness-to-pay for a one unit increase in the
attribute, measured as a percentage of income. We begin with our utility function for
individual i living in census tract j :

                                                  20
                                                                       2
                                    Ui,j = Ci eXj  +1,g g(i),j +2,g g(i),j + i,j        (11)


Recognizing that Ci = Ii - Rj given the budget constraint for each renter i, the marginal
willingness to pay (MWTP) for Xj is given by the following expression:
                                                       U
                                                       X       
                                       MW T P =        U
                                                           =    (Ii - Rj )              (12)
                                                       C
                                                               

Dividing by Ii yields a convenient expression for MWTP as a share of income:

                                   MW T P    (Ii - Rj )  
                                          =             = (1 - sH )                     (13)
                                    Ii           Ii      


where sH is the share of household income spent on rent. This implies that marginal
willingness to pay as a share of non-housing expenditures is given by:

                                                 MW T P        
                                                             =                          (14)
                                                Ii (1 - sH )   


In the case of average school quality,  = 1.3060 and  = 0.0537 and the average standard
deviation across our five MSAs is 1.684. This implies a willingness to pay of 6.9% of non-
housing expenditures for a one standard deviation improvement in school quality. For a
household that consumes 20% of income on rent, this would imply a willingness to pay
of about 5.52% of total income for that one standard deviation improvement.16

4.3         Measuring the Effects of Discrimination on Renter Welfare

Discrimination in the online search environment directly affects a renter's choice set. The
random utility choice framework simulates an actual search process and is well-suited for
analyzing impacts of alterations to an individual's choice set. We describe impacts in
terms of equivalent variation in income by first measuring the expected utility associated
with the full (unconstrained) set of all census tracts versus the constrained set.

                               J
                                                                              2
               EUi = log            exp ln(Ii - Rk ) + Xk  + 1,g g(i),k + 2,g g (i),k   (15)
                              k=1

16
     Figure D plots rent-to-income by income and race.

                                                        21
Alternatively, the expected utility associated with the constrained set of choices is given
by:
                                                                                          
                       Ns
       ~ i = log 
      EU                    Wi,s                                                    2
                                          exp ln(Ii - Rk ) + Xk  + 1,g g(i),k + 2,g g          (16)
                                                                                      (i),k
                      s=1          ki,s



We can therefore calculate the equivalent variation in income (EVi ) associated with choice
set constraint from the following equation:

                      J
                                                                           2
            log            exp ln(Ii + EVi - Rk ) + Xk  + 1,g g(i),k + 2,g g (i),k      =      (17)
                     k=1

                                                                                         
                     Ns
                                                                                   2
           log             Wi,s          exp ln(Ii - Rk ) + Xk  + 1,g g(i),k + 2,g g (i),k
                                                                                           
                     s=1          ki,s




      We use Eq. 17 to simulate changes in the EVi that an individual renter receives in
counterfactual search environments. In particular, we simulate the search behavior of a
set of 5,000 African American and 5,000 Hispanic/LatinX renters using random draws
from actual race-specific income distributions in each city. For each renter, we compute
the welfare effects associated with search when confronted with choice set constraints
given by the response probabilities for their group. We then confront the same renter
with the choice set constraints given by the response probabilities recovered for white
identities. This simulation holds constant all aspects of search that are race-specific ­ in
particular, those associated with income and homophily preferences. This allows us to:
(i) isolate the effects of discriminatory constraints that affect the consumption of an array
of neighborhood amenities and (ii) estimate their combined effects with a single welfare
measure.
      Figure 5 reports the distributions of equivalent income variation associated with dis-
criminatory constraints as a share of annual income. For African Americans, the median
value is -3.6% compared to -3.3% for Hispanic/LatinX renters. The mean effects for both
groups is higher (4.6-4.7%) as a result of left tails with damages of over -15%. These find-


                                                       22
ings indicate that the discrimination incurred during the first stage of a search process can
translate result in lost choices that both groups would be willing-to-pay significant sums
to avoid. Furthermore, they suggest important differences across different renters in each
group. The distribution of damages for Hispanic/LatinX is bimodal, with a large mass
of damages centered around 8-10% of annual income. Figure 6 investigates this further
by illustrating shifts in the distribution of damages across different renter income groups.
These histograms demonstrate that the mass of welfare effects increases (moves to the
left) as income rises for African Americans, with a median value of approximately -3%
for those with annual incomes in the $0-30,000/year range. This rises to -8% for those
in the $120,000-150,000/year range. By contrast, damages for Hispanic/LatinX renters
become smaller and the distribution more compressed at higher incomes.
   Figure 7 provides a clear illustration of the way in which monetized damages from dis-
criminatory constraints vary with the incomes of African American and Hispanic/LatinX
renters. Damages rise steadily with income for African Americans, exceeding $10,000/year
for households that earn more than $140,000/year and reaching nearly $15,000/year at
the upper end of the income distribution in our sample. This contrasts with damages
facing Hispanic/LatinX renters, which grow far less slowly among households that earn
more than $60,000/year and begin to stabilize at around $4,000-5,000/year. This reflects
the stronger constraints facing African American renters that search for housing in high
amenity tracts, which are consistent with stronger reduced form effects in high amenity
neighborhoods reported in Appendix C. This difference sheds light on the implications of
housing discrimination on the economic mobility of African American households, which
is shown to differ systematically from that of Hispanic/LatinX households (Chetty and
Hendren, 2018). Discriminatory constraints impose a higher cost of search on econom-
ically mobile African American households that would optimally invest an increasing
fraction of income in high amenity neighborhoods, which are shown to be important for
human capital accumulation.




                                             23
4.4      Measuring the Effects of Discrimination on Housing Search

In the prior section, we found that renters of color face a considerable welfare impact
associated with discriminatory constraints. A natural response might be to invest more
heavily in search to mitigate the welfare effect. However, search is costly. In this section,
we quantify the amount of additional search required for a renter of color to achieve the
same utility outcome as an otherwise identical renter who faces white response probabil-
ities in the rental market.
     We consider 5,000 pairs of renters in each city, using either the median incomes for
African American or Hispanic/LatinX renters from each of the five cities. The non-
random component of utility for pair i is defined by estimates of preferences for neigh-
borhood characteristics in tract j .17

                                       Ui,j = ln(Ii - Rj ) + Xj                                         (18)


Using these preferences, we rank tracts from highest to lowest utility to define the order
of search within a market.18 As the search proceeds through the series of ranked tracts,
the African American or Hispanic/LatinX identity in each pair receives draws from the
appropriate experimental response distribution while the otherwise identical white mem-
ber of the pair receives a draw from the white response distribution. If the individual
does not receive a response for a tract or if the tract exceeds the budget constraint for
the pair, the draw yields a utility of -. Otherwise, the individual records the utility
(including the idiosyncratic preference shock) received from that tract. We simulate a
search across the series of tracts where renters maximize utility according to the following
procedure: if the utility from a given draw is higher than that received from prior draws
in the search, it becomes the max utility. If lower than the max utility obtained from
prior draws, then that tract is ignored. For each African American and white renter, we
17
   We omit homophily preferences from this model in order to compare the search costs incurred by a
 minority renter relative to those incurred by a counterfactual renter with identical preferences.
18
   We assume that the search order is established prior to the realization of the random component of
 preferences. We consider that random component ­ the idiosyncratic preference shock that is the basis for
 the random utility model specification ­ to be the information that is learned upon visiting a residential
 location choice. This is realized conditional upon a successful inquiry about that tract. As such, each pair
                                                                               -x
 receives a common random draw from the Gumbel distribution (F (x) = e-e ) for each tract conditional
 upon the response outcome.

                                                     24
therefore obtain an estimate of the maximum level of utility achieved at every level of
search.
     We combine simulation results across cities by defining different levels of search in-
tensity in terms of the percentage of the city's tracts.19 We combine all simulated indi-
viduals' max utilities across cities and compute the median in each of 100 percentile bins
over 25,000 different renter pairs. We then compute the additional search required by the
median renter of color to obtain the same utility as the median white counterpart.
     Figure 8 reports the additional investments required by African American and His-
panic/LatinX households to obtain the same utility as an equivalent white counterpart.
Dashed lines in each figure describe the excess search required by the minority renter
as a percentage of the search conducted up to that point. These estimates suggest that
minority renters face non-trivial search costs. Minority renters searching in 5-10% of the
tracts in a market would have to increase their search by 15-30% to achieve the same
utility as a white renter. Minority renters searching 25% of the market would increase
their search by approximately 10% (i.e., an additional 2.5% of tracts in the market). For
both African American and Hispanic/LatinX renters, the results suggest increasing ab-
solute levels of search required to achieve the same utility as a comparable white renter.
This is a result of the fact that the tracts searched later in the process are lower-amenity
and provide less utility, so more of them are required.
     In Appendix Figure G.1, we construct a variant of the search simulation that assumes
that minority renters can strategically avoid tracts where they are likely to face increased
discrimination. In particular, we allow white renters and renters of color to differently
order tracts based on expected utility taken with respect to the probability of receiving
a response. African American and Hispanic/LatinX renters will, therefore, avoid higher
amenity tracts where we have found that the likelihood of discrimination is higher for
these groups. The resulting differences in search cost are largely consistent with those
in the baseline model, suggesting that even with information about discriminatory con-
straints, strategic avoidance does not substantially mitigate the search costs of minority

19
 For example, Atlanta has 129 tracts, so 1% of the city searched would be IN T (0.01  129) = 1 tract,
while 4% of Houston, with its 322 tracts, would be IN T (0.04  322) = 13 tracts.

                                                 25
renters in the markets that we study.20 This is largely attributable to a key fact estab-
lished by our reduced-form analysis: discriminatory constraints are correlated with higher
neighborhood amenity levels, making it difficult to strategically avoid the former without
also avoiding the latter.

4.5     Discrimination and the Bias in WTP Measurement

To this point, we have focused on the ways in which search can be used to better measure
the damages from discrimination. In this section, we examine the distortionary effects of
discriminatory behavior on bias in estimates of revealed preference parameters underlying
housing search behavior. This is important, as decisions in the housing market send
powerful implicit signals about demand for local public goods and have been used for
decades to measure the value of key non-market goods and neighborhood amenities.
These values are used to guide decisions about allocation of public resources and to
conduct cost-benefit analysis of regulatory policy. If biases in these estimated values are
correlated with race, discrimination could have important distributional consequences.
     The intuition underlying the bias hypothesis is straightforward. Housing markets pro-
vide valid revealed preference estimates of demand for local public goods, assuming that
households have access to all available choices. Under that condition households reveal
their willingness-to-pay to live in a neighborhood with a marginally better attribute (e.g.,
lower crime rates) compared to an otherwise similar neighborhood with the marginally
worse attribute (e.g., higher crime rates). Systematic exclusion from housing choices in
neighborhoods with higher amenity levels would bias the preferences estimated for the
excluded group. A naive model would assume that this group has low willingness-to-
pay for those amenities. We construct a test for bias using the experimental data and
consideration set model to estimate MWTP as a share of non-housing expenditures that
incorporates choice set constraints. We then compare these to estimates from a naive
model that ignores these constraints. In order to demonstrate the particularly important
role that these biases might play, we re-estimate using a specification that allows for lim-

20
 There is some evidence that strategic avoidance can mitigate costs when at least 75% of a market has
been searched.

                                                 26
ited heterogeneity in MWTP for all amenities based on race. In particular, we allow the
coefficients on the log of income after paying rent and on all non-race tract amenities to
be different for white renters versus renters of color (ROC).21
       The top panel of Table 6 reports estimates from models with and without (naive
model) consideration sets, based on our main specification. While the parameters in
Table 6 include race-specific heterogeneity in preferences parameters, estimates from the
consideration sets model are consistent in signs, magnitudes, and significance level with
those reported in Table 5. In the lower panel, we report the difference in MWTP as a
share of non-housing expenditures without and with consideration sets for white renters
and renters of color. Ignoring consideration sets raises this number for white renters by
0.81%, whereas doing so only raises it by 0.27% for renters of color. Ignoring consideration
sets could, therefore, bias the allocation of school funding based on these benefit numbers
away from a neighborhood that is composed primarily of renters of color and towards a
neighborhood composed primarily of white renters. We find a similar result with respect
to cafes, though the difference is smaller. In the case of murders, ignoring consideration
sets tends to understate MWTP as a share of non-housing expenditures for both white
renters and renters of color, but it does so to a greater extent for the latter group. The
impact of ignoring consideration sets is most stark in the case of RSEI, where the effects
go in opposite directions ­ increasing the willingness to pay to avoid air toxics for white
renters, while reducing it for renters of color.


5         Conclusion
The experimental literature on discrimination has focused largely on reduced form dif-
ferences in discriminatory behavior. Estimates of impacts are limited by the fact that a
researcher never observes how search constraints bind on the decisions of fictitious buy-
ers/renters. This paper combines a correspondence study with a utility-based structural
model of housing search, drawing upon estimation techniques developed in the considera-
tion sets literature to estimate the structural parameters in the context of discriminatory


21
     In our estimation results, renters of color combines the African American and Hispanic/LatinX groups.

                                                     27
constraints that restrict renter choice sets in five major metropolitan housing markets in
the United States.
   The structural estimation approach recovers utility-theoretic measures of welfare cost
associated with the choice set restrictions imposed by discrimination. We find that the
damages from discriminatory constraints in the first stage of a search process are equiva-
lent to 4.5% and 4.6% of income for the average African American and Hispanic/LatinX
renters in our sample, respectively. As a share of income, these damages grow consid-
erably with the level of income for African American renters. This is consistent with
stronger discrimination rates found in high-amenity/high-rent neighborhoods and the
higher marginal value of neighborhood amenities at higher incomes. In addition, we use
our model to examine the extent to which search activity can be used to offset the detri-
mental effects of discrimination. At moderate levels of search, we find that renters of
color are required to undertake approximately 10% more effort on search to achieve the
same level of utility as a white counterpart with the same income and preferences.
   In a final section, we explore the effect of discriminatory constraints on estimates of
the revealed willingness-to-pay for the amenities that we study. Findings from this analy-
sis indicate that by driving a wedge between true amenity preferences and those revealed
by a housing search, discrimination can distort estimates of willingness-to-pay derived
using standard methods. The same distortion affects signals that the housing market
sends to policymakers about the value of key local public goods.


Peter Christensen: University of Illinois
Christopher Timmins: Duke University




                                            28
References
Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G. W., and Wooldridge, J. (2017). When should you adjust
 standard errors for clustering? Working Paper 24003, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Abaluck, J. and Adams, A. (2016). Discrete choice models with consideration sets: Iden-
 tification from asymmetric cross-derivatives.

Ahmed, A. M., Andersson, L., and Hammarstedt, M. (2010). Can Discrimination in
 the Housing Market be Reduced by Increasing the Information about the Applicants?
 Land Economics, 86(1):79­90.

Ahmed, A. M. and Hammarstedt, M. (2008). Discrimination in the Rental Housing
 Market: A Field Experiment on the Internet. Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2):362­
 372.

Ahmed, A. M. and Hammarstedt, M. (2009). Detecting Discrimination Against Homosex-
 uals: Evidence from a field experiment on the Internet. Economica, 76(303):588­597.

Albouy, D., Christensen, P., and Sarmiento-Barbieri, I. (2020). Unlocking amenities:
  Estimating public good complementarity. Journal of Public Economics, 182:104110.

Alesina, A., Baqir, R., and Easterly, W. (1999). Public goods and ethnic divisions. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4):1243­1284.

Aliprantis, D., Carroll, D., and Young, E. R. (2018). Can wealth explain neighborhood
  sorting by race and income? Working Paper.

Aliprantis, D., Martin, H., and Phillips, D. (2019). Landlords and access to opportunity.
  Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Papers, (WP 19-02R).

Baldini, M. and Federici, M. (2011). Ethnic Discrimination in the Italian Rental Housing
  Market. Journal of Housing Economics, 20(1):1­14.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., and McMillan, R. (2007). A Unified Framework for Measuring
  Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy, 115(4):588­
  638.

Bayer, P. and McMillan, R. (2008). Distinguishing racial preferences in the housing
  market: Theory and evidence. In Hedonic methods in housing markets, pages 225­244.
  Springer.

Bergman, P., Chetty, R., DeLuca, S., Hendren, N., Katz, L. F., and Palmer, C. (2019).
  Creating moves to opportunity: Experimental evidence on barriers to neighborhood
  choice. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bertrand, M. and Duflo, E. (2017). Field Experiments on Discrimination. In Handbook
  of Economic Field Experiments, volume 1, pages 309­393. Elsevier.

Black, S. E. (1999). Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary educa-
  tion. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):577­599.


                                           29
Bosch, M., Carnero, M. A., and Farre, L. (2010). Information and Discrimination in
  the Rental Housing Market: Evidence from a Field Experiment. Regional Science and
  Urban Economics, 40(1):11­19.

Caplin, A., Dean, M., and Leahy, J. (2019). Rational inattention, optimal consideration
  sets, and stochastic choice. The Review of Economic Studies, 86(3):1061­1094.

Carlsson, M. and Eriksson, S. (2014). Discrimination in the Rental Market for Apart-
  ments. Journal of Housing Economics, 23:41­54.

Carpusor, A. G. and Loges, W. E. (2006). Rental Discrimination and Ethnicity in Names.
  Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 36(4):934­952.

Chamberlain, G. (1980). Analysis of covariance with qualitative data, the review of
  economic studies, vo1. 47, no. 1ij f. Econometrics Issue, 1.

Champ, P. A., Boyle, K., and Brown, T. C. (2003). A Primer on Non-Market Valuation:
  The Economics of Non-Market Goods and Services ­ Volume 3.

Chay, K. Y. and Greenstone, M. (2005). Does air quality matter? evidence from the
  housing market. Journal of political Economy, 113(2):376­424.

Chetty, R. and Hendren, N. (2018). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
  Mobility II: County-level estimates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3):1163­
  1228.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Jones, M. R., and Porter, S. R. (2018). Race and Economic
  Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Working Paper No. w24441.

Christensen, P., Sarmiento-Barbieri, I., and Timmins, C. (2020). Housing discrimination
  and pollution exposures in the united states. NBER Working Paper No. w26805.

Christensen, P. and Timmins, C. (2018). Sorting or Steering: Experimental Evidence on
  the Economic Effects of Housing Discrimination. NBER Working Paper No. w24826.

Crabtree, C. and Chykina, V. (2018). Last name selection in audit studies. Sociological
  Science, 5:21­28.

Currie, J., Davis, L., Greenstone, M., and Walker, R. (2015). Environmental Health
  Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings and Closings.
  American Economic Review, 105(2):678­709.

Draganska, M. and Klapper, D. (2011). Choice set heterogeneity and the role of ad-
  vertising: An analysis with micro and macro data. Journal of Marketing Research,
  48(4):653­669.

Edelman, B., Luca, M., and Svirsky, D. (2017). Racial discrimination in the sharing
  economy: Evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 9(2):1­22.

Eliaz, K. and Spiegler, R. (2011). Consideration sets and competitive marketing. The
  Review of Economic Studies, 78(1):235­262.

                                          30
EPA (2018). Epa's risk-screening environmental indicators (rsei) methodology rsei version
  2.3.7. Washington, DC.

Epple, D., Filimon, R., and Romer, T. (1984). Equilibrium among local jurisdictions:
  Toward an integrated treatment of voting and residential choice. Journal of public
  economics, 24(3):281­308.

Epple, D. and Sieg, H. (1999). Estimating equilibrium models of local jurisdictions.
  Journal of political economy, 107(4):645­681.

Ewens, M., Tomlin, B., and Wang, L. C. (2014). Statistical Discrimination or Prejudice?
 A Large Sample Field Experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1):119­134.

Fryer Jr, R. G. and Levitt, S. D. (2004). The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively
  Black Names. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3):767­805.

Gaddis, S. M. (2017a). How Black are Lakisha and Jamal? Racial perceptions from
 names used in correspondence audit studies. Sociological Science, 4:469­489.

Gaddis, S. M. (2017b). Racial/Ethnic Perceptions from Hispanic Names: Selecting Names
 to Test for Discrimination. Socius, 3:1­11.

Galiani, S., Murphy, A., and Pantano, J. (2015). Estimating neighborhood choice mod-
 els: Lessons from a housing assistance experiment. American Economic Review,
 105(11):3385­3415.

Gaynor, M., Propper, C., and Seiler, S. (2016). Free to choose? reform, choice, and
 consideration sets in the english national health service. American Economic Review,
 106(11):3521­57.

Gibbons, S. (2004). The costs of urban property crime. The Economic Journal, 114(499).

Glaeser, E. L., Kim, H., and Luca, M. (2018). Nowcasting gentrification: using yelp data
  to quantify neighborhood change. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, volume 108, pages
  77­82.

Goeree, M. S. (2008). Limited information and advertising in the us personal computer
 industry. Econometrica, 76(5):1017­1074.

Graham, B. S. (2018). Identifying and Estimating Neighborhood Effects. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 56(2):450­500.

Guryan, J. and Charles, K. K. (2013). Taste-Based or Statistical Discrimination: The
 Economics of Discrimination Returns to Its Roots. The Economic Journal, 123(572).

Hanson, A. and Hawley, Z. (2011). Do Landlords Discriminate in the Rental Housing
  Market? Evidence from an Internet Field Experiment in US Cities. Journal of Urban
  Economics, 70(2-3):99­114.

Hanson, A., Hawley, Z., Martin, H., and Liu, B. (2016). Discrimination in Mortgage
  Lending: Evidence from a Correspondence Experiment. Journal of Urban Economics,
  92:48­65.


                                           31
Hanson, A., Hawley, Z., and Taylor, A. (2011). Subtle Discrimination in the Rental
  Housing Market: Evidence from e-mail Correspondence with Landlords. Journal of
  Housing Economics, 20(4):276­284.

Heckman, J. J. (1998). Detecting Discrimination. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  12(2):101­116.

Hsiao, C. (1986). Analysis of panel data. Cambridge university press.

Ioannides, Y. M. (2011). Neighborhood effects and housing. In Handbook of Social
  Economics, volume 1, pages 1281­1340. Elsevier.

Kim, J. B., Albuquerque, P., and Bronnenberg, B. J. (2010). Online demand under
  limited consumer search. Marketing science, 29(6):1001­1023.

Koulayev, S. (2009). Estimating demand in search markets: The case of online hotel
 bookings.

Kuminoff, N. V., Smith, V. K., and Timmins, C. (2013). The New Economics of Equi-
 librium Sorting and Policy Evaluation Using Housing Markets. Journal of Economic
 Literature, 51(4):1007­62.

Lang, K. and Lehmann, J.-Y. K. (2012). Racial discrimination in the labor market:
  Theory and empirics. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(4):959­1006.

Li, N. Y. (2019). Housing Market Channels of Segregation. Working Paper.

List, J. A. (2004). The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence
  from the Field. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):49­89.

Manzini, P. and Mariotti, M. (2014). Stochastic choice and consideration sets. Econo-
 metrica, 82(3):1153­1176.

Masatlioglu, Y., Nakajima, D., and Ozbay, E. Y. (2012). Revealed attention. American
 Economic Review, 102(5):2183­2205.

Moraga-Gonz´ alez, J. L., S´
                           andor, Z., and Wildenbeest, M. R. (2015). Consumer search
 and prices in the automobile market.

Neumark, D. (2018). Experimental research on labor market discrimination. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 56(3):799­866.

Ouazad, A. and Ranci` ere, R. (2019). City Equilibrium with Borrowing Constraints:
 Structural estimation and general equilibrium effects. International Economic Review,
 60(2):721­749.

Palmquist, R. B. (2005). Property Value Models. Handbook of Environmental Economics,
  2:763­819.

Pancras, J. (2010). A framework to determine the value of consumer consideration set
  information for firm pricing strategies. Computational Economics, 35(3):269­300.




                                          32
Papachristos, A. V., Smith, C. M., Scherer, M. L., and Fugiero, M. A. (2011). More
  coffee, less crime? the relationship between gentrification and neighborhood crime
  rates in chicago, 1991 to 2005. City & Community, 10(3):215­240.

Phillips, D. C. (2016). Do Comparisons of Fictional Applicants Measure Discrimination
  When Search Externalities are Present? Evidence from existing experiments. The
  Economic Journal.

Ruggles, S., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., Grover, J., and Sobek, M. (2017). Integrated
 Public Use Microdata Series: Version 7.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: University of
 Minnesota.

Silverman, B. W. (1986). Density estimation for statistics and data analysis, volume 26.
   CRC press.

Stigler, G. J. (1961). The economics of information. Journal of political economy,
  69(3):213­225.

Tiebout, C. M. (1956). A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political
  Economy, 64(5):416­424.

Todd, P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2020). The best of both worlds: Combining rcts with
  structural modeling. Journal of Economic Literature.

Trounstine, J. (2016). Segregation and inequality in public goods. American Journal of
  Political Science, 60(3):709­725.

Turner, M. A., Santos, R., Levy, D. K., Wissoker, D., Aranda, C., and Pitingolo, R.
  (2013). Housing Discrimination Against Racial and Ethnic Minorities 2012.




                                          33
                       Table 1. Summary Statistics: Neighborhood Characteristics

                                        Atlanta, GA            Houston, TX            Philadelphia, PA        Cleveland, OH           San Jose, CA
 Parameter                           Mean       Std. Dev.    Mean        Std. Dev.   Mean       Std. Dev.   Mean       Std. Dev.   Mean       Std. Dev.
 Rental Listings (Search Platform)
 Monthly Rent                        1167.19      290.17     1120.00      355.13     1157.94      336.31    994.55      379.42     2137.11      513.53
 Ave School Quality                    5.07         1.46      4.57         1.82       3.43         1.24       4.93       2.17        6.81        1.73
 Cafes                                15.90        14.09      5.63         7.19       47.05       37.29       3.20       3.38       11.75        7.98
 Murder Index                        273.87       281.89     175.00       155.50     298.89      311.38      98.75      149.39      44.98       62.31
 Toxics Concentration (RSEI)         638.30       466.76    37006.13     45389.93    4312.55     3266.31    9605.46     9523.51     114.36      133.18
 American Community Survey
 African American Share               0.41         0.34       0.21         0.22       0.30         0.31      0.19        0.25       0.02         0.02
 LatinX Share                         0.07         0.09       0.35         0.21       0.08         0.07      0.05        0.07       0.22         0.18
 White Share                          0.43         0.30       0.33         0.25       0.51         0.29      0.70        0.26       0.38         0.20
 InfoUSA Renter Dataset
 Renter Income
 African American                    36, 390      16, 460   36, 970       20, 660    36, 730      24, 380   28, 470     14, 540    79, 480      47, 440
 Hipanic/LatinX                      44, 790      20, 130   39, 730       22, 450    47, 830      30, 630   28, 950     13, 930    74, 730      43, 780
 White                               49, 010      21, 290   50, 800       27, 150    62, 810      31, 320   36, 090     17, 820    90, 800      50, 820
 Housing Expenditure Share
 African American                     0.40         0.16       0.40         0.17       0.42         0.18      0.42        0.16       0.40         0.19
 Hipanic/LatinX                       0.39         0.16       0.39         0.17       0.39         0.18      0.38        0.13       0.40         0.19
 White                                0.37         0.16       0.36         0.18       0.34         0.17      0.35        0.15       0.36         0.19
 Rent-to-Income Ratio                 0.37         0.16       0.38         0.17       0.36         0.18      0.37        0.15       0.37         0.19
 Population Share
 African American                     0.25                    0.23                    0.21                   0.25                   0.02
 Hipanic/LatinX                       0.06                    0.22                    0.06                   0.05                   0.22
 White                                0.68                    0.55                    0.72                   0.71                   0.77

 Census Tracts                               n = 129                 n = 322                 n = 138                n = 92                 n = 184

Notes: Table reports descriptive statistics (mean and std. dev. at the census tract level) for neighbor-
hood characteristics obtained from rental listings on the search platform used in the experiment (toxics
concentrations come from the EPA RSEI model), from the 2013-2017 American Community Survey, and
from InfoUSA renter data.




                                                                           34
                 Table 2. Evidence of Discrimination on Housing Choice by City

    Race Group               All Cities       Atlanta, GA       Houston, TX       Philadelphia, PA     Cleveland, OH      San Jose, CA

    Minority                  0.6865***         0.6519***         0.7940***           0.5274***           0.7450***         0.6088***
                          (0.6250 - 0.7541) (0.5370 - 0.7912) (0.7045 - 0.8949)   (0.4043 - 0.6880)   (0.6311 - 0.8796) (0.5155 - 0.7190)

    Hispanic                  0.7437***         0.6262***         0.7114***             0.7828              0.7896          0.7326***
                          (0.6648 - 0.8318) (0.4853 - 0.8081) (0.6396 - 0.7913)   (0.5794 - 1.0576)   (0.6079 - 1.0257) (0.6049 - 0.8873)
    African American          0.6342***         0.6806***           0.8876            0.3582***           0.7028***         0.5162***
                          (0.5629 - 0.7145) (0.5526 - 0.8383) (0.7680 - 1.0258)   (0.2581 - 0.4972)   (0.6192 - 0.7975) (0.4320 - 0.6168)

    Mean Choice (White)        0.434             0.347              0.173              0.528               0.459              0.692
    Matched Listings           5,451             1,128               792                402                1,506              1,623
    Total Observations         18045             3093               4710                972                4254               5016


Notes: Columns 1 reports estimates of relative response rates for the full sample of listings across all
cities, with standard errors clustered at the MSA level. Estimates in Columns 2-5 report estimates
of relative response rates by city. Response rates are estimated relative to responses to inquiries sent
from a White identity (the omitted category). The average response rate for inquiries sent from white
identities are reported for each sample. 90% confidence intervals are reported in parentheses. Sample
sizes are reported for matched inquiry sets (a set includes inquiries sent from all three identities) and
total observations (where a fully matched set was not obtained). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  35
                   Table 3. Discriminatory Constraint by Inquiry Sequence

   Group                         Full Sample       White Neighborhoods        Minority Neighborhoods

   Minority-1st                   0.5532***               0.3149***                   0.5959***
                              (0.4418 - 0.6926)       (0.1898 - 0.5224)           (0.4505 - 0.7883)
   Minority-2nd                   0.3596***               0.2004***                   0.4352***
                              (0.2654 - 0.4873)       (0.1164 - 0.3451)           (0.2860 - 0.6624)
   Minority-3rd                   0.2519***               0.1598***                   0.2851***
                              (0.1840 - 0.3449)       (0.0984 - 0.2596)           (0.1868 - 0.4353)
   White-2nd                      0.4030***               0.2821***                   0.3727***
                              (0.3058 - 0.5311)       (0.1560 - 0.5104)           (0.2520 - 0.5513)
   White-3rd                      0.3334***               0.1899***                   0.3417***
                              (0.2356 - 0.4719)       (0.1000 - 0.3604)           (0.2117 - 0.5516)

   Mean Choice (White)              0.334                   0.334                       0.334
   Matched Listings                 3,828                    903                         978
   Total Observations               13029                   3243                        3276

Notes: Columns 1-3 report estimates of relative response rates to inquiries that were the first, second or
third in the sequence, relative to response rates to a first inquiry that is sent from a White identity (the
omitted category). Estimates in Columns 2-3 split the sample into listings in census block groups where
the share of White households is above or below the median within the MSA. Standard errors are clustered
at the MSA level. 90% confidence intervals are reported in parentheses.Sample sizes are reported for
matched inquiry sets (a set includes inquiries sent from all three identities) and total observations (where
a fully matched set was not obtained) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    36
                    Table 4. Discriminatory Constraint by Days on Market

                 Race Group                            Combined          Group Specific

                 LatinX: 0-3 Days                                            0.4213*
                                                                        (0.2001 - 0.8870)
                 LatinX: 3-7 Days                                            0.6842**
                                                                        (0.5333 - 0.8778)
                 LatinX: 7+ Days                                             0.8157**
                                                                        (0.7092 - 0.9382)
                 African American: 0-3 Days                                   0.4813
                                                                        (0.2262 - 1.0243)
                 African American: 3-7 Days                                   0.7137
                                                                        (0.4323 - 1.1783)
                 African American: 7+ Days                                  0.7362***
                                                                        (0.6109 - 0.8873)
                 Minority: 0-3 Days                     0.4511*
                                                   (0.2249 - 0.9050)
                 Minority: 3-7 Days                    0.6988**
                                                   (0.5194 - 0.9402)
                 Minority: 7+ Days                     0.7752***
                                                   (0.6802 - 0.8834)

                 Mean Choice (White)                     0.334                0.334
                 Matched Listings                        3,828                3,828
                 Total Observations                      13029                13029

Notes: Columns 1-2 report estimates of relative response rates for properties that, as of the beginning of
a trial, were on the market for 0-3, 3-7, or greater than 7 days. Estimates in Column 1 pool all minority
identities, while estimates in Column 2 report group-specific effects. split the sample into listings in
census block groups where the share of White households is above or below the median within the MSA.
Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. 90% confidence intervals are reported in parentheses.
Sample sizes are reported for matched inquiry sets (a set includes inquiries sent from all three identities)
and total observations (where a fully matched set was not obtained). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    37
                                 Table 5. Parameter Estimates

   Parameter                                     Consideration Sets     WTP/Non-Housing Exp
                                                             
   ln(I-R)                                             1.3060
                                                       (0.0293)
   Avg School Quality                                 0.0537                      0.0411
                                                       (0.0038)              [0.0394, 0.0429]
   Cafes                                              0.0076                      0.0059
                                                       (0.0002)              [0.0056, 0.0061]
   Murders                                           -0.0017                     -0.0013
                                                    (4.02 x 10-5 )         [-0.0013, -0.0012]
   ln(RSEI)                                          -0.0625                     -0.0479
                                                       (0.0064)            [-0.0500, -0.0459]
   White % White                                      0.0900
                                                       (0.0014)
   White % White2                                  -7.32 x 10-4 
                                                    (1.22 x 10-5 )
   African American % African American                0.0985
                                                       (0.0019)
   African American % African American2            -6.06 x 10-4 
                                                    (1.67 x 10-5 )
   LatinX % LatinX                                    0.0812
                                                       (0.0023)
   LatinX % LatinX2                                -8.97 x 10-4 
                                                    (2.70 x 10-5 )

Notes: Table reports parameter estimates from baseline model specification with consideration sets.
Column 1 reports coefficient estimates. Column 2 reports estimates of willingness-to-pay as a share of
non-housing expenditures with 95% confidence intervals derived by sampling the willingness to pay ratio
from the variance-covariance matrix of the estimated parameters. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  38
                                Table 6. Bias in Willingness to Pay

 Variable                                         Consideration Sets             No Consideration Sets
 ln(I-R)                                               1.2996                           1.2369
                                                        (0.0363)                         (0.0360)
 Avg School Quality                                    0.0618                           0.0687
                                                        (0.0043)                         (0.0043)
 Cafes                                                 0.0083                           0.0130
                                                        (0.0002)                         (0.0002)
 Murders                                              -0.0013                          -0.0012
                                                        (0.0001)                         (0.0001)
 ln(RSEI)                                             -0.0255                          -0.0285
                                                        (0.0078)                         (0.0077)
 ln(I-R) x ROC                                           0.0929                           0.0502
                                                        (0.0620)                         (0.0611)
 Avg School Quality x ROC                             -0.0321                          -0.0378
                                                        (0.0088)                         (0.0043)
 Cafes x ROC                                          -0.0042                          -0.0045
                                                        (0.0006)                         (0.0006)
 Murders x ROC                                        -0.0007                          -0.0006
                                                        (0.0001)                         (0.0001)
 ln(RSEI) x ROC                                       -0.1327                           -0.0326
                                                        (0.0136)                         (0.0135)
 White % White                                         0.0908                           0.0875
                                                        (0.0014)                         (0.0013)
 White % White2                                     -7.32 x 10-4                     -7.06 x 10-4 
                                                     (1.23 x 10-5 )                   (1.22 x 10-5 )
 African American % African American                   0.0985                           0.1031
                                                        (0.0019)                         (0.0019)
 African American % African American2               -5.98 x 10-4                     -6.63 x 10-4 
                                                     (1.68 x 10-5 )                   (1.64 x 10-5 )
 LatinX % LatinX                                       0.0753                           0.0681
                                                        (0.0024)                         (0.0024)
 LatinX % LatinX2                                   -8.51 x 10-4                     -6.83 x 10-4 
                                                     (2.73 x 10-5 )                   (2.70 x 10-5 )

                                        [WTP(NCS) - WTP(CS)]/Non-Housing Exp
 Variable                                             White                         Renters of Color
 Avg School Quality                                       0.0081                          0.0027
                                                    [0.0039 , 0.0122]               [0.0010 , 0.0045]
 Cafes                                                    0.0041                          0.0037
                                                    [0.0034 , 0.0048]               [0.0033 , 0.0041]
 Murders                                               2.00 x 10-5                     7.00 x 10-5
                                              [-5.00 x 10-5 , 1.10 x 10-4 ]    [-4.00 x 10-5 , 1.80 x 10-4 ]
 ln(RSEI)                                                -0.0034                          0.0662
                                                  [-0.0052 , -0.0017]               [0.0603 , 0.0729]

Notes: Table reports differences in parameter estimates from model specifications that include/omit
consideration sets using experimentally identified discriminatory constraints. Upper panel reports differ-
ences in parameter estimates with 95% confidence intervals derived by sampling the willingness to pay
ratio from the variance-covariance matrix of the estimated parameters. Lower panel reports differences
in willingness to pay as a share of non-housing expenditure without and with consideration sets, for
white renters and renters of color for four different amenities. 95% confidence intervals are derived by
sampling willingness to pay ratios from the variance-covariance matrices of the estimated parameters.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    39
                  Figure 1. Within-Listing Response Differential by MSA




          (a) Atlanta, GA (n=3,093)                         (b) Philadelphia, PA (n=972)




           (c) Cleveland, OH (n=4,254)                     (d) Houston, TX (n=4,710)




                                    (e) San Jose, CA (n=5,016)
Notes: Figures map the raw data from matched response sets for the five Metropolitan Statistical Areas
in the experiment. Matched responses refer to the number of responses returned from a single property
over the course of the 3-day trial.




                                                 40
                           Figure 2. Differential Responses by Tract
                 African American - White                Hispanic/LatinX - White




Notes: Figures map the average difference in response rates to African American and Hispanic/LatinX
identities (relative to White) in each census tract for the five Metropolitan Statistical Areas in the
experiment. Census tracts where renters are observed to move in 2018 are included in the sample and
colored. Census tracts that contain information from
                                                   41the experimental trials are shown with blue borders.
All other tracts do not contain data on renter moves/response rates and are omitted from the structural
model.
      Figure 3. Discriminatory Constraints by Attribute (White - Renter of Color)




                                               A: Rental Price




                     B: Murder Index                             C: Average School Rating




              D: Toxic Concentrations (RSEI)                             E: Cafes

Notes: Figures plot differential constraints for renters of color (African American and Hispanic/LatinX)
relative to White by attributes observed in rental listings collected in the experiment using estimates
from Eq. 3. Increases in differential response correspond to increases in discriminatory constraints.




                                                     42
              Figure 4. Response Rates by Neighborhood Demographic Shares
                 African American                                    Hispanic/LatinX




               (a)   African American Share                        (b)   African American Share




               (c)   Hispanic/LatinX Share                         (d)   Hispanic/LatinX Share




                     (e)   White Share                                    (f)   White Share

Notes: Figures plot differential constraints for renters of color (African American and Hispanic/LatinX)
relative to white renters by ethnic/racial composition using estimates from Eq. 3. Increases in differential
response correspond to increases in discriminatory constraints. Racial composition is observed at the
block group level using the 2013-2017 American Community Survey.




                                                    43
  Figure 5. Annualized Damages as a Share of Annual Income (Equivalent Variation)




Note: The figure graphs the distribution of renter welfare effects (compensating variation as a share of
renter income) resulting from discriminatory constraints as measured by the correspondence experiment.
Plots illustrate damages to African American renters (top) and Hispanic/LatinX renters (bottom), with
solid vertical lines denoting the mean and dashed vertical lines denoting the median estimates.




                                                  44
         Figure 6. Annualized Damages by Income Group (Equivalent Variation)




Note: Graphs plot the distributions of renter welfare effects (compensating variation as a share of renter
income) at different levels of renter income. Each plot illustrates a distribution of effects for the follow-
ing renter income groups: $0-30,000, $30,000-60,000, $60,000-90,000, $90,000-120,000, $120,000-150,000.
Blue and red vertical lines denote median effects for African American renters and Hispanic/LatinX
renters, respectively.




                                                     45
             Figure 7. Annualized Damages by Income (Equivalent Variation)




Note: Top panel graphs the distribution of renter welfare effects (compensating variation in dollars per
year) resulting from discriminatory constraints as measured by the correspondence experiment. Blue
points show effects for African American renters and red points plot effects for Hispanic/LatinX renters.
Bottom panels graph the distribution of renter incomes from the InfoUSA renter sample.




                                                   46
                                      Figure 8. Search Intensity
                                          (a) African American




                                           (b) Hispanic/LatinX




Note: Graph plots results of 25,000 simulations of additional search required by an African American (top
panel) or Hispanic/LatinX (bottom panel) renter to obtain the same expected utility as an equivalent
white renter at different levels of search intensity. Search intensity is normalized across the 5 cities using
binned percentiles of the number of tracts in each market (x-axis). For example, Atlanta has 129 tracts,
so 1% of the city searched would be IN T (0.01  129) = 1 tract, while 4% of Houston, with its 322 tracts,
would be IN T (0.04  322) = 13 tracts. Dashed line measures the median search cost differential in
percent terms (left axis) and solid line measures the median search cost differential in level (right axis).




                                                     47
Appendix A                                                             Experimental Design


                                      Appendix
A      Experimental Design
Correspondence Research Design
In a correspondence experiment, a researcher elicits racialized perceptions in a trial by
constructing fictitious identities and experimentally varying a single trait (Bertrand and
Duflo, 2017). The majority of correspondence research has focused on the use of racially
distinct names as the trait used to elicit discriminatory behavior. While there are limi-
tations associated with the use of a particular trait, the consistent use of this design has
enabled researchers to learn about racial perceptions of names across studies as well as in
the general population. Correspondence studies select names that are likely to elicit be-
havior, such that the resulting actions can be clearly attributed to racialized perceptions.
These names are not necessarily representative of names in the population at large. Multi-
ple randomized experiments have focused exclusively on the alignment between perceived
associations with an ethnic/racial group and self-identified racial identity (Crabtree and
Chykina, 2018, Gaddis, 2017a,b).
    A concern that arises in both audit and correspondence studies is the potential for
those being audited to check the online profile of the tester or fictitious applicant. Nearly
all correspondence studies rely on the assumption that online search tools will not affect
the interpretation of results. The extent to which this assumption holds may vary across
different settings. We highlight the following features of the present setting in this regard:

  1. Our correspondence design focuses on the first contact in a housing search, where
     the returns to learning about a respondent are low. We might expect online research
     to occur in later stages of contact.

  2. Our study utilizes names that are sampled from the highest percentiles of the dis-
     tribution of each of three racial groups. By construction, these very common names
     will be linked to many possible online identities. For example, if a property man-
     ager were to conduct a google search of one of our fictitious identities, they would
     retrieve results like: this example. It is likely that a large fraction of the renter
     population also has a weak online presence. We assume that the likelihood that
     property managers will be affected by (the absence of) identifiable online informa-
     tion is low.

Name Selection
First names are taken from the work of Gaddis (2017a,b), which experimentally tests for
congruence between the statistical distribution in birth records and the probability of
external classification by survey respondents. Gaddis describes the selection procedure:

     "I selected names for this study using New York state birth record data for all
     births from 1994 to 2012 obtained from the New York State Department of Health
     to examine population-level race and SES characteristics. These data separately
     list the total number of births by (1) name and mother's race and (2) name and
     mother's education. This data structure allowed me, for example, to choose two


                                             48
Appendix A                                                               Experimental Design


     names similar in terms of mother's race but different in terms of mother's education-
     in other words, a black lower-SES name and a black middle- to upper-SES name.
     Two examples used in this study are DaQuan and Jabari; 91.8 percent of chil-
     dren named DaQuan and 92.1 percent of children named Jabari are born to black
     mothers. These names are equal in blackness but vary by mother's education; only
     12.8 percent of mothers who name their child DaQuan have some college or more
     education, whereas 56.8 percent of mothers who name their child Jabari have some
     college or more education. Additionally, when possible, I selected names that were
     used in previous or ongoing audit studies from different disciplines (e.g., Bertrand
     and Mullainathan 2004; Gaddis 2015; Milkman et al. 2012)."

Gaddis finds congruence rates of 75%, 75.5%, and 87.3%, respectively, for African Amer-
ican, Hispanic, and White first names. When last names are included, Gaddis finds that
congruence rates increase to 82.5%, 97.3%, and 92.4% for African American, Hispanic,
and White first-last name pairs, respectively. Gaddis also shows that congruence rates
for all groups decline when first names are (mis)matched with last names from a different
group. Based on this evidence, we select first-last name pairs that are shown to have a
high probability of eliciting racially congruent perceptions. Panel A of Table A1 reports
the identification rates from Gaddis (2017a,b) for the specific subset of first names that
we use in the present study. In the study, we use the following first-last name pairs: Nia
Harris, Jalen Jackson, Ebony James, Lamar Williams, Shanice Thomas, DaQuan Robin-
son, Isabella Lopez, Jorge Rodriguez, Mariana Morales, Pedro Sanchez, Jimena Ramirez,
Luis Torres, Aubrey Murphy, Caleb Peterson, Erica Cox, Charlie Myers, Leslie Wood,
Ronnie Miller. In every case, congruence rates increase with the inclusion of a correctly
matched last name.




                                              49
Appendix A                                                                                                 Experimental Design




     Table A1. Identification Rates for First Names and Last Name Frequencies

                                   Panel A. Identification Rates from Gaddis (2017a,b) (%)
              Race                 First                No                Last Name              Quartile
                                   Name             Last Name              Included          mother's education
              African American     Nia                   41                   65                   High
              African American     Jalen                 63                   71                   High
              African American     Ebony                 91                   95                   Med
              African American     Lamar                 88                   94                   Med
              African American     Shanice               93                   92                   Low
              African American     DaQuan                91                   96                   Low
              Hispanic/LatinX      Isabella              48                   98                   High
              Hispanic/LatinX      Jorge                 86                   98                   High
              Hispanic/LatinX      Mariana               78                   99                   Med
              Hispanic/LatinX      Pedro                 98                   99                   Med
              Hispanic/LatinX      Jimena                49                   97                   Low
              Hispanic/LatinX      Luis                  83                   99                   Low
              White                Aubrey                90                   93                   High
              White                Caleb                 77                   84                   High
              White                Erica                 82                   93                   Med
              White                Charlie               86                   91                   Med
              White                Leslie                72                   93                   Low
              White                Ronnie                71                   89                   Low
                              Panel B. Last Names Frequency of Occurrence in 2010 Census (%)
              Race                Last Name     African American     Hispanic/LatinX               White
              African American     Harris               42.4                  2.3                   51.4
              African American     Jackson              53.0                  2.5                   39.9
              African American     James                38.9                  3.1                   51.6
              African American     Williams             47.7                  2.5                   45.8
              African American     Thomas               38.8                  2.5                   52.6
              African American     Robinson             44.9                  2.6                   48.7
              Hispanic/LatinX      Lopez                0.6                  92.9                    4.9
              Hispanic/LatinX      Rodriguez             0.5                 93.8                    4.8
              Hispanic/LatinX      Morales               0.6                 93.2                    4.6
              Hispanic/LatinX      Sanchez               0.5                 93.0                    5.0
              Hispanic/LatinX      Ramirez               0.3                 94.5                    3.9
              Hispanic/LatinX      Torres                0.6                 92.2                    5.4
              White                Murphy               11.5                  2.3                   83.1
              White                Peterson             10.1                  2.4                   84.4
              White                Cox                  12.1                  2.3                   82.6
              White                Myers                10.5                  2.1                   84.5
              White                Wood                 5.6                  2.4                    88.7
              White                Miller               10.8                  2.2                   84.1

               Notes: In the study, we use the following first-last name pairs; Nia Harris, Jalen Jackson, Ebony
              James, Lamar Williams, Shanice Thomas, DaQuan Robinson, Isabella Lopez, Jorge Rodriguez, Mariana
              Morales, Pedro Sanchez, Jimena Ramirez, Luis Torres, Aubrey Murphy, Caleb Peterson, Erica Cox,
              Charlie Myers, Leslie Wood, Ronnie Miller.




                                                               50
Appendix A                                                            Experimental Design


Panel B reports the set of last names used in our study and examined in Gaddis (2017a,b),
which were generated using the distribution from the 2010 Census. We note that imperfect
(< 100%) name-race congruence shown by Gaddis has implications for the interpretation
of our results since names with lower levels of congruence will be less likely to induce
discriminatory behavior. The fact that African American names are associated with lower
congruence than LatinX names suggests that our results may understate discriminatory
constraints facing the African American group relative to the LatinX group. We also
note that heterogeneity in congruence by maternal education (lower congruence for the
low maternal education group) may mean that our estimates understate constraints for
renters with low maternal education.
    The birth record data used in Gaddis (2017a) cover the years 1994 to 2012, making
them relevant for renters under age 25 as of the time of our study. Gaddis (2017a) explains
the choice to use the full set of NY birth data in his study, rather than constrain the
dataset to an age range that is more likely to have entered the rental housing market or
labor market (i.e. 18-25). Gaddis (2017a) does not provide an analysis of differences in the
frequency of occurrence of names in early years (i.e. 1994-2001) and later years (i.e. 2002-
2012) of birth records. Given that this study is designed to guide correspondence research,
we assume that differences are not substantial. Gaddis (2017a) also discusses potential
heterogeneity in names used across regions: "Although racial and SES-based naming
practices may vary somewhat across regions, the question of importance is whether racial
perceptions from names vary across regions. In supplemental analyses, I test whether
respondents from New York vary from respondents in the rest of the United States. I find
no substantive differences in these analyses, suggesting that the use of New York data
likely has no significant bearing on the results (footnote 4, pp. 484-485)."

Randomization Protocol and Response Coding
The research design simulates a housing search using all available listings in a ZIP code
at a given time and is therefore reflective of the true set of options available in the given
online market. By generating within-property estimates of response for each racial group,
we can more directly examine the effect of discriminatory constraints on each choice set
in the sample.
    Immediately following the compilation of the relevant listings in a given market, a
name is randomly drawn and assigned from each of three racial groups. Each rental
apartment, therefore, receives a sequence of three separate inquiries in the course of an
experimental trial (one from each group). The sequence of inquiries from the different
race groups is randomized, and inquiries for the same listing are never sent from two race
groups on the same day. Responses from property managers are transmitted via email
(gmail address associated with each name), phone messages (individual phone numbers
associated with each name), and text messages. The content of phone, text, and email
responses from property managers are recorded by a team of human coders to ensure the
quality of the data. They are coded using two criteria that determine whether or not a
response indicates that a housing choice is made available to a prospective renter: (1) a
response is received within 7 days of the associated inquiry and (2) the response indicates
that the property is available for rent.
    Figure A.1 plots the distribution of inquiry response time in the sample: 52% of
responses are received within the first 8 hours of an inquiry, 74% are received within 24
hours and 98% are received within 5 days. The 7-day cutoff is used to restrict responses


                                             51
Appendix A                                                                                Experimental Design


that may be received weeks or months after an inquiry and are not counted as choices in
the study. Discriminatory constraints are expressed in terms of relative response rates,
which measure the within-property difference in access to a housing choice. Relative
response rates are estimated relative to an inquiry made to the same property from a
White identity.

                                        Figure A.1. Response Time




Note: Figure plots times elapsed between inquiries and responses in the sample using the timestamp given at the moment
that an inquiry is sent and the timestamp given on the phone, email, or text response.




                                                         52
Appendix B                                    Relative Response Rates: Estimating Equation


B       Estimating Equation
Estimating the Magnitude of Housing Discrimination
Given the experimental setup described in Section 3.2 and Section 3.3, we model the
response of a landlord listing property i as choosing to respond to a renter j as:


                         uij = M inorityj + Xj + i +       ij   j = 1, 2, 3                 (19)

where   ij     Logistic. A landlord chooses to respond to the inquiry yij = 1 if uij > 0.
Thus


                         P (yij = 1|X,  ) = F (M inorityj ) + Xj + i )                      (20)
           exp(.)
F (.) = 1+  exp(.)
                   is the logistic cumulative distribution function. M inorityj indicates
whether the fictitious identity belongs to one of our minority groups: African American
or Hispanic/LatinX, the White identity is the base group. Xj is a vector of renter-specific
control variables: gender, education level and the order in which the inquiry was sent.
i is landlord-property specific fixed effect that controls for time invariant unobservable
characteristics. As shown by Hsiao (1986), the presence of an incidental parameter (i )
can lead to biased and inconsistent estimates. To avoid this problem we estimate a Cham-
berlain's (1980) conditional logit function, where J  j =1 yij is a minimal sufficient statistic.
Then the conditional likelihood function is


                                      exp( j yij (M inorityj  + Xj ))
                         Lc =                                                               (21)
                                i    sSi exp(   j sj (M inorityj + Xj ))


with Si = {(s1 , . . . , sJ )|sj  0, 1and j sj =         j yij }. The likelihood is free of any
unobserved fixed heterogeneity and invariant listing level characteristics. Note that in
cases where a property manager does not respond to any identity or responds to all of
them, i.e. J  j =1 yij is 0 or 3, drop out from the likelihood because lnLc = 0. Then exp( )
is the odds ratio and measures the odds that a minority identity receives a response
relative to a White identity from a landlord-listing i:


             P (yij = 1|M inorityj = 1, x,  ) P (yij = 1|M inorityj = 0, x,  )
                                                                               = exp( )     (22)
             P (yij = 0|M inorityj = 1, x,  ) P (yij = 0|M inorityj = 0, x,  )

    Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. Robust standard errors require con-
sideration of the randomization design and the sampling design (Abadie et al., 2017). In
this study, randomization occurs at the level of a listing and sampling occurs at the level
of an MSA (we sample from the set of MSAs and send inquiries to all available listings).




                                                53
Appendix C                                                     Balance Tests and Robustness to Controls


C     Balance Tests and Robustness
Balance Tests
Table C1 reports balance statistics for our experimental dataset. We note that some
differences in name pairs or timing can occur if a listing is taken offline during a trial. We
do not find any evidence of differences in the sequence of inquiries or the day of the week,
or the frequency of names associated with a given race-gender pair. We detect a small
difference in the frequency of inquiries associated with different levels of maternal edu-
cation. African American names associated with higher maternal education are slightly
more common in our trials, and Hispanic/LatinX names with high levels of maternal
education are slightly less common in our trials. These variables are used as controls in
our tests.

                                    Table C1. Balance Statistics

                                                Dependent variable: Response
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)
                Panel A: Inquiry Order
                                       First        Second        Third

               Hispanic/LatinX        0.0152         -0.0432      0.0280
                                     (0.0450)       (0.0453)     (0.0455)
               African American       -0.0280        -0.0152      0.0432
                                     (0.0455)       (0.0450)     (0.0453)


                Panel B: Evidence of Differential Choices by Weekday

                                       Mon            Tue          Wed          Thurs        Fri

               Hispanic/LatinX        0.0931         -0.0830      0.0277        -0.0143     -0.0086
                                     (0.0966)       (0.1019)     (0.0607)      (0.0564)    (0.0587)
               African American       0.0476          0.0439      -0.0094       -0.0402      0.0017
                                     (0.0976)       (0.0988)     (0.0612)      (0.0567)    (0.0585)


                Panel C: Gender and Mother's Education Level
                                               Gender                     Mother's Education
                                       Male         Female         Low        Medium         High

               Hispanic/LatinX        -0.0057        0.0057       -0.0394       0.0609      -0.0213
                                     (0.0534)       (0.0534)     (0.0550)      (0.0552)    (0.0551)
               African American       -0.0128        0.0128       -0.0333       0.0458      -0.0121
                                     (0.0534)       (0.0534)     (0.0550)      (0.0553)    (0.0551)

               Observations            8,775         8,775        8,775         8,775       8,775

                Notes: Table reports balance statistics for the experimental data set. It shows the
               coefficients of logistic regression on different outcomes. In Panel A, the dependent
               variable takes 1 or 0 depending the order in which the inquiry was sent out, i.e. in
               Column (1) takes 1 if the inquiry was sent first and 0 otherwise. In Panel B, takes
               1 or 0 depending the weekday the inquiry was sent. Panel C, does the same for
               male and females, and levels of maternal education. Standard errors are clustered
               by MSA. *P < 10% level, **P < 5% level, ***P < 1% level.




                                                        54
Appendix C                                                         Balance Tests and Robustness to Controls


Robustness to Controls
Columns 1-4 of Table C2 report results with successive sets of controls and indicate that
there is no difference in estimates that include or omit the maternal education or other
controls. Phillips (2016) shows that matched-inquiry experimental designs can affect es-
timates of discriminatory response in competitive markets. Column 5 reports estimates
from a model that considers differences in first inquiries only, which reflect random as-
signment of identities to listings but do not control for within-listing characteristics. The
point estimates from the preferred model in columns 1-4 are slightly smaller than those
in column 5, when we include data from all three inquiry rounds, which follows from
evidence reported in Table 3 that indicates lower relative response rates when minority
identities are assigned to later inquiries. We do not find that these estimates are statis-
tically different, however, indicating that estimates from both models are consistent.

         Table C2. Evidence of Discrimination on Housing Choice by Race Group

 Race Group                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)              1st Inquiry

 Minority                     0.6955***            0.6943***            0.6977***            0.6865***            0.7245***
                          (0.6296 - 0.7684)    (0.6299 - 0.7652)    (0.6323 - 0.7698)    (0.6250 - 0.7541)    (0.6470 - 0.8114)


 Hispanic                     0.7502***            0.7470***            0.7481***            0.7437***            0.7673***
                          (0.6691 - 0.8411)    (0.6670 - 0.8367)    (0.6661 - 0.8400)    (0.6648 - 0.8318)    (0.6735 - 0.8742)
 African American             0.6448***            0.6453***            0.6509***            0.6342***            0.6843***
                          (0.5669 - 0.7335)    (0.5699 - 0.7306)    (0.5763 - 0.7352)    (0.5629 - 0.7145)    (0.6038 - 0.7757)

 Mean Choice (White)            0.434                0.434                0.434                0.434                0.434
 Matched Listings               5,451                5,451                5,451                5,451                5,049
 Total Observations             18045                18045                18045                18045                6015
 Gender                          No                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Education                       No                   No                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Inquiry Order                   No                   No                   No                   Yes                  Yes

  Notes: Columns 1-4 report estimates of relative response rates for the full sample of listings across all cities, with standard
 errors clustered at the MSA level. Estimates in Column 5 report estimates of relative response rates from a model that tests
 for differences in first inquiries. Response rates are estimated relative to responses to inquiries sent from a White identity
 (the omitted category). The average response rate for inquiries sent from White identities are reported for each sample. 90%
 confidence intervals are reported in parentheses. Sample sizes are reported for matched inquiry sets (a set includes inquiries
 sent from all three identities) and total observations (where a fully matched set was not obtained).




                                                              55
Appendix D                                      Heterogeneity by Housing/Neighborhood Attributes


D      Heterogeneity by Housing/Neighborhood Attributes

             Figure D.1. Response Rates by Housing/Neighborhood Attribute
                  African American                                Hispanic/LatinX




                     (a)   Rental Price                               (b)    Rental Price




                    (c)   School Rating                               (d)   School Rating




                            (e)   Cafes                                (f)   Cafes




                    (g)   Toxic Concentration                  (h)   Toxic Concentration




                           (i)   Murders                              (j)   Murders

Notes: Figures plot differential constraints for renters of color (African American and Hispanic/LatinX)
relative to White by attributes observed in rental listings collected in the experiment using estimates
from Eq. 3. Increases in differential response correspond to increases in discriminatory constraints.


                                                      56
Appendix E                                                                Rent-to-Income Ratio


Appendix E: Rent-to-Income Ratio

                         Figure E.1. Rent-to-Income Ratio by City




Note: Graphs plot the distributions of rent-to-income ratios using renter incomes from InfoUSA data
and rental prices from from the 2013-2017 American Community Survey for each MSA. Blue vertical
lines identify the mean for each distribution.




                                                57
Appendix F                                                                             Damages by City


Appendix F: Damages by City

              Figure F.1. Annualized Damages by City (Equivalent Variation)




Note: Graphs plot the distributions of renter welfare effects (compensating variation as a share of renter
income) at different levels of renter income. Each plot illustrates a distribution of effects for the follow-
ing renter income groups: $0-30,000, $30,000-60,000, $60,000-90,000, $90,000-120,000, $120,000-150,000.
Blue and red vertical lines denote median effects for African American renters and Hispanic/LatinX
renters, respectively. Effects were estimated using the baseline model with all preferences.


                                                     58
Appendix G                                                                               Search Intensity


Appendix G: Search Intensity

                       Figure G.1. Search Intensity: Strategic Avoidance
                                          (a) African American




                                           (b) Hispanic/LatinX




Note: Graph plots results of 25,000 simulations of additional search required by an African American (top
panel) or Hispanic/LatinX (bottom panel) renter to obtain the same expected utility as an equivalent
white renter at different levels of search intensity. Search intensity is normalized across the 5 cities using
binned percentiles of the number of tracts in each market (x-axis). For example, Atlanta has 129 tracts,
so 1% of the city searched would be IN T (0.01  129) = 1 tract, while 4% of Houston, with its 322
tracts, would be IN T (0.04  322) = 13 tracts. Solid lines reproduce the median search cost differential in
levels (right axis) for a renter with average income in each city from Figure 8. Dotted lines provide the
same measure from a simulation that assumes minority renters can strategically avoid discrimination by
searching in tracts that maximize expected utility conditional on the probability of a response.




                                                     59
