                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            DO URGENT CARE CENTERS REDUCE MEDICARE SPENDING?

                                        Janet Currie
                                      Anastasia Karpova
                                        Dan Zeltzer

                                     Working Paper 29047
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29047


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




This research was supported by National Institute on Aging grant numbers P01AG005842 and
P30AG012810. Dan Zeltzer acknowledges support from Israeli Science Foundation grant number
1461/20. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Janet Currie, Anastasia Karpova, and Dan Zeltzer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Urgent Care Centers Reduce Medicare Spending?
Janet Currie, Anastasia Karpova, and Dan Zeltzer
NBER Working Paper No. 29047
July 2021
JEL No. I1,I11

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of the opening of a new urgent care center (UCC) on health care costs
and the utilization of care among nearby Medicare beneficiaries. We focus on 2006­2016, a
period of rapid UCC expansion. We find that total Medicare spending rises when residents of a
zip code are first served by a UCC, relative to spending in yet-to-be-served zip codes, while
mortality remains flat. We explore mechanisms by looking at categories of spending and by
examining utilization. Increases in inpatient visits are the largest contributor to the overall
increase in spending, rising by 6.65 percent within six years after UCC entry. The number of
emergency room visits that result in a hospital admission also increases by 3.7 percent. In
contrast, there is no change in the number of ER visits that do not result in admission to hospital,
in visits to physicians outside a UCC, or in imaging and tests. Overall, these results provide little
evidence that UCCs replace costly ER visits or that they crowd out visits to patients' regular
doctors. Instead, the evidence is consistent with the possibility that UCCs--which are
increasingly owned by or contract with hospital systems--induce greater spending on hospital
care.

Janet Currie                                      Dan Zeltzer
Department of Economics                           The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing 185A              Tel Aviv University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building                    P.O.Box 39040
Princeton University                              Tel Aviv 6997801
Princeton, NJ 08544                               Israel
and NBER                                          dzeltzer@tauex.tau.ac.il
jcurrie@princeton.edu

Anastasia Karpova
Princeton University
akarpova@princeton.edu
I.     Introduction

Urgent Care Centers (UCCs) have frequently been viewed as a way to curb health care costs
(Weinick, Burns and Mehrotra, 2010; Allen, Cummings and Hockenberry, 2019; Merritt,
Naamon and Morris, 2000; Corwin, Parker and Brown, 2016). If patients can be diverted
from costly hospital emergency rooms (ERs) and treated at lower cost in UCCs, the potential
per-visit savings could be substantial. However, large health care systems are increasingly
operating UCCs, and in other cases UCCs contract with health systems (Kaissi, Shay and
Roscoe, 2016). Some commentators have expressed concern that in these cases UCCs are
used as a way to funnel patients into hospital systems (Landro, 2016). As one hospital
executive has remarked: "The benefit to patients is getting them out of the ER so they can
get treated most effectively and most efficiently for their non-life-threatening problems. . ..
And on the flip side, it's provided us with some more feet through the door" (Experity,
2016). If hospitals use affiliated UCCs to increase their shares of a fixed market, UCCs will
not necessarily affect health care utilization or costs. But if UCCs offer a means to grow
the market by increasing provider-initiated demand for hospital services, UCC entry could
increase overall costs with uncertain effects on health outcomes.
     This study examines the impact of the opening of a new UCC on health care costs and
utilization of care among nearby Medicare recipients. We focus on the period 2006 to 2016,
when the percentage of zip codes with a UCC serving Medicare patients grew from 28.3
to 90.7. There are several advantages to focusing on Medicare, the public health insurance
program that covers elderly Americans. First, Medicare recipients accounted for 21 percent
of total U.S. health care spending in 2019 (Martin et al., 2021). Second, we can observe
all health care spending for Medicare recipients, which enables us to examine substitution
between UCCs and ERs, as well as the effects of UCCs on the use of physician's offices and
hospitals. Third, Medicare allows us to identify UCCs through their use of specific codes for
place of service.


                                              2
      This last advantage is important, because previously it has been difficult to develop either
a uniform definition or a comprehensive longitudinal data base of UCCs. Previous studies
of the impact of UCCs are based on case studies rather than on the universe of UCCs.
There are a number of private organizations that offer UCC accreditation, but because not
all UCCs pursue accreditation it is not possible to compile a comprehensive list of facilities
from these sources. Moreover, accrediting organizations typically only have lists of current
members. Hence, the Medicare claims data offer the most complete available picture of U.S.
UCC activity.
      To estimate the impact of UCC entry, we use a difference-in-differences (DID) framework,
comparing zip codes around the time they are first served by a UCC to zip codes that had
not yet experienced such an entry. We use the estimator proposed by de Chaisemartin and
d'Haultfoeuille (2020a), which is suitable for staggered entry with potentially heterogeneous
treatment effects.
      Our results show that when the residents of a zip code first begin to be served by a
UCC, total Medicare spending rises while mortality remains flat. Inpatient spending is the
largest contributor to this increase, rising by $153 (2006 dollars) per patient, or 4.2 percent
by six years after the entry. Part D spending on prescription drugs, home health spending,
and Part B drug spending also rise by $108 per capita (9.55 percent), $43 per capita (9.83
percent) and $19 per capita (4.63 percent), respectively.1 There are also increases in the
number of ER visits that result in hospital admission (3.71 percent).
      The percentage increase in elective inpatient visits (5.62 percent) is larger than the per-
centage increase in non-elective visits (3.6 percent). By six years after entry, about a quarter
of the increase in elective inpatient spending is occurring within 90 days after a UCC visit
while about half of the increase occurs within six months of a UCC visit. In the case of
non-elective visits, which are typically more urgent than elective visits, 14 percent of the
increase occurs within two days of a UCC visit.
  1
    Part B drugs are drugs that are usually administered by a health care provider but not during an
inpatient visit.


                                                 3
   Several important categories of spending are not affected by UCC entry. In particular,
there is no evidence of an effect on spending for hospital outpatient care, visits to physicians
outside a UCC, imaging and tests, or the number of ER visits that do not result in admission
to hospital. Hence, there is little evidence that UCCs are substituting for these services.
   On the whole, there is little evidence that UCCs function as a low-cost alternative for
costly ER visits or that they crowd out visits to patients' regular doctors. Instead, the
evidence is consistent with the possibility that UCCs induce greater spending on hospital
care, especially elective services, and for both prescription and Part B drugs.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides some background about
UCCs and prior work. Section III provides an overview of the data, and Section IV discusses
our methods. Results appear in Section V, followed by a discussion and conclusions in
Section VI.



II.     Background

According to the American Academy of Urgent Care Medicine (2021), most UCCs employ
physicians. They typically have X-ray and laboratory facilities and are able to treat wounds,
injuries, fractures, asthma attacks and mild concussions. They do not offer surgery or
inpatient care, and most do not have advanced imaging equipment (e.g., CT scans). If a
patient requires more advanced care, the UCC will transfer the patient to an ER. From the
patient's point of view, the most salient features of a UCC are likely that they have longer
opening hours than typical doctor's offices, and that they welcome walk-in patients.
   While the first UCCs were owned by physicians, UCCs are increasingly either owned by
hospitals and health systems or by corporations that contract with health systems. Accord-
ing to the Urgent Care Association (2018), in 2008 54.1 percent of UCCs were owned by
physicians, 24.8 percent were owned by hospitals, and the rest were owned largely by corpo-
rations, often with private equity partners. By 2014, physician ownership had fallen to 40



                                               4
percent and direct hospital ownership had increased to 37 percent. According to the Urgent
Care Association (2018), big hospital chains such as Dignity Health, HCA, Aurora Health,
Intermountain Health, and Carolinas Healthcare have all made significant investments in
UCCs. Yee, Lechner and Boukus (2013) report that in some markets the vast majority of
UCCs are owned by hospitals.
   These trends in ownership suggest that arrangements with hospitals are likely to have
become increasingly important over time. While there is little direct evidence that ownership
of UCCs matters to patient spending (and indeed, data about ownership of UCCs are not
comprehensively available), related research about the ownership of physician practices sug-
gests that patients in organizations owned by hospitals have higher spending than patients
treated in similar physician-owned practices, although there is no consistent difference in
quality (Ho et al., 2020). Similarly, Chernew et al. (2021) show that physicians affiliated
with hospitals refer patients in need of lower-limb MRIs to hospitals, though the imaging
could easily be done in an outpatient setting.
   Much of the existing literature argues that UCCs have the potential to greatly lower
health care costs. For example, Weinick, Burns and Mehrotra (2010) examine the types of
conditions that bring people to the ER and estimate that as many as 27.1 percent of ER
visits could be treated at UCCs or retail clinics, for a savings of up to $4.4 billion annually.
Similarly, Allen, Cummings and Hockenberry (2019) find that in areas with multiple UCCs,
local non-emergent ER visits increase by 1.43 percent (over the adjusted mean rate of 70.58
percent) after UCCs close each day. This finding suggests that UCC visits can substitute
for ER visits. Merritt, Naamon and Morris (2000) tracked patients before and after their
first visit to a UCC and report that these patients were subsequently less likely to use ERs.
Corwin, Parker and Brown (2016) examine a cross section of Medicare beneficiary data in
2012 and find that ER use is lower in areas with high UCC use, and vice versa.
   However, a few recent observers found zero or positive effects of UCC entry on ER use.
Yakobi (2017) examines ER use in New York City and notes that although by 2015 there


                                               5
were over 100 UCCs operating in the city, there appeared to have been no impact on ER
use. Carlson et al. (2020) examine patients who were using the ERs at two academic medical
centers for low severity conditions. They find that patients who lived within one mile of an
open UCC were less likely to utilize one of the ERs, but that proximity to a UCC had no
apparent effect on the use of the other ER. Wang, Mehrotra and Friedman (2021) analyze
commercial insurance data and find that zip-code level increases in the rate of urgent care
visits were associated with small reductions in ER visits, but with an overall increase in
spending on urgent care services. In related work, Xu and Ho (2020) also report that the
entry of new, free-standing emergency departments had little impact on visits to hospital
ERs but served merely to increase the overall use of emergency services. These conflicting
results of various studies suggest that it will be informative to look in the Medicare data at
the effects of UCC entry.



III.     Data

Our main source of data is the Medicare Fee-for-Service population (CMS, 2006­2016). We
use a 20-percent sample of the Medicare Master Beneficiary Summary Files (MBSF) and its
segments for 2006 to 2016. These files include information about the patient's utilization
of care and spending, demographic characteristics, chronic conditions, dates of Medicare
enrollment, date of death (if relevant), and zip code of residence. For identifying UCC and
physician visits and for measuring associated spending, we also use the 20-percent sample
of the Carrier Files, which record fee-for-service claims submitted by professional providers
including physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners. For analyzing inpatient
spending, we use the 20-percent sample of the Inpatient Files, which contain claims submitted
by hospital providers.
   In order to define UCC entry into a zip code, we take advantage of the fact that since
2003 the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), which oversees Medicare, has



                                              6
designated a specific place of service code for urgent care facilities.2 Using this code, we can
determine the number of Medicare beneficiaries residing in a given zip code who used a UCC
in each year. If the share of patients residing in a zip code who use a UCC in a particular
year is at least one percent, we consider that zip code to be served by a UCC in that year
and in subsequent years. We sometimes refer to this for short as "entry," but it should be
clear that the UCC serving patients in a particular zip code need not necessarily be located
in that zip code. These definitions are described in further detail in the appendix.
      A patient-year is included in the sample if the patient was covered by Medicare Parts A
and B (which cover inpatient and outpatient care, respectively) for the entire year, or if the
patient died sometime during the year. In addition, the patient must have been enrolled in
fee-for-service Medicare for all 12 months and be 65 or older. We remove zip codes that had
fewer than 100 fee-for-service beneficiaries in at least one year, leaving 14,562 zip codes.
      Appendix Table A1 shows the rapid penetration of UCCs over our sample period. Be-
tween 2006 and 2016, the fraction of Medicare beneficiaries with a UCC that began serving
their zip code increased from 29.3 percent to 92.2 percent. The fraction of beneficiaries
covered is slightly higher than the fraction of treated zip codes over our sample period, in-
dicating that zip codes with UCC entry are slightly larger than those without. Appendix
Table A1 provides some support for our decision to ignore exits in our main results. In
2016, the fraction of beneficiaries in a zip code currently served by a UCC is 87.1 percent.
Comparing this figure to the percentage with an "entry" suggests that only 5.1 percent of
beneficiaries lived in a zip code that experienced an exit. We show below that the results
are quite similar whether we drop the zip codes with exits entirely, or treat an exit as a
"negative" entrance. For these additional analyses, we define a zip code that experienced an
exit as one in which the share of patients treated by a UCC dropped below one percent for
at least two years in a row and did not rise again until the end of our sample period.
      Characteristics of patients, utilization of care and spending are shown in Table 1 for areas
  2
   "CMS     Place    of   Service   Code    Set,"      https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/
place-of-service-codes/Place_of_Service_Code_Set, accessed July 10, 2021.


                                                 7
with and without UCCs in 2011, about halfway through our sample period, and in 2016, the
end of this period. Spending is in 2006 US dollars throughout. The first panel of Table 1
shows that the probability of UCC use, the number of UCC visits, and UCC spending are all
an order of magnitude bigger in "treated" zip codes with UCC entry compared to "control"
zip codes without such entry, as one would expect given our definition of entry.
   Panel B of Table 1 shows that total per capita spending was lower in treated zip codes
in 2011, but somewhat higher in 2016. Treatment zip codes had lower mortality rates in
both periods. These differences could reflect differences in the areas where UCCs entered
over time. Previous research suggests that UCCs first entered wealthier urban areas and
areas with higher rates of private insurance (Le and Hsia, 2016). One might well expect the
effect of UCC entry to be different in the richer areas where UCCs initially entered compared
to the areas where they entered later. In what follows, we use methods that are robust to
heterogeneous treatment effects.
   Panel C of Table 1 shows the main categories of Medicare spending that we consider. One
can see that the largest components of spending are (in order): inpatient visits; outpatient
hospital visits; Medicare Part D drug benefits; and spending on skilled nursing facilities
(SNF) and hospice. In each of these categories, per capita 2011 spending was lower in
treated areas; however, by 2016, per capita spending on inpatient visits and Part D was
higher in treated areas. As discussed above, one possible explanation for this crossover is
that poorer areas with less healthy populations were being added to the treatment group
over time. Spending on Part B drugs, imaging and testing, and visits to non-UCC physicians
were always higher in treatment areas despite their lower mortality rates, underscoring the
concern that there may be some unobserved differences between areas.
   Since inpatient spending is the largest category, Panels D­F of Table 1 break it down
in several ways. Inpatient spending in acute care facilities (a category that includes most
general-purpose hospitals) follows the pattern described above. Spending on non-elective
visits (i.e., visits that were relatively urgent) was lower in treatment areas in 2011 but


                                             8
became higher by 2016. Spending on elective visits was roughly even in treatment and
control areas.
       Because one concern about UCCs is that they may steer patients to hospitals, we break
down inpatient spending on elective and non-elective visits further by considering only pa-
tients who visited a UCC in the past year or the previous year. Panel A shows that 6.3
percent of patients in zip codes that were treated in 2016 visited a UCC during the year. In
the two-year period 2015­2016, 10.2 percent of patients visited a UCC. Patients who visited
a UCC in either the current or the previous year spent on average $2313 on non-elective
inpatient admissions, nearly the same as the average beneficiary living in the same zip code
($2305). Of this spending, 8 percent ($184) occurred within two days of a UCC visit and 11
percent ($259) occurred within seven days of a UCC visit. We see a similar pattern for elec-
tive visits: Patients who visited a UCC had spending of $1044 compared to an overall mean
of $942. Because elective visits may be scheduled in a more leisurely way than non-elective
visits, we consider a longer time window and show that 23 percent ($241) of the spending
occurred within 90 days of a UCC visit and 39.6 percent ($413) occurred within 180 days.
Although they are only descriptive, these figures suggest that UCCs may be steering patients
to hospitals and that this possibility merits further investigation.
       Panel G of Table 1 shows comparable figures for ER visits. An ER visit can end in an
admission to the hospital or a discharge, so these two types of visits are further broken out.
Zip codes with UCC entry had fewer ER visits on average than control zip codes (0.60 versus
0.69 per beneficiary per year). This difference is concentrated in visits that did not result in
an admission (0.40 vs 0.49 per beneficiary per year).
       Finally, the last panel shows the controls that are available. In addition to age and sex
(which are constant over time and similar in treatment and control areas), we construct an
approximation to the Charlson Comorbidity Index (Charlson et al., 1987), which is frequently
used to measure the burden of chronic disease in elderly people.3 The index is a weighted
   3
    Our approximation is based on the smaller set of chronic conditions that is available in MBSF File. See
the appendix for the list of included conditions and their weights.


                                                    9
sum of the number of chronic conditions where more severe conditions get higher weights.
Table 1 shows that people are sicker in control areas than in treatment areas. The fact
that the index rises over time in both treatment and control areas is consistent with UCCs
moving into areas where people are sicker: Moving the least sick patient from the control
to the treatment group would increase the mean level of sickness in both groups. In models
examining spending on drugs, we also control for the number of months of Part D coverage,
since elderly people may move in and out of such coverage over time. See the appendix for
further discussion of the definitions of the variables included in Table 1.



IV.      Methods

Our main analysis relies on a series of DID event-study analyses, examining the impact
of UCC entry into a zip code on a range of outcomes, relative to yet-to-be-treated zip
codes. Several authors have shown that when treatment is staggered, standard DID estimates
can be biased in the presence of heterogeneous treatment effects (Goodman-Bacon, 2021;
de Chaisemartin and d'Haultfoeuille, 2020a,b). Sun and Abraham (2020) show that the
estimated coefficients from two-way fixed effect regressions are not robust when there are
heterogeneous treatment effects, while Borusyak and Jaravel (2017) show that in this case
it is also difficult to identify pre-trends. Since it is quite likely that UCCs will have different
impacts in different areas, depending for example on how well served they are by other types
of providers, we use the estimator proposed by de Chaisemartin and d'Haultfoeuille (2020a)
which is unbiased in the presence of heterogeneous treatment effects.
   We compute dynamic treatment effects for each event-time l  0, where l = 0 denotes
contemporaneous treatment effects and l > 0 denotes dynamic average treatment effects.
This estimator corresponds to the average effect of the treatment on the treated patients
(ATT), given the staggered entry design. Note that in keeping with the huge growth of
UCCs over our sample period and as discussed above, in our main results we ignore exits



                                                10
and assume that once a zip code is treated, it stays treated. Specifically, we estimate:



                   T
                                             Nz,t                                      Nz,t
         l =             t,l                   treat
                                                     (Yz,t - Yz,t-l-1 ) -             non-treat
                                                                                                  (Yz,t - Yz,t-l-1 ) ,   (1)
                                        =t-l
                                             N t,l                        z :
                                                                                     Nt,l
                t=l+2            z :z                                           z >t




where Yz,t is the average outcome for beneficiaries in zip code z and year t; z is the year of
                                                                                         treat
UCC entry in zip code z ; Nz,t is the number of beneficiaries in zip code z and year t; Nl,t   is
                                                                                       non-treat
the number of beneficiaries in zip codes treated for the first time in year t - l and Nl,t
is the number of beneficiaries in zip codes that had not been treated by year t. The weights
t,l capture the relative size of the group of zip codes that had UCC entry in each year t for
a fixed event-time l relative to all treated zip codes observed for event-time l.4 The term in
brackets is the DID estimator comparing the evolution of the outcome from period t - l - 1
(the last period before the treatment) to t in groups treated for the first time in t - l and in
groups which are yet to be treated at period t.
      We present plots with dynamic treatment effects for the six years following a UCC entry as
well as placebo pre-treatment effects for the six years preceding entry (with period -1 as the
baseline). We compute the placebo pre-period coefficients as proposed by de Chaisemartin
and d'Haultfoeuille (2020a) in order to be able to assess the parallel trends assumption.
These coefficients are computed using the following equation:

            T
                                      Nz,t                                              Nz,t
lpre   =           pre
                   t,l                 treat
                                             (Yz,t-2l-2 - Yz,t-l-1 ) -                 non-treat
                                                                                                   (Yz,t-2l-2 - Yz,t-l-1 ) .
                                 =t-l
                                      Nt,l                             z :
                                                                                      Nt,l
           t=l+2          z :z                                                   z >t
                                                                                                                         (2)
      To incorporate the effects of control variables, we estimate a generalization of equation
(2) in which (Yz,t and Yz,t-l-1 ) are replaced by residuals from regressions of Y on X
(the control variables) and year fixed effects. The control variables include: beneficiary
age, gender, and the approximated Charlson Comorbidity Index (see Section III for details).
                                                                     T
  4                                              treat                     treat
      The weights are defined as follows: t,l = Nt,l                      Nt,l   .
                                                                  t=l+2




                                                                11
Estimates of the effect of UCC entry on drug spending and utilization as well as on total
spending also control for months of Part D enrollment. The reason for controlling for Part D
enrollment is that although sample participants must have been in Medicare Parts A and B
for 12 months, many of them have fewer than 12 months of enrollment in Part D, the part
of Medicare that covers prescriptions drugs.
      In addition to the DID event-study graphs, we summarize our findings in tables that
report weighted averages of the dynamic estimates for the post-treatment effects from equa-
tion (1). The weights correspond to the size of the group of zip codes that had UCC entry
and are observed for event-time l relative to all treated zip codes.5 Standard errors are
clustered at the zip code level and are computed using 200 bootstrap replications.



V.        Results

Figure 1 shows the "first stage" results: The entry of a UCC in a zip code increases the
use of UCCs by Medicare beneficiaries living in that zip code. This is of course a necessary
condition for UCC entry to affect other types of utilization of medical care and spending
and is implied by our definition of UCC entry. Figure 1a shows that the probability that a
beneficiary uses a UCC is essentially zero prior to entry and then jumps to about 1.5 percent
in the year of entry, rising smoothly to over 4 percent by six years after entry.6 Similarly,
Figure 1b shows that the average number of UCC visits jumps to about 0.02 visits per
person after UCC entry, rising to 0.065 visits per enrollee after six years. Figure 1c shows a
corresponding increase in Medicare spending on UCC services, rising from zero dollars prior
to UCC entry to around $6 per enrollee by six years after the year of entry. These figures
demonstrate that UCC entry into a zip code clearly increased utilization of UCCs among
  5
      They are defined as follows:
                                     L                        T               L    T
                                                                      treat                treat
                         post =          l l ,   where l =           Nt,l                 Nt,l   .         (3)
                                  l=0                        t=l+2            l=0 t=l+2


  6
      Pre-entry UCC use may reflect occasional use by zip code residents of UCCs located in other areas.


                                                        12
Medicare beneficiaries living in that zip code, by all measures.
   Figure 2 shows DID estimates for the impact of UCC entry on total per capita Medicare
spending and mortality. Figure 2a indicates that total spending per recipient began to rise
after UCC entry, increasing by almost $300 per person by six years after entry. Figure 2b
shows that there is no corresponding change in mortality rates--death rates are unchanged
following UCC entry. Since the increase in expenditure is much higher than the amount
spent directly on UCCs and has no effect on mortality, it begs the question of what categories
account for the additional, apparently non-productive, spending?
   This question is addressed in Figure 3, which shows the four categories with the greatest
increases in spending. Figure 3a shows that inpatient spending accounts for the largest share
of the increase, rising by $153 per person by six years after entry (this increase amounts to
4.23 percent of its baseline 2006 average). Figure 3b shows that there is also an increase
in spending on Medicare Part D, the prescription drug benefit, of $108 (9.55 percent) after
six years, suggesting that patients are receiving more prescriptions, or prescriptions for more
expensive drugs, after a UCC opens. This observation is consistent with concerns about UCC
over-prescription of drugs such as antibiotics (Laude et al., 2020; Urgent Care Association,
2019; Incze, Redberg and Katz, 2018). Figure 3c shows that UCC entry also led to modest
increases in home health spending of approximately $43 per patient after six years. Although
there does not seem to be much research on this subject, it is possible that the availability of
additional options for receiving both regular doctor visits and urgent care encourages some
seniors to remain in their homes and therefore to make greater use of home health services.
Finally, Figure 3d shows that there was also an increase in spending on Part B drugs of
about $19 per person after six years. These are drugs that a patient wouldn't usually give
themselves (such as injectable and infused drugs that are usually given in an outpatient
setting) but which could be administered in a setting such as a UCC.
   Figure 4 shows DID graphs for several other important categories of services that one
might expect to be impacted by UCC entry. Figure 4a shows that hospital outpatient


                                              13
spending was on a declining trend prior to UCC entry. Upon entry, spending flattens for a few
years but then continues a downward trend. Figure 4b shows that spending on imaging and
lab tests declined fairly smoothly through UCC entry (though perhaps with some flattening
right around entry). This may be in part because most UCCs do not have the most expensive
imaging equipment such as MRIs and CT scans. Figure 4c suggests that there was a small
decline in spending on skilled nursing facilities four to six years after UCC entry, perhaps
consistent with the increase in spending on home health care noted above given that these
may be substitutes.
   Figure 4d shows that visits to non-UCC physicians continued on a smooth, slightly up-
ward trend through UCC entry, suggesting that there is little evidence of substitution of
UCC visits for non-UCC outpatient visits. This observation is consistent with the claim
from urgent care trade groups that most people who visit UCCs already have a primary care
physician and seek care at UCCs in addition to the care they receive from their doctors (Lan-
dro, 2016). Because inpatient spending was the largest contributor to increases in spending
following UCC entry, we examine it further in Figure 5. Figure 5a shows that virtually all
of the increase in spending is occurring in regular acute care hospitals rather than non-acute
care facilities. Figure 5b breaks admissions into elective and non-elective components. As
discussed above, both components of inpatient spending rise following UCC entry. While
the absolute size of the increase in spending on elective visits is less because elective visits
account for a smaller share of spending, there is a larger percentage increase in spending on
elective visits (5.62 percent) than in spending on non-elective visits (3.6 percent).
   Figure 5c breaks down the increase in spending on elective hospitalizations further by
asking what share of the increase in spending occurs within a relatively short window after a
trip to a UCC? By six years after entry, about a quarter of the increase in elective spending
occurs within 90 days after a UCC visit, while, about half of the increase occurs within six
months of a visit. We chose these cutoffs to allow time for a patient to book an elective
visit. Figure 5d performs a similar exercise for non-elective visits. Because these visits are


                                              14
supposed to be more urgent, we focus on much shorter time windows of two and seven days.
The figure shows that 15 percent of the increase in non-elective spending is occurring within
two days of a UCC visit, while 21 percent is occurring within seven days of a visit.
   As discussed above, UCCs are often thought of as a substitute for emergency rooms, so
it is particularly interesting to see how UCC entry affects utilization of the ER. Figure 6
shows the impact of UCCs on the number of ER visits, divided by whether the person
was admitted to the hospital from the ER. We look at numbers of visits here because it
is difficult to attribute spending to the ER when many visits result in an admission and
are billed together with subsequent hospital charges. The figure shows that there is little
change in the number of ER visits that do not end in an admission when a UCC opens in a
patient's zip code, suggesting that UCCs do not divert a significant share of patients from
ERs. However, the number of visits to the ER which do end in an admission rises by 3.7
percent by six years after UCC entry. Together with the results for inpatient visits, these
estimates seem consistent with the idea of UCCs' serving as a way to get "feet in the door"
of hospitals.
   The estimates underlying Figures 1­6 are summarized in Table 2. Column 1 shows the
mean of the dependent variable for 2006. Column 2 shows a weighted average of the pre-
treatment coefficients (i.e. the pre-trend values), while column 3 shows a weighted average of
the post-UCC entry estimates, where the weights are as described above. Since we observe
zip codes for up to six years after their first UCC entry and the effects are growing over time,
column 4 shows the last point estimate, while column 5 divides that point estimate by the
mean to give an estimate of the percent change six years after entry.
   Each panel of Table 2 corresponds to one of the figures, allowing us to refine the discussion
above. In the case of Figure 1, Panel A of Table 2 confirms that the pre-trends are not quite
flat--they were gently trending upward prior to UCC entry. But there is a clear trend break
after UCC entry. Panel B confirms that there was no significant pre-trend in either total
per capita spending or mortality, and that only spending increased after UCC entry (neither


                                              15
there were significant pre-trends for specific types of inpatient spending, as confirmed by
Panel E). Panel C indicates that there was no pre-trend in any of the Figure 3 spending
variables except for Part D spending, where there was a slight negative estimate prior to a
dramatic positive estimate after UCC entry.
   Turning to the estimates corresponding to Figure 4, Panel D of Table 2 shows that in
three cases there were strong pre-trends, which, as we saw above, continued into the post-
UCC period. In the case of SNF and hospice spending, the estimates are not statistically
significant either before or after entry. It is for these reasons that we judge that UCC entry
had no effect on these outcomes. Panel F, corresponding to Figure 6, indicates that there
was no pre-trend for ER visits ending in admission to hospital, but a clear increase after
UCC entry. For ER visits that ended without an admission, there is a positive coefficient in
period -6 that drives an overall positive "pre" coefficient, but no evidence of any effect after
UCC entry. A natural question is whether the increases in spending that follow UCC entry
reflect increases in the prices or in the quantities of services. Because Medicare prices are
administered, they are relatively similar across areas, suggesting that much of the increased
spending is due to increased utilization. Table 3 shows analyses of utilization using the same
empirical specifications as above. Table 3 indicates that inpatient hospital stays--the main
driver of the increases in spending--increase by 6.65 percent by six years after UCC entry.
The fact that the number of visits rises by more in percentage terms than spending on visits
suggests that the marginal additional visit may be for a patient with a less severe condition.
The average number of months of drugs supplied (in both Parts D and B) decreases following
a UCC entry, suggesting that the estimated increase in spending reflects an increase in prices
(i.e., different drugs), not quantities. The estimated changes in the utilization of all other
services are similar in magnitude and direction to the estimated changes in spending.
   One potential concern about our data is that it covers only fee-for-service Medicare
enrollees. Over the period we study, there was a slow decline in the fraction of Medicare
enrollees in fee-for-service Medicare and an increase in the number enrolled in managed care


                                              16
plans. The first panel of Appendix Figure A1 shows that over our sample period, treated zip
codes saw a relative decline in the share enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare. But this decline
was quite small in magnitude (about 1.2 percent over the six-year period following an entry)
and it occurred smoothly through UCC entry, suggesting that it is not due to UCC entry
and should not confound our estimates. Similarly, the second panel shows that there was a
very gradual increase in the number of months of Part D enrollment that was very smooth
through the point of UCC entry. Hence, we do not think that these small changes in the
sample over time are driving the estimated effects of UCC entry.
   A second issue is that we focus on UCC entries and ignore exits. Appendix Table A2
shows estimates similar to those in columns 2 and 3 of Table 2 from two additional spec-
ifications. Columns 4 and 5 show estimates using the sub-sample where zip codes that
experienced UCC exit have been dropped. The estimates are clearly very similar to those
from the full sample. Columns 6 and 7 show estimates from an alternative specification
where exits are treated as negative entries. Again, this specification produces estimates very
similar to those in Table 2.



VI.      Discussion and Conclusions

We present the first national analysis of the effects of UCC entry on overall health care
spending. In doing so, we are greatly aided by the fact that the Medicare program has
systematized the coding of health services rendered in UCC settings. This coding enables
us to examine the effects of UCC entry on the health care of millions of elderly people
across the United States. At the same time, it is important to recognize that the Medicare-
covered population is quite different from the rest of the U.S. population. In addition to
that population's being sicker and more likely to use medical services, Medicare also has
administered prices so that there is a close connection between utilization and spending.
Conclusions about spending and utilization derived from Medicare data do not always apply



                                              17
to the privately insured population, in part because the latter may pay very different prices
for the same services (Cooper et al., 2019).
   Our results show that when a zip code's Medicare patients first begin to be served by a
UCC, total Medicare spending rises, with no impact on mortality. Delving into the mecha-
nisms underlying this increase, we find that the largest rise is in inpatient spending which
increases by 4.2 percent by six years after UCC entry. Much of this increase is accounted
for by elective visits that occur within 90 to 180 days after a UCC visit, and by non-elective
visits that occur within a few days of a UCC visit. The fact that the percentage increase
in visits is greater than the percentage increase in spending may indicate that the marginal
visits induced by UCC entry are of lower acuity.
   We also see increases in Part D prescription drug spending, home health spending, and
Part B drug spending, which appear to be due to the prescribing of higher-priced drugs, as
well as increases in the number of ER visits that result in a hospital admission. There is little
evidence that UCC entry substitutes for other forms of care such as ER visits that do not
result in admission to hospital, hospital outpatient care, or visits to non-UCC physicians.
   On the whole, the evidence indicates that UCCs induce greater spending on inpatient
hospital care, especially elective services, and for both Part D and Part B drugs. It would
be of great interest to know whether these effects are larger in UCCs that are owned by
hospitals or contract with hospital networks. But given the current absence of information
about contracts with hospitals, hospital ownership, and changes in ownership over time, this
question will have to remain for future work.


References
Allen, Lindsay, Janet R Cummings, and Jason Hockenberry. 2019. "Urgent care
 centers and the demand for non-emergent emergency department visits." NBER Working
 Paper No. 25428.

American Academy of Urgent Care Medicine. 2021. "What is urgent care medicine?"
 https://aaucm.org/what-is-urgent-care-medicine/, accessed July 10, 2021.



                                               18
Borusyak, Kirill, and Xavier Jaravel. 2017. "Revisiting event study designs." Available
 at SSRN 2826228.

Carlson, Lucas C, Ali S Raja, Daniel A Dworkis, Jarone Lee, David FM Brown,
 Margaret Samuels-Kalow, Michael Wilson, Marc Shapiro, Jungyeon Kim, and
 Brian J Yun. 2020. "Impact of urgent care openings on emergency department visits
 to two academic medical centers within an integrated health care system." Annals of
 Emergency Medicine, 75(3): 382­391.

Charlson, Mary E, Peter Pompei, Kathy L Ales, and C Ronald MacKenzie. 1987.
 "A new method of classifying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development
 and validation." Journal of Chronic Diseases, 40(5): 373­383.

Chernew, Michael, Zack Cooper, Eugene Larsen Hallock, and Fiona Scott Mor-
 ton. 2021. "Physician agency, consumerism, and the consumption of lower-limb MRI
 scans." Journal of Health Economics, 76: 102427.

CMS. 2006­2016. "20% Research Identifiable Medicare Databases." data dictionaries are
 available at https://resdac.org/cms-data, accessed July 10, 2021.

Cooper, Zack, Stuart V Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "The
 price ain't right? Hospital prices and health spending on the privately insured." The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1): 51­107.

Corwin, Gregory S, Devin M Parker, and Jeremiah R Brown. 2016. "Site of treat-
 ment for non-urgent conditions by Medicare beneficiaries: is there a role for urgent care
 centers?" The American Journal of Medicine, 129(9): 966­973.

de Chaisemartin, Cl´      ement, and Xavier d'Haultfoeuille. 2020a. "Difference-in-
  differences estimators of intertemporal treatment effects." Available at SSRN 3731856.

de Chaisemartin, Cl´    ement, and Xavier d'Haultfoeuille. 2020b. "Two-way fixed
  effects estimators with heterogeneous treatment effects." American Economic Review,
  110(9): 2964­96.

Experity. 2016. "It's a Win-Win for Healthcare as Hospital Systems Ac-
 quire Urgent Care Centers." https://www.experityhealth.com/resources/
 hospitals-acquire-urgent-cares/, accessed July 10, 2021.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2021. "Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment
 timing." Journal of Econometrics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2021.03.014.

Ho, Vivian, Leanne Metcalfe, Lan Vu, Marah Short, and Robert Morrow. 2020.
 "Annual spending per patient and quality in hospital-owned versus physician-owned orga-
 nizations: an observational study." Journal of General Internal Medicine, 35(3): 649­655.

Incze, Michael A, Rita F Redberg, and Mitchell H Katz. 2018. "Overprescription in
  urgent care clinics--the fast and the spurious." JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(9): 1269­
  1270.

                                           19
Kaissi, Amer, Patrick Shay, and Christina Roscoe. 2016. "Hospital systems, con-
 venient care strategies, and healthcare reform." Journal of Healthcare Management,
 61(2): 148­163.
Landro, Laura. 2016. "Traditional providers get into the urgent-care game." The Wall
  Street Journal. March 20, 2016.
Laude, Jillian D, Harold P Kramer, Marie Lewis, Michael Winiarz, Cecelia K
  Harrison, Zugui Zhang, and Marci Drees. 2020. "Implementing antibiotic steward-
  ship in a network of urgent care centers." The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and
  Patient Safety, 46(12): 682­690.
Le, Sidney T, and Renee Y Hsia. 2016. "Community characteristics associated
  with where urgent care centers are located: a cross-sectional analysis." BMJ Open,
  6(4): e010663.
Martin, Anne B, Micah Hartman, David Lassman, Aaron Catlin, and National
 Health Expenditure Accounts Team. 2021. "National health care spending in 2019:
 Steady growth for the fourth consecutive year." Health Affairs, 40(1): 14­24.
Merritt, Brenda, Edwin Naamon, and Stephen A Morris. 2000. "The influence of
 an urgent care center on the frequency of ED visits in an urban hospital setting." The
 American Journal of Emergency Medicine, 18(2): 123­125.
Sun, Liyang, and Sarah Abraham. 2020. "Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event
  studies with heterogeneous treatment effects." Journal of Econometrics.
Urgent Care Association. 2018. "Urgent care industry white paper 2018 (unabridged):
 The essential role of the urgent care center in population health." https://www.ucaoa.
 org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=m3Bg5772Y-Q%3D&portalid=80/, accessed July 10,
 2021.
Urgent Care Association. 2019. "Industry perspectives: 2018 report - habits and
 perceptions of UCC antibiotic prescribing." https://www.ucaoa.org/About-UCA/
 Industry-News/ArtMID/10309/ArticleID/758/hs.healthstream.com/l/152971/
 2020-05-08/v4msjn/, accessed July 10, 2021.
Wang, Bill, Ateev Mehrotra, and Ari B Friedman. 2021. "Urgent Care Centers Deter
 Some Emergency Department Visits But, On Net, Increase Spending: Study examines
 whether growth of retail urgent care centers deterred lower-acuity emergency department
 visits." Health Affairs, 40(4): 587­595.
Weinick, Robin M, Rachel M Burns, and Ateev Mehrotra. 2010. "Many emergency
 department visits could be managed at urgent care centers and retail clinics." Health
 Affairs, 29(9): 1630­1636.
Xu, Yingying, and Vivian Ho. 2020. "Freestanding emergency departments in Texas do
 not alleviate congestion in hospital-based emergency departments." The American Journal
 of Emergency Medicine, 38(3): 471­476.

                                          20
Yakobi, Ramy. 2017. "Impact of urgent care centers on emergency department visits."
 Health Care Current Reviews, 5: 204.

Yee, Tracy, Amanda E Lechner, and Ellyn R Boukus. 2013. "The surge in urgent
 care centers: emergency department alternative or costly convenience." Research Brief,
 26.




                                          21
                              Figure 1: UCC Entry, Different Measures
           (a) Probability of UCC Use            (b) Number of UCC Visits           (c) UCC Spending (USD)

    0.04                                                                        6
                                          0.06

    0.03                                                                        4
                                          0.04
    0.02
                                                                                2
                                          0.02
    0.01

                                          0.00                                  0
    0.00

           -6   -4   -2   0   2   4   6          -6   -4   -2   0   2   4   6       -6   -4   -2   0   2   4   6
                                             Year Relative to UCC Entry
Notes: Figure shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on UCC use. UCC entry (Year 0)
is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries in a zip code use
a UCC. Year -1 (denoted by a vertical dashed line) is the reference level, which is set to zero. The
different panels show estimates of l from equation (1) for different measures of UCC use. Probability
of UCC use (Panel A) is the share of beneficiaries with any UCC visit during the year. Number of
UCC visits (Panel B) is the average number of visits per beneficiary (including zeros). UCC spending
(Panel C) is the total per capita spending on claims with UCC as the place of service (all spending
measures are in 2006 US dollars). For detailed definitions see Section III and the appendix. Standard
errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                           22
                      Figure 2: UCC Impact on Spending and Mortality
           (a) Total Spending (USD Per Capita)                            (b) Mortality Risk
    400                                               0.0100



    300                                               0.0075



    200                                               0.0050



    100                                               0.0025



      0                                               0.0000


          -6     -4    -2     0      2     4     6             -6    -4    -2     0      2     4      6
                                          Year Relative to UCC Entry
Notes: Figure shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on total Medicare spending and
mortality. UCC entry (Year 0) is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare
beneficiaries in a zip code use a UCC. Year -1 (denoted by a vertical dashed line) is the reference level,
which is set to zero. The different panels show estimates of l from equation (1) for total Medicare
spending (Panel A) and mortality risk (Panel B). Total spending is the total per capita spending on
all services. Mortality risk is the probability that the beneficiary died anytime during the year. For
detailed definitions see Section III and the appendix. Standard errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                     23
                Figure 3: UCC Impact on Spending, Most Affected Services
                          (a) Inpatient                                         (b) Part D
    200




    100




      0




                        (c) Home Health                                    (d) Part B Drugs
    200




    100




      0




          -6     -4     -2      0         2      4     6     -6    -4      -2       0        2   4   6
                                              Year Relative to UCC Entry
Notes: Figure shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on spending on the most affected
services.. UCC entry (Year 0) is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare
beneficiaries in a zip code use a UCC. Year -1 (denoted by a vertical dashed line) is the reference level,
which is set to zero. The different panels show estimates of l from equation (1) with annual per-capita
spending on each of the services shown in the panel titles as the outcome (panels are sorted by overall
dollar impact, in descending order). For detailed definitions see Section III and the appendix. Standard
errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                      24
               Figure 4: UCC Impact on Spending, Other Important Services
                      (a) Hospital Outpatient                        (b) Imaging and Tests

    100




     50




      0




    -50



                      (c) SNF and Hospice                      (d) Physician Visits, Non-UCC

    100




     50




      0




    -50


          -6     -4      -2      0     2        4   6     -6    -4      -2     0     2       4    6
                                           Year Relative to UCC Entry
Notes: Figure shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on spending on selected services.. UCC
entry (Year 0) is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries in a
zip code use a UCC. Year -1 (denoted by a vertical dashed line) is the reference level, which is set to
zero. The different panels show estimates of l from equation (1) with annual per-capita spending on
each of the services shown in the panel titles as the outcome. For detailed definitions see Section III
and the appendix. Standard errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                    25
           Figure 5: UCC Impact on Inpatient Spending, Different Breakdowns
                        (a) Type of Facility                                     (b) Type of Admission
     200                                                         200

                                                   Acute
                                                                                                     Non-Elective

     100                                                         100



                                               Nonacute
                                                                                                         Elective
       0                                                           0




    -100                                                        -100

           -6      -4    -2      0      2      4           6           -6   -4      -2     0     2       4      6

                (c) Days after UCC Visit (Elective)                    (d) Days after UCC Visit (Non-Elective)
                                                                                                     Non-Elective


     100                                                         100
                                                Elective


      50                                                          50
                                               180 Days
                                                                                                         7 Days
                                                90 Days                                                  2 Days
       0                                                           0




     -50                                                        -50




           -6      -4    -2      0      2      4           6           -6   -4      -2     0     2       4      6
                                               Year Relative to UCC Entry
Notes: Figure shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on spending on inpatient admissions.
UCC entry (Year 0) is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries
in a zip code use a UCC. Year -1 (denoted by a vertical dashed line) is the reference level, which is
set to zero. The different panels show estimates of l from equation (1) for different inpatient spending
outcomes (per capita USD). Panels A and B decompose the impact on inpatient spending by whether
the facility was acute versus non-acute (Panel A) or elective versus non-elective (Panel B). Panels C
and D further decompose spending on elective admissions (Panel C) and non-elective admissions (Panel
D) by the time in days between the admission and the most recent UCC visit preceding it. For detailed
definitions see Section III and the appendix. Standard errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                           26
      Figure 6: UCC Impact on the Number of ER Visits, by ER Discharge Type
                (a) ER Visits without Admission                  (b) ER Visits with Admission


    0.02




    0.01




    0.00




           -6    -4     -2      0     2      4      6     -6     -4     -2     0      2      4     6
                                          Year Relative to UCC Entry
Notes: Figure shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on the number of ER visits. UCC
entry (Year 0) is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries in a
zip code use a UCC. Year -1 (denoted by a vertical dashed line) is the reference level, which is set
to zero. The different panels show estimates of l from equation (1) for different types of ER visits.
Panel A shows data for ER visits ending without the patient being admitted to a hospital. Panel B
shows data for ER visits resulting in the patient being admitted to a hospital. For detailed definitions
see Section III and the appendix. Standard errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                   27
                                            Table 1: Patient Characteristics
                                                                 All       Treated 2011   Controls 2011   Treated 2016   Controls 2016
                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)

 A. UCC entry
   Probability of UCC use                                       0.032         0.041           0.004          0.063           0.005
   Number of UCC visits                                         0.050         0.063           0.005          0.097           0.006
   UCC spending                                                  4.47         5.89             0.52           8.73            0.58

 B. Spending and Mortality
   Total spending (USD per capita)                             11,537         11,570         12,396          11,920         11,620
   Mortality risk                                               0.054          0.053         0.056            0.051          0.057

 C. Spending, by Type of Service (USD per capita)
   Inpatient                                                    3,491         3,386           3,732          3,307           3,262
   Hospital outpatient                                          1,533         1,499           1,601          1,842           2,041
   Part D                                                       1,383         1,300           1,583          1,704           1,681
   SNF and hospice                                              1,274         1,405           1,472          1,219           1,271
   Imaging and tests                                             530           556             535            472             372
   Physician visits: non-UCC                                     526           577             556            572             471
   Home health                                                   511           515             592            480             497
   Part B drug                                                   431           427             397            526             431

 D. Inpatient Spending Categories
   (1) Acute facilities                                         3,108         3,017           3,303          2,944           2,860
   (2) Non-acute facilities                                      383           369             429            364             401
   (A) Non-elective                                             2,453         2,438           2,775          2,305           2,272
   (B) Elective                                                 1,021         1,018           1,044           942             950

 E. Inpatient Spending: Non-Elective Admissions
 All beneficiaries                                              2,453         2,438           2,775          2,305           2,272
   If no UCC visit in this or prior calendar year               2,459         2,434           2,776          2,304           2,272
   If at least one UCC visit in this or prior calendar year     2,356         2,484           2,549          2,313           2,344
      Spending on admissions within 1 year of UCC visit         1,624         1,707           1,609          1,596           1,419
      Spending on admissions within 7 days of UCC visit          283           310             251            259             215
      Spending on admissions within 2 days of UCC visit          210           234             198            184             168

 F. Inpatient Spending: Elective Admissions
 All beneficiaries                                              1,021         1,018           1,044           942             950
   If no UCC visit in this or prior calendar year               1,016         1,008           1,043           931             949
   If at least one UCC visit in this or prior calendar year     1,103         1,152           1,234          1,044           1,095
      Spending on admissions within 1 year of UCC visit          711           750             735            681             668
      Spending on admissions within 180 days of UCC visit        440           466             451            413             320
      Spending on admissions within 90 days of UCC visit         263           287             256            241             158

 G. ER utilization
  Number of ER visits                                            0.57          0.56           0.61            0.60           0.69
  ER visits without admission                                    0.35          0.34           0.37            0.40           0.49
  ER visits with admission                                       0.22          0.22           0.24            0.20           0.20

 H. Controls
   Age                                                           76.37        76.42           76.66          76.00          75.93
   Percent male                                                  0.42          0.43            0.42           0.43           0.43
   CCI approximation (lower is better)                           2.94          2.96            3.10           3.11           3.24
   Part D enrollment (number of months)                           6.26         5.67            6.28           7.87           7.96
 Observations                                                 51,260,567    3,044,037       1,587,742      4,425,561       375,015

Notes: Column 1 shows average characteristics for all sampled patients in all years. Columns 2 and 4 focus
on the subsample of beneficiaries that reside in zip codes that had a UCC entry ("treated") by 2011 and
2016, respectively. Columns 3 and 5 focus on the subsample of beneficiaries living in zip codes with no UCC
entry ("controls") by 2011 and 2016, respectively. Spending is the sum of Medicare and beneficiary spending
for each particular category and is denominated in 2006 US dollars. CCI stands for approximated Charlson
Comorbidity Index. For detailed definitions, see Section III and the appendix.



                                                                  28
                         Table 2: The Impact of UCC Entry
                                Mean Dependent       pre       post           6       6 /mean
                                Variable in 2006                                        (4)/(1)
                                                                                      (percent)
                                      (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)            (5)

A. UCC entry, Different Measures
  Probability of UCC use             0.0137         -0.0010    0.0266       0.0424      310.20
                                                   (0.0001)   (0.0004)     (0.0008)
  Number of UCC visits               0.0225         -0.0015    0.0411       0.0653      290.31
                                                   (0.0001)   (0.0007)     (0.0014)
  UCC spending                        1.85            -0.17     3.86         6.11       330.97
                                                     (0.02)    (0.07)       (0.14)

B. UCC Impact on Spending and Mortality
  Total spending (USD per capita) 10,829.41          26.73     129.08       268.63        2.48
                                                    (19.54)    (20.62)      (40.10)
  Mortality risk                    0.05493         -0.0001    0.0002       0.0008         1.48
                                                   (0.0002)   (0.0002)     (0.0004)

C. UCC Impact on Spending, Most Affected Services
  Inpatient                     3,624.82         2.69          64.49       153.24          4.23
                                              (12.16)         (11.86)      (21.38)
  Part D                        1,132.89        -8.09          47.75       108.20         9.55
                                               (3.93)          (4.07)       (8.47)
  Home health                    439.06          5.97          16.07        43.17         9.83
                                               (3.91)          (4.46)       (9.64)
  Part B drug                    414.41         -1.75          10.45        19.17         4.63
                                               (3.68)          (3.18)       (7.14)

D. UCC Impact on Spending, Other Important Services
  Hospital outpatient             1,219.16    16.49             -3.33       -32.71        -2.68
                                             (4.76)            (5.22)      (11.07)
  Imaging and tests                603.77     10.64            -11.60       -35.76        -5.92
                                             (1.14)            (1.18)       (2.63)
  SNF and hospice                 1,096.82    -2.98             -9.14       -17.56        -1.60
                                             (5.10)            (5.30)       (9.87)
  Physician office visits non-UCC  432.14     -5.59             4.44        12.57         2.91
                                             (0.61)            (0.73)       (1.57)

                                                                        continued on next page




                                        29
                        Table 2: The Impact of UCC Entry (Continued)
                                              Mean Dependent       pre       post        6        6 /mean
                                              Variable in 2006                                      (4)/(1)
                                                                                                  (percent)
                                                     (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)

 E. UCC Impact on Inpatient Spending, Different Breakdowns
   (1) Inpatient in acute facilities         3,232.77    -3.01               57.99     140.26         4.34
                                                       (10.64)              (10.24)    (18.64)
   (2) Inpatient in nonacute facilities       392.05      5.70                6.50      12.97         3.31
                                                        (3.75)               (3.99)     (7.55)
   (A) Inpatient: non-elective               2,546.84   19.78                37.61      91.70          3.60
                                                       (10.19)              (10.25)    (18.34)
     Non-elective within 7 days of UCC visit   6.74      -0.67               12.23      19.61       291.07
                                                        (0.23)               (0.33)     (0.87)
     Non-elective within 2 days of UCC visit   5.19      -0.60                8.80      14.09       271.71
                                                        (0.21)               (0.28)     (0.75)
   (B) Inpatient: elective                   1,125.38    9.66                33.65      63.13         5.61
                                                        (6.66)               (6.79)    (12.92)
     Elective within 90 days of UCC visit      6.62      -0.57               10.79      16.94       256.02
                                                        (0.25)               (0.34)     (0.78)
     Elective within 180 days of UCC visit     9.38      -0.63               18.50      29.34       312.72
                                                        (0.30)               (0.47)     (1.18)

 F. UCC Impact on the Number of ER Visits
    ER visits without admission           0.3118                  0.0019     -0.0010    -0.0031       -0.99
                                                                 (0.0009)   (0.0011)   (0.0025)
     ER visits with admission                      0.2218         0.0011     0.0032      0.0082       3.71
                                                                 (0.0007)   (0.0007)   (0.0014)
Notes: Table shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on different outcomes. Column 1 shows
the mean dependent variable in 2006 (for all beneficiaries, including those then treated). Column 2 shows
a weighed average of pre-treatment estimates from equation (2), which describe the pre-trends in outcome
variables. Column 3 shows a weighed average of post-treatment coefficients from equation (3). Column 4
shows estimates of 6 , the estimated change in the outcome six years after UCC entry. Column 5 shows
this change in outcome six years after UCC entry as a percentage of the mean dependent variable in 2006.
Spending for each category is the sum of Medicare and beneficiary spending and is denominated in 2006 US
dollars. All estimates control for beneficiary age, gender and patient approximated Charlson Comorbidity
Index. Estimates of Part D spending and total spending also control for months of Part D enrollment.
Standard errors are clustered by zip code. N = 51,260,567 patient-years (36,030,854 of which are from zip
codes yet to be treated in 2006). For detailed definitions see Section III and the appendix.




                                                   30
                                    Table 3: Utilization Results
                                            Mean Dependent       pre       post       6        6 /mean
                                            Variable in 2006                                     (4)/(1)
                                                                                               (percent)
                                                   (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)            (5)

 A. UCC Impact on Utilization, Most Affected Services
   Hospital stays                       0.3840       -0.0018              0.0100     0.0255        6.65
                                                    (0.0009)             (0.0009)   (0.0019)
   Part D medication (months of supply)  18.76         0.38                -0.60      -1.48        -7.90
                                                      (0.03)              (0.04)     (0.08)
   Home health visits                     3.21         0.15                 0.01       0.18        5.54
                                                      (0.07)              (0.06)     (0.11)
   Part B drug events                    3.31          0.01                -0.01      -0.06        -1.88
                                                      (0.01)              (0.01)     (0.02)

 B. UCC Impact on Utilization, Other Important Services
   Hospital outpatient visits            5.70          0.11    -0.09    -0.23                      -4.00
                                                      (0.02)  (0.02)   (0.05)
   Imaging and testing events            18.86         0.06    -0.09    -0.35                      -1.84
                                                      (0.03)  (0.04)   (0.08)
   SNF and hospice stays                0.1097        0.0001  0.0010   0.0026                       2.41
                                                    (0.0004) (0.0005) (0.0009)
   Physician office visits non-UCC      7.4312       -0.0243 -0.0021   0.0052                      0.07
                                                    (0.0080) (0.0099) (0.0210)
Notes: Table shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on different outcomes. Column 1 shows
the mean dependent variable in 2006 (for all beneficiaries, including those then treated). Column 2 shows
a weighed average of pre-treatment estimates from equation (2), which describe the pre-trends in outcome
variables. Column 3 shows a weighed average of post-treatment coefficients from equation (3). Column 4
shows estimates of 6 , the estimated change in the outcome six years after UCC entry. Column 5 shows
this change in outcome six years after UCC entry as a percentage of the mean dependent variable in 2006.
All estimates control for beneficiary age, gender and patient approximated Charlson Comorbidity Index.
Estimate of Part D prescription drugs controls for months of Part D enrollment. Standard errors are
clustered by zip code. N = 51,260,567 patient-years (36,030,854 of which are from zip codes yet to be
treated in 2006). For detailed definitions see Section III and the appendix.




                                                   31
Appendix

Sample and Variable Definitions

Construction of the Main Sample
Our main sample consists of all beneficiaries aged 65 years old or older who were enrolled
for at least one full calendar year in Medicare Parts A and B in 2006­2016 and residing in
zip codes that had at least 100 beneficiaries.

Zip-code areas. We sample zip codes as follows. For each zip code and year, we use the
20-percent sample of the MBSF to calculate the number of fee-for-service (FFS) beneficiaries
who resided in the zip code during that year. We then exclude all zip codes that had fewer
than 100 beneficiaries in one or more years during the study period 2006­2016. The resulting
sample of zip codes consists of 14,562 zip codes that had 100 or more beneficiaries throughout
this study period.

Beneficiaries. We sample all patient-years during which the beneficiary resided in a sam-
pled zip code, was at least 65 years old, and had Parts A and B coverage for the full 12
months, or for as long as they were alive for beneficiaries who died during the year. That is,
we exclude beneficiary-years that had any enrollment in Medicare Advantage. The resulting
sample has 51,260,567 patient-years.


Variable Definitions
UCC entry and exit. We consider a zip code as being served by a UCC from the first
year when at least one percent of Medicare FFS beneficiaries residing in this zip code used a
UCC. To calculate the numerator, we use the 20-percent sample of the Carrier File to define
the number of unique beneficiaries who used UCC in each zip-year (without any other sample
restrictions)--namely, beneficiaries with least one Carrier claim with UCC as the place of
service. To calculate the denominator, we use the 20-percent sample of the MBSF to define
the number of FFS beneficiaries residing in each zip every year. The ratio between the two
defines the share of FFS beneficiaries who had at least one visit to UCC in a zip-year. For
each zip code, we consider the first year in which this share is greater or equal to 1 percent
as the year of UCC entry. In our main analysis, we ignore UCC exits (that, as we show, are
rare) and consider a zip code as treated from the year of UCC entry and onward.


                                             32
    In our robustness checks, we also consider UCC exits, using the same access-based ap-
proach we used to define entry. To reduce the measurement error that results from the use of
a 20-percent sample of beneficiaries to measure UCC access, we classify the UCC as having
lost UCC access (i.e., had a UCC exit) only if the number of UCC users falls below 1 percent
for at least two consecutive years and does not rises above this threshold again during our
sample period.

Utilization and health outcomes. We observe multiple utilization measures, spending,
and mortality outcomes for our sample of Medicare beneficiaries. UCC visits are observed
in the Carrier File. Number of UCC visits is the number of distinct dates on which a patient
has any claim in Carrier data with place of service "Urgent Care Facility". Probability
of UCC use is estimated using a dummy that has the value one if a patient has at least
one UCC physician office visit within a given year and zero otherwise. We observe patient
mortality in the MBSF Base File, and estimate mortality probabilities based on whether
a patient died anytime during the year. We observe ER visits and hospital stays in the
MBSF Cost and Utilization File. We classify ER visits to those with and without admission,
using the inpatient and hospital outpatient emergency room visit categories in this file. Our
Hospital Stays variable is the sum of acute inpatient stays and other inpatient stays from
the MBSF Cost and Utilization File.7 Number of physician visits is the number of services
that a patient receives in the Carrier File with Berenson-Eggers Type of Service (BETOS)
codes corresponding to office visits (as opposed to ER visits and visits to other facilities,
procedures, tests and other service types in non-institutional settings). Physician visits in
non-UCC settings have any place of service except for UCC, the majority of which are
physician offices.

Spending measures. For most services, we use spending measures from the MBSF Cost
and Utilization File, which provides annual summaries of spending that CMS calculates from
detailed claims data. In some cases when we consider more granular definitions of services,
we ourselves compute spending by aggregating payments from detailed claims data. All
spending measures are annual and denominated in 2006 US dollars.
    The following spending variables are computed using MBSF Cost and Utilization File.
Inpatient spending in acute facilities is the sum of Medicare, patient and pass-through per
diem payments for acute inpatient hospital category. Inpatient spending in non-acute facili-
ties is the sum of Medicare, patient and pass-through per diem payments for "other inpatient
  7
   For detailed definitions, see "Data Documentation Master Beneficiary Summary File (MBSF):
Cost and Utilization Segment," https://resdac.org/cms-data/files/mbsf-cost-and-utilization/
data-documentation, accessed July 10, 2021.


                                             33
hospital" category. This category includes settings such as long-term care hospitals, inpa-
tient psychiatric facilities, inpatient rehabilitation facilities, and other inpatient facilities.
Hospice spending and home health spending are defined based on Medicare payments for
each category. All other reported spending measures are the sum of Medicare and benefi-
ciary payments for each category. We group skilled nursing facility with hospice payment
and imaging with tests payment. Finally, total spending is the sum of all spending on all
categories reported in the MBSF Cost and Utilization File.
    We computed the following spending measures from detailed claims data (from the In-
patient and Carrier Files). Spending on non-UCC physician visits and UCC spending are
computed using data from the Carrier File. We compute spending as the sum of all line
payments by Medicare and the beneficiary (coinsurance and deductible amount).8 Spending
on UCC services is the sum of payments on all Carrier claims with UCC as the place of
service. To compute spending on physician visits non-UCC, we identify procedures (claim
lines) with BETOS codes for "office visits." We exclude claims with UCC as the place of
service. The place of service for most remaining claims is "physician office." Note that this
category excludes procedures, imaging, and testing.
    We use inpatient claims (from the Inpatient File) to decompose inpatient spending by
whether the admission is elective and by the timing of admission relative to the most recent
UCC visit. Spending for each category is beneficiary and Medicare spending on all relevant
inpatient claims that a patient had in a given year.9 We classify an admission as elective if it
has a type "elective," and as non-elective if it has any other type.10 Non-elective admission
is within 2 days of UCC visit if admission date is the same, one day or two days after the
date of any UCC visit. Other categories with UCC timing are defined similarly.

Approximation of the Charlson Comorbidity Index. As a summary measure of ben-
eficiary health, we approximate the Charlson Comorbidity Index using data on all chronic
   8
     Carrier line payment by Medicare and beneficiary = Line NCH Medicare Payment Amount + Line
Beneficiary Part B Deductible Amount + Line Beneficiary Coinsurance Amount.
   9
     Following CMS documentation, Medicare spending = Claim (Medicare) Payment Amount + Claim Pass
Thru Per Diem Amount * Claim Medicare Utilization Day Count. Beneficiary spending = NCH Beneficiary
Inpatient (or other Part A) Deductible Amount + NCH Beneficiary Part A Coinsurance Liability Amount
+ NCH Beneficiary Blood Deductible Liability Amount (for all inpatient claims with non-negative Claim
(Medicare) Payment Amount). We use the sum of Medicare and beneficiary spending, recoding negative
spending to zero.
  10
     Inpatient claims have Claim Inpatient Admission Type Code with categories: "elective;" "emergency;"
"urgent;" "newborn;" and "trauma center." CMS definitions of these admission types are as follows.
Elective--The patient's condition permitted adequate time to schedule the availability of suitable accom-
modations; Urgent--The patient required immediate attention for the care and treatment of a physical or
mental disorder (Generally, the patient was admitted to the first available and suitable accommodation);
Emergency--The patient required immediate medical intervention as a result of severe, life threatening, or
potentially disabling conditions (Generally, the patient was admitted through the emergency room).


                                                   34
conditions that are a part of the original index and are observed in the MBSF Chronic
Conditions segment. The resulting index is a weighted number of the following chronic con-
ditions. We use the same weights as in the Charlson Comorbidity Index or average weights
for different disease severity (that we do not observe). Weight of 1: Acute Myocardial Infarc-
tion; Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders or Senile Dementia; Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease; Heart Failure; Rheumatoid Arthritis and Osteoarthritis; Stroke or Tran-
sient Ischemic Attack. Weight of 1.5: Chronic Kidney Disease and Diabetes. Weight of 4:
Breast Cancer, Colorectal Cancer, Prostate Cancer, Lung Cancer, Endometrial Cancer. The
possible range of the resulting health index is 0­29.

Enrollment measures. We measure FFS and Part D enrollment using the MBSF Base
File. The yearly share of FFS beneficiaries is defined as the share of beneficiaries with zero
Medicare Advantage months during the year out of the sample of all beneficiaries who are
65 or older, with full-year coverage, or coverage until death. Months of Part D enrollment
are observed in the MBSF base segment.




                                             35
                  Appendix Figure A1: UCC Entry and Enrollment Trends
                                      (a) FFS Enrollment Share (p.p.)
                   2


                   1


                   0


                  -1


                  -2

                                       (b) Part D Enrollment (Months)
                   2


                   1


                   0


                  -1


                  -2
                        -6       -4        -2          0       2         4         6
                                        Year Relative to UCC Entry
Notes: Figure shows DID estimates of the impact of UCC entry on entry and enrollment outcomes.
UCC entry (Year 0) is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries
in a zip code use a UCC. Year -1 (denoted by a vertical dashed line) is the reference level, which is
set to zero. The different panels show estimates of l from equation (1) for the following outcomes:
FFS enrollment share (Panel A) is the percent of beneficiaries who were enrolled in Medicare FFS
throughout the year. Part D enrollment is the number of months a beneficiary was enrolled in Part D
during the year (including zero). For detailed definitions see Section III and the appendix. Standard
errors are clustered by zip code.




                                                  36
                               Appendix Table A1: UCC Penetration

    Year     Beneficiaries     Zips      % bene with       % zips with     % bene with      % zips with
                                         UCC entry         UCC entry          UCC              UCC
                  (1)           (2)          (3)               (4)             (5)              (6)
    2006      4, 718, 394     14, 562         29.3             28.3             29.3             28.3
    2007      4, 616, 647     14, 562         37.4             37.2             37.3             37.1
    2008      4, 544, 576     14, 562         45.4             45.7             45.2             45.4
    2009      4, 546, 816     14, 562         53.4             53.4             52.9             52.9
    2010      4, 592, 044     14, 562         59.3             59.3             58.4             58.4
    2011      4, 631, 779     14, 562         65.7             66.0             64.6             64.6
    2012      4, 672, 461     14, 562         72.5             72.3             70.7             70.1
    2013      4, 719, 898     14, 562         78.5             77.8             75.8             74.4
    2014      4, 712, 215     14, 562         84.7             83.0             81.1             78.3
    2015      4, 705, 161     14, 562         89.3             87.7             84.1             80.8
    2016      4, 800, 576     14, 562         92.2             90.7             87.1             83.8
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 show the number of unique beneficiaries and zip codes included in the sample each
year. Columns 3 and 4 show the share of beneficiaries and zip codes that has a UCC entry on or before a
given year. Columns 5 and 6 show the number of beneficiaries and zip codes still served by a UCC in a given
year. UCC entry is defined as the first year in which more than 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries in a zip
code use a UCC. UCC exit is defined based on a drop of the share of UCC users below 1 percent for at least
two consecutive years and until the end of our sample period. For detailed definitions see the appendix.




                                                     37
                         Appendix Table A2: Robustness to UCC Exits
                                              Main results       Remove zip codes      Use both entries and
                                                                    with exits        exits for identification
                                             pre       post       pre       post        pre          post
                                             (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)

A. UCC Entry, Different Measures
  Probability of UCC use                    -0.0010    0.0266     -0.0010  0.0281      -0.0013      0.0267
                                           (0.0001)   (0.0004)   (0.0001) (0.0004)    (0.0001)     (0.0004)
  Number of UCC visits                      -0.0015    0.0411     -0.0016  0.0434      -0.0021      0.0412
                                           (0.0001)   (0.0007)   (0.0001) (0.0008)    (0.0001)     (0.0006)
  UCC Spending                                -0.17     3.86        -0.18   4.08         -0.21       3.86
                                             (0.02)    (0.07)      (0.02)  (0.07)       (0.02)      (0.06)

B. UCC Impact on Spending and Mortality
  Total spending                        26.73          129.08      28.63   129.35       24.07       125.97
                                       (19.54)         (20.62)    (21.55) (23.06)      (19.22)      (20.24)
  Mortality rate                       -0.0001         0.0002     -0.0001  0.0001      -0.0001      0.0002
                                      (0.0002)        (0.0002)   (0.0002) (0.0003)    (0.0002)     (0.0002)

C. UCC Impact on Spending, Most Affected Services
  Inpatient spending                      2.69   64.49              4.15    66.81        1.07       63.03
                                       (12.16) (11.86)           (12.77)   (12.51)    (11.93)      (11.13)
  Part D spending                        -8.09   47.75             -8.52    51.43       -8.34       46.84
                                        (3.93)  (4.07)            (4.24)    (4.26)     (4.05)       (4.20)
  Home health spending                    5.97   16.07              6.22    17.11        5.86       15.46
                                        (3.91)  (4.46)            (3.90)    (4.50)     (3.90)       (4.36)
  Part B drug spending                   -1.75   10.45             -1.93    10.76       -1.67       11.04
                                        (3.68)  (3.18)            (3.45)    (3.34)     (3.13)       (2.91)

D. UCC Impact on Spending, Other Important Services
  Hospital outpatient spending                16.49   -3.33       18.22     -7.68      16.71         -4.20
                                              (4.76) (5.22)       (4.75)   (5.20)      (4.56)       (4.72)
  Imaging and tests spending                  10.64  -11.60       11.36    -12.92      10.46        -11.57
                                              (1.14) (1.18)       (1.19)   (1.13)      (1.06)       (1.19)
  SNF and hospice spending                     -2.98  -9.14        -3.80   -11.04       -3.73        -9.07
                                              (5.10) (5.30)       (5.95)   (6.07)      (5.27)       (5.60)
  Spending on physician office visits non-UCC  -5.59   4.44        -6.25     4.93       -5.58        4.46
                                              (0.61) (0.73)       (0.60)   (0.79)      (0.64)       (0.77)

                                                                                     continued on next page




                                                38
                  Appendix Table A2: Robustness to UCC Exits (Continued)
                                                 Main results       Remove zip codes    Use both entries and
                                                                       with exits      exits for identification
                                                pre         post     pre       post      pre          post
                                                (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)

 E. UCC Impact on Inpatient Spending, Different            Breakdowns
   (1) Inpatient in acute facilities           -3.01        57.99    -1.90    61.03      -4.08       57.08
                                             (10.64)       (10.24) (11.14)   (10.45)   (10.65)       (9.85)
   (2) Inpatient in non-acute facilities        5.70         6.50     6.05     5.78       5.15        5.95
                                              (3.75)        (3.99)  (3.98)    (4.41)    (3.83)       (3.68)
   (A) Inpatient: non-elective                19.78         37.61   25.05     37.83     19.20        37.25
                                             (10.19)       (10.25) (11.47)   (10.92)    (9.75)       (9.62)
     Non-elective within 7 days of UCC visit   -0.67        12.23    -0.70    12.91      -0.62       12.34
                                              (0.23)        (0.33)  (0.26)    (0.37)    (0.22)       (0.36)
     Non-elective within 2 days of UCC visit   -0.60         8.80    -0.63     9.31      -0.54        8.89
                                              (0.21)        (0.28)  (0.23)    (0.33)    (0.20)       (0.31)
   (B) Inpatient: elective                      9.66        33.65     7.99    34.66       7.83       32.41
                                              (6.66)        (6.79)  (7.32)    (6.40)    (6.81)       (5.99)
     Elective within 90 days of UCC visit      -0.57        10.79    -0.57    11.52      -0.49       10.96
                                              (0.25)        (0.34)  (0.28)    (0.37)    (0.25)       (0.35)
     Elective within 180 days of UCC visit     -0.63        18.50    -0.67    19.63      -0.63       18.73
                                              (0.30)        (0.47)  (0.36)    (0.53)    (0.33)       (0.47)

 F. UCC Impact on the Number of ER Visits
    ER visits without admission       0.0019   -0.0010  0.0021   -0.0011  0.0019                     -0.0013
                                     (0.0009) (0.0011) (0.0009) (0.0011) (0.0010)                   (0.0009)
    ER visits resulting in admission  0.0011    0.0032  0.0012    0.0034  0.0012                      0.0033
                                     (0.0007) (0.0007) (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0008)                   (0.0007)
 Observations                                     51,260,567           48,579,973            51,260,567
Notes: Table shows estimates with and without accounting for UCC exists. Columns 1 and 2 show the
weighted average of pre-treatment and post-treatment coefficients for the main results. Results in columns 3
and 4 are estimated on a sample of zip codes that did not have a UCC exit in 2007­2016. Results in
columns 5 and 6 are computed on our main sample and represent both the (positive) effect of UCC entry
and the (negative) effect of UCC exit. Spending for each category is the sum of Medicare and beneficiary
spending and is denominated in 2006 US dollars. All estimates control for beneficiary age, gender and patient
approximated Charlson Commorbidity Index. Estimates of Part D spending and total spending also control
for months of Part D enrollment. Standard errors are clustered by zip code. For detailed definitions see
Section III and the appendix.




                                                      39
