                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       GROWING PAINS? A COMMENT ON "CONVERGING TO CONVERGENCE"

                                        Rohini Pande
                                      Nils T. Enevoldsen

                                      Working Paper 29046
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29046


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Daron Acemoglu and conference participants at 26th NBER macro annual for
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Rohini Pande and Nils T. Enevoldsen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Growing Pains? A Comment on "Converging to Convergence"
Rohini Pande and Nils T. Enevoldsen
NBER Working Paper No. 29046
July 2021
JEL No. E02,O43

                                          ABSTRACT

Early tests of cross-country convergence found evidence only for conditional convergence. In
contrast, with more recent data, Kremer, Willis, and You (2021) find evidence that since the
mid-1980s there has been a trend towards unconditional convergence culminating in absolute
convergence since 2000. Additionally, they find suggestive evidence that one of the major drivers
of this trend is an underlying convergence towards development-favored policies. We discuss the
implications of this result through the lens of individual welfare and poverty, concluding that the
news is not as welcome as it may seem for the world's poor. We point out that absolute
convergence has happened contemporaneously with rising within-country inequality, resulting in
more of the world's poor living in middle-income countries. Next, we argue that domestic
redistribution is essential to spread the benefits from industrialization, since the labor share of
manufacturing isn't reaching the heights it did in industrialized countries. Finally, we argue that
the democratic institutions that can facilitate this redistribution themselves face headwinds.
Democratic backsliding, the Covid-19 pandemic, and a bleak climate outlook all present
obstacles to transforming economic growth into economic justice for the poor.


Rohini Pande
Yale University
Department of Economics
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and CEPR
and also NBER
rohini.pande@yale.edu

Nils T. Enevoldsen
nils@wlonk.com
 Growing Pains? A Comment on "Converging to
                Convergence"
                     Rohini Pande and Nils Enevoldsen
                                      May 2021


                                       Abstract
          Early tests of cross-country convergence found evidence only for condi-
      tional convergence. In contrast, with more recent data, Kremer, Willis,
      and You (2021) find evidence that since the mid-1980s there has been
      a trend towards unconditional convergence culminating in absolute con-
      vergence since 2000. Additionally, they find suggestive evidence that one
      of the major drivers of this trend is an underlying convergence towards
      development-favored policies. We discuss the implications of this result
      through the lens of individual welfare and poverty, concluding that the
      news is not as welcome as it may seem for the world's poor. We point out
      that absolute convergence has happened contemporaneously with rising
      within-country inequality, resulting in more of the world's poor living in
      middle-income countries. Next, we argue that domestic redistribution is
      essential to spread the benefits from industrialization, since the labor share
      of manufacturing isn't reaching the heights it did in industrialized countries.
      Finally, we argue that the democratic institutions that can facilitate this
      redistribution themselves face headwinds. Democratic backsliding, the
      Covid-19 pandemic, and a bleak climate outlook all present obstacles to
      transforming economic growth into economic justice for the poor.


1    Paper summary
Neoclassical growth theory posits that countries with access to identical tech-
nologies should converge to a common income level. However, an important
literature, exemplified by Barro and Sala-i Martin (1992), tested this prediction
using cross-country data from 1960­1990 and instead found conditional con-
vergence. That is, poor countries converged in growth to rich countries, only
after conditioning on policies, institutions and other country-specific factors (like
human capital).
    "Converging to Convergence" extends the underlying data series up to 2015,
re-estimates cross-country growth regressions and documents a striking change.
   We thank Daron Acemoglu and conference participants at 26th NBER macro annual for

comments. Contact information: rohini.pande@yale.edu; nils@wlonk.com.


                                            1
 Since mid-1980s, there has been a trend towards unconditional convergence cul-
 minating in absolute convergence since 2000 (roughly 1% per annum). The paper
 examines convergence in correlates of growth, and finds that enhanced Solow
 fundamentals (s, n, h), short-run correlates (political and financial institutions,
 fiscal policy), and culture all show  -convergence. This evidence, the authors
 suggest, is supportive of "institutional homogenization" contributing to absolute
 convergence: short-run growth coefficients diminished because convergence of
"development-favored" policies outpaced that of income. Importantly, the same
 is not true of Solow fundamentals
     The paper is based on an impressive collation of data-sets and careful stan-
 dardization of conditioning variables. Using the original empirical specification
 developed in Barro and Sala-i Martin (1992), it documents changing trends
 and evaluates proximate determinants of the paper. The authors provide a
 battery of robustness checks and acknowledge the difficulty of identifying causal
 drivers of the absolute convergence findings. In line with Patel et al. (2021),
 they provide three pieces of descriptive evidence on the role of different income
 quartiles in driving absolute convergence. First, growth rates for richest countries
 slowed down post-2005, and convergence patterns are weaker if the top income
 quartile of countries is removed. Second, laggards remain: absolute convergence
 is stronger if on Sub-Saharan African countries or the bottom income quartile
 of countries is removed. And, third, there is an "absence of middle-class trap":
 Growth is particularly strong for the second quartile countries.
     In their discussion of this paper, Acemoglu and Molina discuss the appropri-
 ateness of the original empirical specification if the aim is to evaluate economic
 relationships. Here, we provide a complementary discussion which examines
 the implications ­ both positive and normative ­ of absolute convergence for
 individual well-being. We take a development economics perspective and focus
 on poverty as the relevant welfare metric.
     In Section 2, we discuss how the time period associated with absolute con-
vergence has also been a period marked by greater clustering of the world's
 poor within lower-middle-income (second quartile) countries and rising within-
 country inequality. Drawing on recent research, Section 3 highlights how the
 changing nature of structural transformation ­ potentially driven by greater
 automation of manufacturing ­ has contributed to these patterns such that,
 today, a high share of labor fails to benefit from a more productive manufacturing
 sector. Thus, if disequalizing growth is to benefit the poor then institutions
 that support domestic redistribution are critical. In Section 4, we argue that
 strong democratic institutions can enable this but there is growing evidence
 of democratic backsliding ­ a phenomenon often linked to growing economic
 inequality. Inequality, combined with weak institutions for redistribution, may
 limit progress on the poverty reduction front in the coming years, especially
 in the face of Covid-19 pandemic. Moreover, a growing incidence of climate
 breakdowns suggest that the policies that may have helped absolute convergence
 are likely to be increasingly inadequate in ensuring that growth benefits the
 poor. Section 5 concludes.



                                         2
2     The changing distribution of world poverty
Development economists have long concerned themselves with poor households
and with poor countries. For much of the discipline's history, the association
was natural: poor countries were predominantly home to poor households, and
poor households were predominantly found in poor countries. Thus, countries
rising out of poverty should be more or less equivalent to households rising out
of poverty.
    There are, certainly, income distributions within countries as well. If certain
policies narrow the income distribution, this provides another way to reduce
household poverty in middle-income countries, even holding mean income fixed.
Using household survey data for 118 countries from 1970 to 2010, Dollar and
Kraay (2002); Dollar et al. (2016), find that the poorest quintile of a country
earns on average 7% of its income. While this proportion varies somewhat
between continents, it is invariant across levels of mean income, across decades,
and across periods of economic growth and economic crisis. The same result holds
when using national accounts income data. "The good news," they conclude, "is
that institutions and policies that promote economic growth in general will on
average raise incomes of the poor equiproportionally." So long as income shares
remain constant, absolute poverty will naturally decline as countries grow.1 In
this view finding absolute convergence is reassuring: as poor countries grow, so
too do the incomes of the poor individuals within those countries. And poor
individuals in poor countries make up the world's extreme poor... don't they?
    The answer is, increasingly, "no." The period since 1980 has seen a weakening
correlation between country income and the share of the world's poor in that
country. While country convergence remains monotonically beneficial for poor
individuals, its relative importance diminishes as within-country inequality has
begun to dominate between-country inequality. In our discussion, we build on
the changing profile of world poverty across countries to argue that absolute
convergence in an increasingly unequal world is driving a wedge between country
incomes and living standards of vulnerable groups, especially within lower-middle-
income (second quartile) countries.

2.1    Poor are increasingly living outside poor countries
A common presumption is that poor people live in poor countries, many im-
poverished by colonialism. This was not always the case. Bourguignon and
Morrisson (2002) find that in 1820 almost 90% of global inequality was due to
within-country inequality rather than than between-country inequality. This
proportion fell in the subsequent century, and by 1950 within-country inequality
accounted for only 40% of global inequality. That proportion remained stable for
   1 Deaton (2005) notes that non-classical measurement error in using either consumption

surveys or national accounts to identify how economic gains are distributed within a country
restricts our ability to conclude that this finding implies that growth is good for the poor.
Consumption surveys undersample richer households and national accounts may assign incorrect
consumption bundles to the poor.



                                             3
                       populations of poor people and have become more unequal as they
                       have grown. This has created two concentrations of poverty in the
                       world.

                       In 1987, nine out of 10 extremely poor people generally lived in low-
                       income countries. But by 2015 only four out of 10 lived in low-
                       income countries, while the rest lived in middle-income countries,
                       over half of them in India, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Kenya,
                       Yemen, South Africa, China, Pakistan and Zambia.


                       Richer Countries, but Millions Still Destitute
                       Number of people living in extreme poverty (less than $1.90 per day) in 1987 and 2015.
                       The 10 countries with the most people in extreme poverty in each year are named.


                                              1987                                             2015
                                                                         457          India
                                                                      million        176m

                                                                                Nigeria 87m
                                                                                                           Bangladesh
                       Middle-                                                    Indonesia
                                                                                                           Kenya
                       income    Brazil                     115
                                              Others                                           Others
                       countries                            million

                                   China                                 256                               Dem. Congo
                                   660m                                          Ethiopia
                                                                      million Madagascar                   Tanzania
                                                                                                           Mozambique
                       Low-
                                                                                               Others
                       income                               1.6
                       countries                            billion




                                    India
                                   417m




                          Indonesia 123m
                                 Pakistan
                                  Nigeria
                                                             Vietnam
                                Myanmar
                                                             Bangladesh
                                 Ethiopia

                                              Others


                       By The New York Times | Source: PovcalNet, World Bank; countries are grouped as low- or middle-

                  Figure 1: Most poor live in middle-income countries
                       income according to the World Bank's historical classifications.



                       Conflict, inequality and weak institutions may cause growth to
       Source: Pande et al.as
                   reverse, (2019).  Graph
                              in Yemen,       reprinted
                                        which since        courtesy
                                                    2015 has           of The
                                                             slipped from       New York Times.
                                                                          the ranks
                 of middle-income countries. But poverty reduction propelled by
                 economic growth, as in China, may also be running out of steam.
the next four decades.    In The
                 This growth        Bottom
                              was rooted        Billion
                                         in low-skilled     (2007),
                                                        laborers moving outinstance,
                                                                      for   of       Collier argued
that 58 countries  ­ largely in sub-Saharan Africa ­ were home to the majority
                 agriculture and into manufacturing industries bolstered by high

of the world's impoverished, and it is toward these countries that anti-poverty
                 global demand and trade.

efforts should be Now,
                   directed.
                        manufacturing is on the decline and automation is spreading

    In response, inSumner        (2010) coined the "New Bottom Billion," pointing
                    rich and poor countries. From 2013 to 2015, total employment in

out that by World       Bank       definitions, three-quarters of the world's poor live
                  India, for instance, shrank by seven million, more than Illinois's
                  entire civilian labor force of 6.5 million.
in middle-income countries. Indeed, in recent decades, the global income in-
equality decomposition        trend is reverting. World Bank Group (2016) finds that
                  Aid doesn't reach the majority of the poor because the middle-
                  income countries they live in either never received much or have
between 1988 and    2013,     the proportion of global inequality due to within-country
                  outgrown eligibility.
inequality rose from 20% to 35%.2
    Page and Pande     (2018) identify
                                     Subscribe for the    subset        ofoffer.
                                                                            middle-income countries which
                  India and Nigeria, the countries with the two largest populations of
                                                   $1 a week. Limited time                             EXPAND
                  extreme poor in the world, received nearly the lowest net aid per
contain 1% or more of the world's poor ­ high-poverty middle-income countries
(HiPMIs) ­ typically in the second quartile of GDP per capita. Just five HiMPIs
are home to half of the world's poorest: India, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Indonesia,
and Kenya. While the mean incomes of these countries are not among the lowest
in the world, the trends of inequality within them have an outsized impact on
the global convergence between rich and poor regions, communities, households,
and individuals.
   2 The difference in estimates between when Bourguignon and Morrisson ends and World

Bank, based on Lakner and Milanovi, begins is in part due to different methodologies and
measures ­ the former use Thiel index; the latter, mean log deviation ­ but we draw attention
only to the direction and magnitude of the change, rather than the exact level.




                                                                       4
               DRC           Ethiopia     Northern Nigeria      Bihar, India




            92M people      117M people       98M people         127M people
            $520 GDPpc      $850 GDPpc        $977 GDPpc         $650 GDPpc

                                                    Low-income regions
                Low-income countries
                                                of middle-income countries


           Figure 2: Low-income regions of middle-income countries


2.2    Poor are increasingly clustered within countries
Within HiPMIs themselves, poverty is, naturally, nonuniform. As though viewing
a fractal through a loupe, the spatial clustering of poverty so visible on a global
scale is replicated within middle-income countries. The distinction between a
poor region of a HiPMI and a poor country is not demographic, but political.
    In populous middle-income countries like HiPMIs, some such regions are
massive. In fact, if the Indian state of Bihar were a sovereign state, it would be
the world's most populous low-income country, with 127M people and a GDP per
capita of just $650. Or, were the northern region of Nigeria to break away, the
low-income country it became would be second in population only to Ethiopia.
    A large part of this spatial clustering of poverty reflects patterns of urban-
ization. As of the 2011 census, Bihar's urbanization rate of 11.3% was ahead
only that of Himachal Pradesh, a much smaller state. Fully 80% of the world's
extreme poor live in rural areas (Castañeda et al., 2016), while urban areas are
engines of growth and labor productivity (Glaeser et al., 1992). The authors'
ongoing surveys of economic migrants from two poor, rural Indian states finds
that the incomes of migrants who returned to their villages during the Covid-19
lockdown fell by over 80%, while the incomes of those who subsequently rem-
igrated ­ mostly to urban areas ­ rebounded to 85% of their previous levels
(Allard et al., 2021).
    Since such a large proportion of the world's poor are clustered in so few
middle-income countries, the trends of within-country inequality in these specific
countries matters quite a lot for global poverty ­ arguably more than all between-
country inequality combined. The trends here are mixed, but are especially
concerning in the South Asian HiPMIs of India and Bangladesh, and more or
less neutral in other HiPMIs like Nigeria and Indonesia.
    Indeed, the same convergence tests that are done between countries can
also be done between subnational regions, and here there is suggestive evidence
from India of within-country divergence in regional per capita income (Sachs
et al., 2002; Ghosh, 2008, 2012; Kalra and Sodsriwiboon, 2010) or limited club
convergence (Baddeley et al., 2006; Bandyopadhyay, 2011; Ghosh et al., 2013).


                                          5
                         Income shares of Top 1% in selected HiPMIs
             25%
                                                                           Bangladesh
                                                                           China
                                                                           India
             20%                                                           Indonesia
                                                                           Nigeria



             15%




             10%




              5%




              0%
               1980   1985   1990   1995   2000       2005   2010   2015



      Figure 3: Income shares of top 1% are increasing in some HiPMIs

                      Data source: World Income Inequality Database



3    Structural transformation and disequalizing growth
If poor countries converged with rich ones with respect to mean income, then of
course residual poverty must reflect within-country inequality. The important
question, then, is whether processes of economic growth that imply absolute
convergence are increasing within-country inequality.
    Historically, processes of economic development have been marked by a decline
in the share of agriculture in both country income and labor employment. For
today's rich countries, the process of structural transformation was accompanied
by the manufacturing sector demonstrating a double advantage. It was both
more productive than farming and absorbed a larger population share.
    More recently, lower income countries have continued to see relative increases
in the income shares of manufacturing and, in some cases, services. Using data
on (formal) manufacturing in 118 countries, Rodrik (2012) shows that up to 2005
manufacturing exhibited strong unconditional convergence in labor productivity.
However, this was not accompanied by aggregate convergence due to the small
share of manufacturing employment in low-income countries and the slow pace of
industrialization. Figure 4 shows that HiPMIs continue to lag in manufacturing
employment.
    Service growth shows a similar pattern ­ India being the exemplar case
here. Between 1950 and 2009, the share of agriculture in India's GDP fell
from 55% to 17%, manufacturing rose but remained under 30%, while services
increased to 57%. Fan et al. (2021) show that the rise in services was driven by
consumer, not producer services and reflected limited employment gains. It was
also urban-biased.
    Thus, recent trends in manufacturing and services suggest these remain


                                                  6
                                                                                        Bangladesh
                                                                                        China
                                        20%                                             India
                                                                                        Indonesia




            Manufacturing Labor Share
                                                                                        Kenya
                                        15%                                             Nigeria




                                        10%



                                        5%



                                        0%
                                              1995   2000      2005       2010   2015

                                                               Year


                                 Figure 4: HiPMIs lag in manufacturing employment

                                                            Data source: ILO



productive sectors that are gaining GDP share in the world's less well-off countries.
But, they are less likely to provide high levels of well-paid employment. Diao
et al. (2021) show that this is leading to a new form of dualism: In Ethiopia
and Tanzania, the manufacturing sector is made up of larger firms that exhibit
superior productivity performance but do not expand employment much, and
small firms that absorb employment but lack productivity growth. Clearly, the
declining labor share of income in many developing countries may further weaken
link between GDP convergence and household well-being.


4    The present and the future
Disequalizing growth can still benefit the poor if the state is willing and able
to redistribute resources to those who need them. Pande (2020) shows that
most of the world's poor now live in democratic states, but many of these
states are relatively non-egalitarian. The twenty-first century has, concerningly,
been marked by significant democratic backsliding. Haggard and Kaufman
(2021) define it as "the processes through which elected rulers weaken checks on
executive power, curtail political and civil liberties, and undermine the integrity
of the electoral system." They identify over 16 democracies that have seen such
backsliding in recent years.
    Democratic backsliding and reduced redistribution is particularly costly for
the poor and near-poor when economic growth falters ­ a possibility that has
come to pass with Covid-19 in many HiPMIs. 2020 was the first year in the
twenty-first century when world poverty rose. The newly poor are concentrated
in `second quartile' countries: 61% in South Asia and 27% in Sub-Saharan Africa
(Lakner et al., 2021). At the $3.20/day threshold, 68% of the newly poor are in
South Asia.


                                                                      7
        Electoral democracy index             Speech and media freedom index
  1.0

  0.8                                                                                GDPpc quartile
  0.6                                                                                    4

  0.4                                                                                    3
                                                                                         2
  0.2
                                                                                         1
  0.0

                                                                                     Selected countries
  1.0
                                                                                         Bangladesh
  0.8
                                                                                         India
  0.6                                                                                    Indonesia

  0.4                                                                                    Kenya
                                                                                         Nigeria
  0.2

  0.0
        1980   1990   2000    2010     2020   1980       1990   2000   2010   2020
                      Year                                      Year



                             Figure 5: Democratic backsliding

                                     Data source: V-Dem Project



    In the medium-term, climate breakdowns will likely constrain fossil-fuel-based
growth and this may particularly reduce growth in lower income settings. For
the average developing country, economic convergence is accompanied by a
convergence towards the global average usage of most primary energy carriers,
consumption of final energy in most sectors, and total carbon dioxide emissions.
Current economic growth in lower-income countries is no less energy intensive
than past growth in industrialized countries (van Benthem, 2015).
    In addition to potentially lower growth as countries transition away from fossil-
fuel based growth, HiPMIs are also significantly exposed to direct climate change
adverse effects. Notre Dame's ND-GAIN scores each country on its exposure to
climate change (Chen et al., 2015). "Exposure" is a purely biophysical assessment,
unrelated to a country's mitigation capacity. Factors include proportion of land
that will be submerged under the sea, how annual groundwater runoff and
recharge will change, how cereal yields will change, and so forth. Of the top
five most-exposed countries with over one million population (thereby excluding
most small island nations), three are HiPMIs.
    International climate change mitigation policies are a double-edged sword
for poor countries and HiPMIs. If adopted, they will make fossil-fuel-based
convergence more expensive. If not, climate change itself may reverse their
growth via draughts, floods, storms, or rising sea level. It is essentially a growth-
and-carbon accounting exercise to then conclude that there are only a handful of
possible outcomes: economic convergence will stagnate, industrialized countries
will experience dramatic degrowth, economic growth will decouple from energy
use, energy use will decouple from carbon dioxide emissions, carbon sequestration


                                                     8
             ND-GAIN [Biophysical] Exposure to Climate Change
              Niger                                                        HiPMI
              India                                                        Other
    Myanmar (Burma)
            Zambia
             Angola
                      0      0.1    0.2       0.3    0.4     0.5   0.6

                                          ND-GAIN Exposure

                          Figure 6: Exposure to climate change

                 Data source: Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative



technology will scale-up massively, and/or humanity will engage in brinkmanship
with climate catastrophe.


5     Conclusion
The paper convincingly documents a trend towards absolute convergence in
GDP per capita and provides suggestive evidence that policy convergence played
a role. From a development perspective, it is useful to link a narrative about
country-level convergence to income distribution within countries: poor regions,
communities, households, and individuals. Doing so highlights the need for
institutions that will ensure greater domestic redistribution and, possibly, also a
rethinking of domestic industrial policy. This, we argue, is critical if absolute
convergence is to be the tide that lifts all boats. The need is amplified by the
ongoing Covid-19 pandemic and the increasing likelihood of significant climate
breakdowns.


References
Allard, Jenna, Nils Enevoldsen, Maulik Jagnani, Charity Troyer
 Moore, Yusuf Neggers, Rohini Pande, and Simone Schaner, "Over a
 Year after the First Covid-19 Lockdown, Migrants Remain Vulnerable," Blog
 post, Yale University Economic Growth Center April 2021.
Baddeley, Michelle, Kirsty McNay, and Robert Cassen, "Divergence
 in India: Income differentials at the state level, 1970­97," The Journal of
 Development Studies, 2006, 42 (6), 1000­1022.
Bandyopadhyay, Sanghamitra, "Rich States, Poor States: Convergence and
 Polarisation in India," Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 58 (3),
 414­436.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala i Martin, "Convergence," Journal of
 Political Economy, 1992, 100 (2), 223­251.

                                              9
Bourguignon, François and Christian Morrisson, "Inequality Among
 World Citizens: 1820­1992," American Economic Review, September 2002, 92
 (4), 727­744.
Castañeda, Andrés, Dung Doan, David Newhouse, Minh Cong
 Nguyen, Hiroki Uematsu, and João Pedro Azevedo, Who are the
 Poor in the Developing World?, The World Bank, 2016.
Chen, Chen, Ian Noble, Jessica Hellmann, Joyce Coffee, Martin
 Murillo, and Nitesh Chawla, "University of Notre Dame Global Adapta-
 tion Index Country Index Technical Report," Technical Report, University of
 Notre Dame 2015.
Collier, Paul, The Bottom Billion, Oxford University Press, 2007.
Deaton, Angus, "Measuring Poverty in a Growing World (or Measuring Growth
 in a Poor World)," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 05 2005, 87 (2),
 395­395.
Diao, Xinshen, Mia Ellis, Margaret S McMillan, and Dani Rodrik,
 "Africa's Manufacturing Puzzle: Evidence from Tanzanian and Ethiopian
 Firms," Working Paper 28344, National Bureau of Economic Research January
 2021.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay, "Growth is Good for the Poor," Journal of
 Economic Growth, 2002, 7, 195­225.
  , Tatjana Kleineberg, and Aart Kraay, "Growth still is good for the
  poor," European Economic Review, 2016, 81, 68­85.
Fan, Tianyu, Michael Peters, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Service-Led or
  Service-Biased Growth? Equilibrium Development Accounting across Indian
  Districts," Working Paper 28551, National Bureau of Economic Research
  March 2021.
Ghosh, Madhusudan, "Economic Reforms, Growth and Regional Divergence
 in India," Margin: The Journal of Applied Economic Research, 2008, 2 (3),
 265­285.
  , "Regional Economic Growth and Inequality in India during the Pre- and
  Post-reform Periods," Oxford Development Studies, 2012, 40 (2), 190­212.
  , Atanu Ghoshray, and Issam Malki, "Regional divergence and club
  convergence in India," Economic Modelling, 2013, 30 (C), 733­742.
Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, José A. Scheinkman, and Andrei
 Shleifer, "Growth in Cities," Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100 (6),
 1126­1152.
Haggard, Stephan and Robert Kaufman, Backsliding: Democratic Regress
 in the Contemporary World, Cambridge University Press, 2021.

                                    10
Kalra, Sanjay and Piyaporn Sodsriwiboon, "Growth Convergence and
 Spillovers Among Indian States: What Matters? What Does Not?," Working
 Paper 10/96, International Monetary Fund 2010.
Lakner, Christoph, Nishant Yonzan, Daniel Gerszon Mahler, R. An-
  dres Castaneda Aguilar, and Haoyu Wu, "Updated estimates of the
  impact of COVID-19 on global poverty: Looking back at 2020 and the outlook
  for 2021," Blog post, World Bank January 2021.
Page, Lucy and Rohini Pande, "Ending Global Poverty: Why Money Isn't
 Enough," Journal of Economic Perspectives, November 2018, 32 (4), 173­200.
Pande, Rohini, "Can democracy work for the poor?," Science, 2020, 369
 (6508), 1188­1192.
  , Vestal McIntyre, and Lucy Page, "A New Home for Extreme Poverty:
  Middle-Income Countries," The New York Times, Jan 2019.
Patel, Dev, Justin Sandefur, and Arvind Subramanian, "The New Era
 of Unconditional Convergence," Working Paper 566, Center for Global Devel-
 opment February 2021.
Rodrik, Dani, "Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 11 2012, 128 (1), 165­204.
Sachs, Jeffrey, Nirupam Bajpai, and Ananthi Al Ramiah, "Understand-
  ing Regional Economic Growth in India," Asian Economic Papers, 02 2002, 1,
  32­62.
Sumner, Andy, "Global Poverty and the New Bottom Billion: What if Three-
  quarters of the World's Poor Live in Middle-income Countries?," IDS Working
 Papers, 2010, 2010 (349), 01­43.
van Benthem, Arthur A., "Energy Leapfrogging," Journal of the Association
  of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2015, 2 (1), 93­132.
World Bank Group, Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2016: Taking on Inequality,
 World Bank, 2016.




                                     11
