                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A SIGNAL TO END CHILD MARRIAGE:
           THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM BANGLADESH

                                        Nina Buchmann
                                         Erica M. Field
                                       Rachel Glennerster
                                       Shahana Nazneen
                                        Xiao Yu Wang

                                      Working Paper 29052
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29052


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021


The study was funded by the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation, the US National
Institutes of Health, the Nike Foundation, the International Development Research Center, and
GrOW, a multi-funder partnership with the UK Government's Department for International
Development, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, and the International Development
Research Center, Canada. We thank colleagues at Save the Children and Bangladesh
Development Society who were an integral part of designing this evaluation particularly Jahirul
Alam Azad, Winnifride Mwebesa, Veronica Torres, Mary Beth Powers, Elizabeth Pearce, and
Barbara Burroughs as well as Shoraez Shahjahan (IPA) and Diva Dhar (JPAL). Invaluable
research assistance was provided by Libby Abbott, Michael Duthie, Rahin Khandker, Elizabeth
Linos, Parendi Mehta, Rudmila Rahman, Akshay Dixit, Rizwana Shahnaz, Pauline Shoemaker,
Saffana Humaira, Mihir Bhaskar, Jintao Sun, Sara Pratico, and Shakil Ayan. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nina Buchmann, Erica M. Field, Rachel Glennerster, Shahana Nazneen, and Xiao Yu
Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Signal to End Child Marriage: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Bangladesh
Nina Buchmann, Erica M. Field, Rachel Glennerster, Shahana Nazneen, and Xiao Yu Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 29052
July 2021
JEL No. D03,D9,O1

                                         ABSTRACT

Child marriage remains common even where female schooling and employment opportunities
have grown. We introduce a signaling model in which bride type is imperfectly observed but
preferred types have lower returns to delaying marriage. We show that in this environment the
market might pool on early marriage even when everyone would benefit from delay. In this
setting, offering a small incentive can delay marriage of all treated types and untreated non-
preferred types, while programs that act directly on norms can unintentionally encourage early
marriage. We test these theoretical predictions by experimentally evaluating a financial incentive
to delay marriage alongside a girls' empowerment program designed to shift norms. As predicted,
girls eligible for the incentive are 19% less likely to marry underage, as are nonpreferred type
women ineligible for the incentive. Meanwhile, the empowerment program was successful in
promoting more progressive gender norms but failed to decrease adolescent marriage and
increased dowry payments.

Nina Buchmann                                   Shahana Nazneen
Department of Economics                         Bangladesh
Stanford University                             shahanans@hotmail.com
Landau Economics
Building                                        Xiao Yu Wang
579 Jane Stanford Way                           Department of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305                              Duke University
ncb21@stanford.edu                              213 Social Sciences Building
                                                Box 90097
Erica M. Field                                  Durham, NC 27708
Department of Economics                         and NBER
Duke University                                 xy.wang@duke.edu
Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and CEPR
and also NBER
emf23@duke.edu

Rachel Glennerster
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
22 Whitehall
London, SW1A 2EG
United Kingdom
rachel.glennerster@fcdo.gov.uk

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29052
1       Introduction
    Adolescent marriage remains the norm in many parts of the world, with 120 million girls under
18 projected to become brides over the next decade (Unicef, 2017). There is growing evidence that
underage marriage is bad for women and their children. Women who marry as adolescents attain
less schooling and give birth at a younger age, both of which result in worse outcomes for their
children.1 These welfare concerns have prompted a global campaign to end adolescent and child
marriage, and most countries in the world have enacted age of consent legislation banning the prac-
tice. Meanwhile, even though marriage is one of the largest financial transactions a household will
undertake, there is surprisingly little empirical analysis of the motivations and potential conflicts of
interest leading families to make this choice.2 Understanding why this practice persists is necessary
in order to design effective policy approaches to discourage it.
    This paper attempts to shed light on this question by investigating marriage behavior in rural
Bangladesh, a setting in which female marriage before or shortly after 18 is the norm. Bangladesh
has the second-highest adolescent marriage rate in the world: 74% of women aged 26-55 were mar-
ried before age 18 (Unicef, 2014). More surprisingly, as shown in figure 1, the adolescent marriage
rate has changed little in recent years despite large gains in female education and employment, and
dramatic reductions in fertility and child mortality. According to the most recent Bangladesh De-
mographic and Health Survey (BDHS), while the median years of female schooling rose from zero
to nearly seven in only two decades, the median age of marriage increased by only one year (Mitra
et al., 2016).3
    Bangladesh's recent success in achieving many gender development goals, alongside widespread
public health campaigns to increase awareness about the negative consequences of underage mar-
riage, raises the question of why it remains so pervasive. Since early marriage reduces child quality,
in a Beckerian framework all of the above trends should exert positive pressure on female marriage
age (Becker and Lewis, 1973). Indeed, data from numerous sources, including our own, indicate
that the vast majority of female adolescents and their parents no longer favor underage marriage,
which makes the stagnation particularly puzzling (see, for example, Loaiza Sr and Wong (2012)).4
    The fact that child marriage happens at all suggests the existence of some perceived cost of
delaying that outweighs the accompanying gains in maternal and child quality. One possibility is
that the demand for young brides is a culturally entrenched preference rooted in strong beliefs about
the benefits of marrying young - for instance, that expected fertility rises (Goody, 1990).5 Even if

    1
      Much of the literature linking child marriage to poor outcomes is correlational, but there is also evidence that early
marriage is causally linked to lower schooling attainment and worse outcomes in marriage, including health-seeking
behavior (Field and Ambrus, 2008), and worse outcomes for offspring (Chari et al., 2017).
    2
      See online appendix OA.1 for a comprehensive literature review of academic studies on child marriage.
    3
      Not only has Bangladesh achieved gender parity in primary and secondary school enrollment, but poverty fell from
57% in 1991/92 to 32% in 2010, and maternal mortality declined by 40% between 2001 and 2010. Wage opportunities
for women, reproductive health, and child survival also increased steadily over this period (Mitra et al., 2016).
    4
      In our survey data, 95% of girls aged 15-17 reported a minimum acceptable marriage age at or above 18, and when
asked why girls should not marry younger, 74% said because she would not be physically ready for childbearing.
    5
      In fact, fertility should be lower if childbearing starts 2-3 years under age 18 relative to 2-3 years above 18 given
the health risks of very early childbearing, and survey data indicate that individuals are reasonably aware of the health


                                                             1
the factors motivating an original preference for youth have become obsolete, child marriage might
persist if norms are sticky due to perceived social sanctions to deviating from norms or incomplete
information on higher-order beliefs (Bursztyn et al., 2020).

                 Figure 1: Education, child mortality, and marriage trends in Bangladesh




Notes: Data from the 2004, 2007, 2011, 2014, and 2017 Bangladesh DHS. The samples include all women aged 18-49.
All blue lines follow the left y-axis scale and the red line follows the right y-axis scale. "Under-5 mortality" includes all
deaths of children born in the five years preceding the survey. "Married<18" is the percentage of women who report a
marriage age under 18. Because the DHS data only include ever-married women, child marriage rates were calculated
by multiplying the share of ever-married women that married under 18 by the share of married women age 18-49 in the
household roster.


    Yet, the fact that roughly half of marriages take place above age 18 makes the existence of strong
cultural preference for underage marriage less likely, especially as we observe many households
choosing early marriage for only a fraction of their daughters.6 Thus, a simple "youth premium"
alone appears insufficient to explain why marriage age is not rising steadily with increasing returns
to and falling costs of female schooling.
    One possibility, which we formalize in this paper, is that delaying marriage is taken as a negative
signal of bride quality. Signaling influences marriage age in the following manner: If brides with

risks associated with early childbearing.
     6
       In control communities, 44% of households with more than one daughter chose underage marriage for only some
of their daughters.


                                                             2
the lowest economic returns to delaying also differ on an unobservable dimension that grooms de-
sire, these brides might choose to enter the market early to signal they are the preferred type. This is
particularly likely to be the case in Bangladesh, and throughout South Asia, where anthropological
research has documented high marriage market returns to women's adherence to traditional gender
norms of behavior such as docility and obedience to husbands and in-laws. Individual adherence to
norms is difficult to observe prior to marriage, especially given that our data suggest that parents'
norms (which can be more easily observed) are not a strong predictor of their daughters' beliefs.
Conservative gender norms are also very likely to be correlated with the private costs of human cap-
ital attainment (e.g., conservative women face greater barriers to attending school, engaging with
learning, or behaving competitively in academic settings) and returns to education (e.g., conserva-
tive women are also less likely to be employed or participate actively in household decision-making
as adults).
     As a result, brides who privately know they are conservative have an incentive to enter marriage
earlier than they would in a full-information environment in an attempt to signal their type. This,
in turn, leads less conservative women who would benefit the most from delaying marriage to pool
with preferred types and marry early as well, or face worse marriage prospects as an obvious non-
preferred type. In this manner, signaling can lead to an equilibrium in which everyone marries
earlier than is optimal, even though everyone (including men) would be weakly better off if all
women were required to delay. Moreover, a small incentive that pushes brides to postpone marriage
has the potential to shift the marriage market equilibrium from one in which all brides pool on early
marriage to one in which many brides delay, including non-preferred types not offered the incentive.
     The signaling model also implies that policies that attempt to reduce the incidence of child
marriage by reducing girls' adherence to traditional gender norms ­ e.g., traditional empowerment
programs ­ can actually have a perverse effect on marriage age because altering the distribution of
types in the marriage market works to increase the value of signaling one's type.7
     Meanwhile, alternative explanations for child marriage do not yield the same predictions, which
permits an empirical test of the signaling model. In the "strong preferences" scenario, only a very
large incentive could cause marriage delay for a significant fraction of brides, and there should be no
immediate effect on households who do not receive the incentive. Alternatively, if child marriage
were due to an "unraveling" story in which all brides marry early for fear of missing out on the
highest quality husbands, then the incentive should lead to spillovers on all women, and not only on
non-preferred types.8
     To provide empirical evidence on signaling motivations for child marriage, we conduct a field

    7
      Wahhaj (2018) studies a signaling story where daughters marry early for fear of being suspected to be of bad
character, but the model does not consider the relationship between this unobserved type and other attributes such as
education, and yields fundamentally different predictions. He shows theoretically that policies that increase women's
bargaining power may increase average age of marriage. In our model, adolescent girls have no bargaining power
in marriage, which we believe is more realistic in this setting of arranged marriage. Moreover, our signaling model
predicts that "empowering" adolescent girls could actually lower their marriage market value and decrease marriage
age in the absence of other policy interventions, as docility is the preferred bride type in this environment.
    8
      Unraveling also requires there to be a fixed supply of grooms on the market, which is unlikely to occur in settings
such as ours in which brides can match with grooms over a large geographic area and age range (Anderson, 2007b).


                                                           3
experiment that evaluates the impact of a novel policy in rural Bangladesh. In particular, we intro-
duced a conditional incentive program that offered regular transfers to families of adolescent girls
between the ages of 15 and 17 as long as they remained unmarried, for up to two years or until they
reached the age of consent (18). The program was implemented as a clustered randomized trial,
allowing us to assess the causal impact on marriage age of a small increase in the value of delaying
marriage on girls living in communities randomized to receive the program. This is the first rigor-
ous evaluation of a financial incentive to delay marriage that is conditional only on marriage age.9
In parallel, we evaluate the impact of a prototypical adolescent empowerment program, a more
standard policy instrument designed to discourage child marriage by promoting more progressive
gender norms among adolescent girls.
    Consistent with our theoretical predictions, our findings indicate that the conditional incentive
program was highly effective in increasing age at marriage and schooling attainment. Four and a
half years after program completion, women in treatment communities who were eligible for the
incentive for two years are 19% less likely to have married under age 18 and 18% less likely to
have married below 16. Moreover, back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest extremely high take-
up of the incentive among those at risk of marrying young. Importantly, we also find patterns of
results from auxiliary predictions unique to the signaling model: untreated women who live close
to incentive communities and have relatively progressive gender norms are 37% less likely to have
married under age 18, which is not true of their socially conservative peers. Meanwhile, although
the empowerment program succeeded in promoting more progressive gender norms, it distinctly
failed to encourage later marriage and there is some evidence that underage marriage actually rose
in this arm and average dowry payments to grooms increased, also consistent with the signaling
model.
    These results provide novel evidence that non-taste-based factors such as signaling play a sub-
stantive role in sustaining the institution of child marriage in Bangladesh. It is important to distin-
guish between a model in which child marriage exists because youth is valued in the market and a
model in which child marriage is influenced by signaling motivations because these models have
very distinct policy implications. In particular, a financial incentive has far more potential to be both
welfare-improving and cost-effective relative to a similar policy offered in a non-signaling world.
This is because, in the signaling model, child marriage is unambiguously inefficient since delaying
marriage for all women would be a weak Pareto improvement for society: women increase their ed-
ucation if they enter the marriage market later, and men and children are better off with an educated
wife and mother.10 In contrast, if society has a preference for child marriage, delaying marriage
age with a financial incentive does not necessarily make everyone better off. Hence, evidence of
signaling provides justification for intervening to change a practice that may otherwise be seen as
reflecting a strong cultural preference.

    9
       Krishnan et al. (2014) conduct a non-experimental evaluation of a state-wide program in Haryana that provided a
financial incentive to girls at birth who were still unmarried on their 18th birthday. The paper compares the marriage
timing of girls from Haryana with that of daughters-in-law originally from other states.
    10
       Consistently, 31% of men in our sample reported education as one of the two most desirable characteristics in a
bride).


                                                          4
     The cost-efficacy of the policy approach depends critically on the underlying model. First, in the
signaling environment, a financial incentive has the unique potential to immediately reduce child
marriage among those who do not receive the incentive but who face lower stigma from delaying
(as long as there is some ambiguity as to who is eligible). Second, the human capital benefits of
delaying imply that a lower incentive value is necessary to induce delay among recipients relative
to a world in which the only value to postponing marriage is the cash transfer received. That
is, because everyone is made better off by postponing marriage in a signaling world, a financial
incentive to delay marriage does not need not be large or even universally offered to have an impact
on marriage age, only believed to be orthogonal to the preferred type.11
     Our results also offer an explanation for why existing programs that promote girls' education or
attempt to change girls' gender norms directly have not reduced child marriage. Our theory shows
that, while these approaches may work if preferences are the sole determinant of marriage age,
if signaling concerns drive child marriage, they would have no impact or even increase underage
marriage. This is because, in a signaling environment, either policy would exacerbate the adverse
selection problem by strengthening grooms' beliefs that a late entrant is the non-preferred type,
making it even costlier for women not to pool on early marriage. For the same reason, it is important
that incentives are conditioned directly on marriage age rather than indirectly on education.
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the marriage practices in our set-
ting and section 3 introduces a signaling model of marriage timing to explain the observed patterns.
Section 4 describes the experiment to test the model predictions and section 5 presents the results.
Finally, section 6 discusses the cost-effectiveness of the conditional incentive program and section
7 concludes.


2        Setting
    Our study takes place in rural Bangladesh in communities that are overwhelmingly Muslim. As
a result, most marriages are governed by religious law and follow a standard set of practices. Almost
all marriages are arranged by parents, with brides having relatively little control over groom choice
or marriage timing. Less than 1% of women in our control group said they could discuss groom
choice or timing with their father and only 10% with their mother. Marriages are contracts between
families and most (89%) are arranged by third party matchmakers. Moreover, the matchmaking
industry is relatively competitive: in our study sample, the vast majority of rural communities (95%)
have a professional matchmaker that lives in the community, and 70% have three or more.12
    While dowry was outlawed in Bangladesh in 1980, most marriages (85% in our sample) con-
tinue to involve dowry in the form of a pre-negotiated transfers from the bride's family to the
groom's, and the amounts are large: among those who pay it, average dowry in our sample is $786.
Dowry serves as the price that equilibrates supply and demand for grooms in a setting in which it is

    11
       This is easy to accomplish in practice. For example, we achieve orthogonality in our field experiment by random-
izing the incentive across locations.
    12
       We present community summary statistics in online appendix OA.4.1.


                                                          5
relatively more unattractive for women to stay unmarried than for men, for instance because male
individual earning capacity exceeds that of females (Rao, 1993). Data from matchmakers in our
study area confirm that the family of a bride with attractive characteristics such as more years of
schooling can pay lower dowry (Buchmann et al., 2021).
    Every Muslim marriage contract also specifies a denmeher, which in Bangladesh is an amount
of money to be transferred to the wife in the event of divorce, much in the style of a Western
prenuptial agreement (Ambrus et al., 2010). As such, denmeher acts to reduce the risk of divorce
for the bride, and richer families will pay higher dowries in order to purchase higher denmeher
for their daughters (Buchmann et al., 2021). Of those marriages in our sample reporting denmeher
(over 99%), the mean amount is $2,208 with a standard deviation of $1,844.13
    The average age of marriage for women in our study setting is 18.4, and 41% of women marry
under age 18 and 20% under age 16.14 Husbands are on average 6 years older than their wives,and
90% of married women were married to a husband outside their community but fewer (21%) outside
the sub-district. In terms of preferences over marriage timing, stated preferences on ideal marriage
age reported by parents (20) and women (21) are significantly higher on average than actual mar-
riage age of the same girls, and survey data indicate that both parents and daughters understand that
early marriage has health costs.15 Parents report that both financial (78%) and social (21%) pressure
influenced the timing of their daughters' marriage, which might explain the discrepancy. The most
common reason given for why a girl should not marry late was that she risks getting a bad reputation
(43%), and the second most common reason given was that she would not find a good groom (31%),
both of which are consistent with (though not unique to) late marriage sending a negative signal of
unobserved bride quality.
    In terms of desired spousal traits, a large body of anthropological work suggests that adherence
to traditional norms of behavior is one of the most sought after characteristics of brides throughout
South Asia. In multiple qualitative studies, brides in South Asia are said to be valued for being
submissive and obedient (Hamid et al., 2010), docile (Goody, 1990), and protecting the family's
reputation above all else (Ortner, 1978). Correspondingly, in a subsample survey of 579 husbands
of the women in our sample, 51% reported either "Nature", "Character", "Reputation", or "Reli-
gion and Tradition" as one of the two most desirable characteristics in a bride (figure 2). Nor did
husbands report a preference for youth: only four husbands reported age as one of the two most
important characteristics in a bride, further suggesting that entrenched preferences for young brides
are unlikely to be the main driver of underage marriage in our setting. For women, a groom's
earnings capacity was the dominant trait: 60% of women reported income as the most desirable

   13
      In other Muslim countries, denmeher is given to the wife at the time of marriage, or split between an amount
given at marriage (prompt dower) and an amount provided upon divorce (deferred dower). See Anderson (2007a) and
Ambrus et al. (2010) for more details on Bangladeshi marriage contracts.
   14
      Since women in our analysis sample were 15-17 and unmarried at program start, these figures are calculated
among older siblings age 18 at program start. Nonetheless, as we oversampled households with unmarried women at
baseline, these numbers likely underestimate the true rate of underage marriage in our study area.
   15
      Only 5% of women in our sample gave as a minimum age of marriage an age under 18. When asked why girls
should not marry below this age, 72% said because a girl would not be physically ready for marriage. In the control
group at endline, 90% of women correctly identified at least one health risk associated with early pregnancies.


                                                        6
characteristic in a husband.

                                      Figure 2: Characteristics desired in a bride (%)




Notes: The figure shows the share of husbands of women in our sample who reported different characteristics as one out of the two most desired
characteristics in a bride. "Nature/Reputation/Tradition" is 1 if the husband chose either "Nature", "Character", "Reputation", or "Tradition and
Religion". "Good Family/Wealth" is 1 if the husband chose "Good Family" or "Wealth", and "Hard-working/Income" is 1 if the husband chose
"Hard-working nature" or "Income potential".




3        A Signaling Model of Marriage Timing
    In order to distinguish signaling motivations from other potential explanations for child mar-
riage, we build a model that yields three sets of predictions. The first set describes conditions of the
environment under which reputation concerns lead to child marriage, the second set describes the
impact of introducing a small financial incentive to delay marriage in this signaling environment,
and the third set describes the impact of changing the distribution of types in this environment. The
unique predictions of the signaling model can then be tested empirically with a field experiment in
order to generate casual evidence that signaling is at play.
    For signaling considerations to influence marriage timing, two conditions must hold: First, it
must be the case that a dominant bride characteristic (henceforth, "preferred" type) is not fully
observable to potential grooms, and second, it must be the case that this characteristic is correlated
with the marriage market returns to postponing (the non-preferred types are known to gain more by
delaying marriage than the preferred types). If these two conditions hold, men's belief that early
marriage signals desirability in this key dimension is sustainable in equilibrium.16

    16
     Women may also be heterogeneous in observable dimensions, i.e., physical appearance. The unobservable het-
erogeneity is within an equivalence class of observable characteristics. To illustrate the idea clearly, we suppose that
women cannot send costly signals of their unobservable type (signals are infinitely costly), that is, the case of greatest


                                                                       7
     As described in the previous section, the dominant bride characteristic in our setting is women's
adherence to conservative gender norms of behavior, which is highly likely to satisfy both condi-
tions. First, it is arguably difficult for a prospective groom to fully observe a prospective bride's
first-order beliefs about gender norms, and our data suggest that family members' beliefs - which
may be more observable - provide little information on individual norms. In particular, to measure
obedience to gender norms, we construct an index based on a suite of baseline survey questions
about adherence to conservative gender norms asked of girls and their parents. As shown in online
appendix OA.2.1, girls' responses differed substantially from responses of their sisters and mothers,
indicating that social conservatism is not well predicted by parents' or older siblings' conservatism
in our setting.
     In this setting, conservative women are likely to have lower (though positive) returns to ed-
ucation than less conservative women who are willing to challenge gender norms and thus more
likely to work outside the home and participate in household decisions. Indeed, even controlling for
parents' social conservatism, in our sample socially conservative women in control communities
are substantially more likely to marry early and have lower education on average than less socially
conservative women (table 1). They are also less likely to work outside the home or have economic
decision-making power inside the household once married. Taken together, these results suggest
that less conservative women gain more from getting educated.

Table 1: Marriage and education outcomes, unmarried girls age 10-17 at program start in control communities, by women's social
conservatism at baseline

                                      Ever Married    Married<18        Still in school   Last class passed   Ever Worked   Economic DM

 High Social Conservatism                 0.067           0.095             -0.214             -2.391            -0.052         -0.123
                                         (0.024)         (0.029)           (0.035)            (0.215)           (0.031)        (0.039)
 High Parents' Social Conservatism        0.069           0.079             -0.123             -0.675            -0.002         -0.060
                                         (0.025)         (0.032)           (0.034)            (0.236)           (0.035)        (0.037)
 Outcome Mean                            0.81988         0.48531           0.30482           10.91585           0.63295       -0.00000
 Observations                             1127            1123               912                915               1117           900
 FE                                       Union           Union             Union              Union             Union          Union

  Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions with Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level in parentheses.
 The regressions control for strata (union and village size tercile) and a vector of baseline controls, including age, household size and
 assets, an older unmarried sister in the household, school enrollment, mother's level of education, whether the community is accessible
 via public transport (a proxy for remoteness), and the ratio of unmarried adult boys to unmarried adult girls in the community (a proxy
 for marriage market conditions). "Economic decision-making" is a Kling Mean Effects index of 11 purchase/investment decisions in
 which the woman could be involved inside the household. The social conservatism indices are formed as described in online appen-
 dices OA.2.3 and OA.2.1. "High Social Conservatism" is an indicator that is 1 if the woman had an above median social conservatism
 at baseline. "High Parents' Social Conservatism" is an indicator that is 1 if the parents of the woman had an above median social con-
 servatism at baseline.


    As we formalize in this section, if these two conditions hold, signaling concerns can lead ev-
eryone to marry younger: since dowry can only be conditioned on observables like marriage timing
and not on unobservable characteristics like degree of adherence to traditional norms, brides who
enter the marriage market later are believed to be non-preferred types because everyone knows they

information asymmetry. As signals become less costly, information becomes less asymmetric. Our signaling model
predicts that we should see less pooling on early marriage as type becomes more observable.


                                                                    8
have relatively higher returns from education and therefore a stronger incentive to stay in school.17
Thus, all brides enter early, even though everyone would gain if women delayed marriage and at-
tained more schooling.18 In this environment, an intervention reduces child marriage induced by
reputation concerns if and only if it is believed to strengthen the returns from delaying marriage for
sufficiently many preferred types. The rest of this section formalizes these insights and shows how
a small but randomly assigned conditional financial incentive can delay marriage.


3.1     The Model
    A marriage market is populated by women of measure |W | = 1, and men of measure |M | > 1.19
Women are heterogeneous in preferred type   {L, H }, which is private information, while men
are homogenous.20 Men desire H women but cannot learn this type before marriage. Not only is
social conservatism a difficult trait for suiters to observe directly in this setting of arranged marriages
where couples rarely interact one-on-one before their wedding day, but it is arguably easy for L
women to pretend to be conservative when meeting potential grooms.
    It is commonly known that the fraction of preferred types is f  (0, 1). All women have the
same outside option, W , and face the same liquidity constraint, a total budget of Y . Women choose
between entering the marriage market early at t1 or delaying until t2 .21 We assume that if a woman
marries in t1 , her education level is EL , while if she delays until t2 , her education level increases to
EH > EL .22 A woman's education and her decision about when to enter the marriage market are
observable and contractible.
    Men have a higher outside option than women: M > W .23

   17
       We focus on education because there is causal evidence on the impact of early marriage on education and the
trade-off between early marriage and education is highly salient in Bangladesh, but marrying too young can potentially
have negative effects on childbearing and child-rearing for reasons in addition to mother's education (Mathur et al.
(2003), Jain and Kurz (2007), EngenderHealth (2003), Nour (2009), Raj (2010)). In our sample, educated women have
healthier children (online appendix OA.2.2).
    18
       In theory, grooms could also offer a menu of dowries by type. We provide conditions under which this cannot be
implemented in equilibrium and focus on this case in our paper, as we do not observe menus of dowries by unobserved
type in the data.
    19
       This is not necessary for our results, but we assume this so that money given to women is not fully extracted by
men in dowry charged, which we do not observe empirically. Partial extraction is likely more realistic but does not
affect our results if homogeneous. If heterogeneous, our results do not need to be modified as long as heterogeneity in
extraction is not correlated with gains from delaying for the non-preferred unobservable type. Moreover, |M | > |W |
is in line with our data, in which the ratio of unmarried men age 21 to 23 to unmarried women age 15-17 is 1.9 (the
average marriage gap in our setting is 6 years).
    20
       We assume homogeneity of men in our benchmark in order to focus on the signaling strategies of heterogeneous
women. Note that both men and women can be heterogeneous in any number of observable ways that matter in the
marriage market, without implication for the model. Hence, in reducing men to homogenous types while allowing
women to be heterogeneous in type we are assuming that the most important feature of brides in the marriage market is
not perfectly observed, while that of men is relatively observable (e.g., income or earnings capacity).
    21
       We assume that entering the market but not marrying is observable, and the damage to future marriage prospects
outweighs any possible gain. This is both realistic and simplifying. Thus, if a woman expects to receive better marriage
proposals in t2 , she will wait to enter in t2 .
    22
       In our setting, if young women do not get married, they go to school. Thus, marriage and education co-move
closely for young women who would be considered child brides. However, it is important to note that our results do not
require a one-to-one relationship, merely that there is some desirable societal effect (for example, on human capital)
from delaying marriage for young women.
    23
       This simply ensures that women are always willing to pay the minimal dowry at which a man is willing to marry

                                                           9
  Suppose the total transferable utility generated by a union between a man and a woman Wj ,
µ(j , Ej ), increases in both arguments, and exhibits two additional features:

   1. The unobservable type  is first-order in marriage desirability: µ(H , EH ) > µ(H , EL ) >
      µ(L , EH ) > µ(L , EL ).24

   2. The unobservable type and education are substitutes such that µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL ) <
      µ(H , EL ) - µ(L , EH ) < µ(L , EH ) - µ(L , EL ).25

    If a woman enters the marriage market, men can decide whether to propose to her. Specifically,
they propose a dowry D to be paid by the woman's family as a price for marriage, where D can be
conditioned only on observable characteristics.26 Since there are more men than women, and men
are homogeneous, if a woman is such that at least one man is willing to propose to her, then multiple
men are willing to propose to her. This implies that men compete for available women with whom
marriage would satisfy their participation constraints at some feasible (affordable) dowry.
    The timing of the game is as follows. At the beginning of t1 :

   1. An unmarried woman may declare herself available for marriage, and in doing so reveal
      herself to have low education EL .

   2. Men may make dowry offers to available women.

   3. If a woman receives an offer and accepts it, she pays the dowry, gets married, and exits the
      market.

   4. If a woman receives an offer and rejects it, or does not receive an offer, she remains unmarried,
      and may re-enter in t2 (but it will be known that she entered in t1 and remained unmarried).

At the beginning of t2 :

   1. Unmarried women may declare availability for marriage. They will be known to have educa-
      tion EH .

   2. Unmarried men may make dowry offers to available women.

   3. If a woman receives an offer and accepts it, she pays the dowry, gets married, and exits the
      market.

   4. If a woman receives an offer and rejects it, or does not receive an offer, she stays unmarried.

them, even if they cannot afford it.
    24
       Among husbands of women in our sample, 51.1% reported either nature/character/reputation or religion/tradition
as one of their two most desired bride characteristics as compared to 31.3% who reported education, 7.4% who reported
family reputation/wealth, 3.5% who reported hard-working/income, and 0.7% who reported age.
    25
       In our setting, men who report desiring education in a potential wife are less likely to report desiring gender-
normative characteristics in a potential wife (online appendix OA.2.2).
    26
       We abstract from denmeher in our model as dowry and denmeher usually move in the same direction in our setting
(Buchmann et al., 2021).


                                                         10
We study perfect Bayesian equilibria (PBE) that survive the intuitive criterion.27 Formally, we
solve for (i) P r( = H |t1 ) and P r( = H |t2 ): a man's beliefs about a woman's unobserved type,
conditional on when she enters the marriage market, (ii)  ()t1 + (1 -  ())t2 : a woman's entry
strategy, given her type , and (iii) D|t1 and D|t2 : the dowries offered by men to women who enter
at t1 and at t2 .
    The intuitive criterion disciplines off-equilibrium beliefs and actions. The conditions for on-
equilibrium behavior 1.-3. are:

   1. Beliefs P r( = H |t1 ) and P r( = H |t2 ) must respect Bayes' rule.

   2. A woman's entry strategy  () maximizes her expected utility, given beliefs, the entry strate-
      gies of other women, and the proposal strategies of men.

   3. A man's proposed dowry D|t1 to a woman in t1 , or D|t2 to a woman in t2 , maximizes his
      expected utility, given beliefs, the entry strategies of women, and the proposal strategies of
      other men.


3.2     Child Marriage
    The fact that bride type is not perfectly observed opens up the possibility that, under certain
marriage conditions, women of different types pool on a single marriage timing. The pooling sce-
nario is of particular interest because, as we show below, it implies that the unique equilibrium is
for all brides to marry young. As a result, there are: (1) an inefficiently large number of women
marrying young, and (2) scope for small financial incentives to generate large changes in marriage
timing since they have the potential to influence the behavior of all types. Hence, we begin by
characterizing conditions under which men are unable to offer a menu of dowries to induce women
to reveal their private type by self-selecting into different marriage timing decisions (i.e., separating
equilibria).

Result 1. Suppose women are liquidity-constrained: Y < M + µ(H , EH ) - 2µ(H , EL ). Then
non-preferred type women are unable to pay the cheapest dowry D|t2 men are willing to offer a
later entrant that he knows with certainty is a non-preferred type. Hence, separation cannot be
achieved.

    See appendix A.1.1.1 for a formal proof.
    First, observe that the substitutability of  and education in match quality implies single-
crossing: if H weakly prefers entering in t2 and paying dowry D|t2 , then L strictly prefers
to do so. Thus, if a separating equilibrium exists, it must be that preferred types enter early and
non-preferred types delay.
    In order to induce this separation, a man must charge a higher dowry for delaying marriage. If
he charged a lower dowry in t2 , all women would be strictly better off entering at t2 , as they would

   27
      A PBE violates the intuitive criterion if there exists a type that has a profitable deviation, given beliefs that assign
positive weight only to types for whom that deviation is not equilibrium-dominated (Cho and Kreps, 1987).


                                                             11
be more educated and pay a lower price for marriage. In particular, to induce separation, a man
must propose D|t2 that exceeds the preferred type's marginal gain from increasing her education,
but does not exceed the non-preferred type's.
    The liquidity constraint condition in result 1 ensures that no woman can afford the minimum
D|t2 that both induces separation and satisfies the man's participation constraint.28 Examining the
condition, we see that a separating equilibrium is harder to achieve the smaller the gap between
preferred and non-preferred types' marginal returns to delaying marriage, and harder to achieve the
more men value bride type relative to bride education.
    A corollary is that there are no mixed-strategy equilibria.

Corollary 1. When there is no separating equilibrium, there are no equilibria in mixed strategies.

    The logic is due to single-crossing. A woman mixes between entering at t1 and entering at t2
if and only if she is indifferent between entering in either period. Since delaying marriage affords
her the opportunity to increase her education and thus her desirability, a man must ask for a higher
dowry for t2 entrants in order for her to be indifferent between marrying early and delaying.
    Non-preferred types do not play a mixed strategy in equilibrium, because if they are indifferent
between entering at t1 and paying dowry D|t1 and entering at t2 and paying dowry D|t2 , then pre-
ferred types strictly prefer entering early at t1 . But then men know that t2 entrants are non-preferred
type with certainty, and by our condition that the unobservable type is first-order in marriage de-
sirability, men will not propose to t2 entrants (the dowry they would require to be willing to marry
them exceeds the woman's budget constraint).
    On the other hand, if the preferred type is indifferent, the non-preferred type must strictly prefer
delaying. Thus, to respect Bayes' rule, men must believe that t1 entrants are preferred type with
certainty.
    We show in online appendix OA.3.2 that if a man proposes the minimal D|t2 that satisfies
his participation constraint, the period 1 discount he must give in proposing a lower D|t1 violates
his participation constraint, and if a man proposes the minimal D|t1 that satisfies his participation
constraint, the minimal D|t2 he must charge violates the liquidity constraint. Thus, if there is no
separating equilibrium, then there is no semi-separating equilibrium.
    Finally, we show that, when there is no separating equilibrium, then the unique equilibrium
(absent a financial incentive) is that all women pool on entering the marriage market early, for a
sufficiently large difference in the returns to delaying marriage by unobservable type.
    Notationally, let the expected utility of a match with a highly educated woman be:

                                µ(EH )  f µ(H , EH ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EH )

   28
      If non-preferred types were richer than preferred types, that would make separation more possible. While socially
conservative women in our sample come from less wealthy households on average, the difference is very small and
unlikely to overcome the information asymmetry (the difference in household income between young women of below
and above median social conservatism is less than 1% of average expected dowry at baseline).




                                                         12
Result 2. Suppose that:

           µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL ) < µ(H , EL ) - µ(EH ) < µ(L , EH ) - µ(L , EL )

Then the unique equilibrium is:
(i) All women enter the marriage market at t1 .
(ii) Men propose dowries:
       D|t1 = M - [f µ(H , EL ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EL )]
       D|t2 = M - µ(L , EH )
(iii) Beliefs are P r( = H |t1 ) = f and P r( = H |t2 ) = 0.

    This condition effectively places an upper bound on the fraction of preferred types in the popu-
lation, relative to the difference in marginal returns to education by type. Appendix A.1.1.2 contains
the formal proof.
    The intuition for this result is as follows. There are two candidates for a pure-strategy equilib-
rium, pooling on t1 and pooling on t2 .
    Pooling on t2 is a PBE but fails the intuitive criterion. To see this, suppose a woman deviates,
and enters early at t1 instead. Then she could credibly send the following message to a man: "I
am a docile woman. You should believe this, because a more liberal woman would never deviate
and enter early, given the dowry offered to t2 entrants when all women pool on t2 . This is because,
even if you had the most favorable beliefs about t1 entrants, which are that she is docile for sure,
she would still prefer to enter at t2 and pay the equilibrium dowry D|t2 offered when women are
believed to be preferred type with probability f ." But, if preferred types can credibly deviate, men
should believe that t1 entrants are H with certainty. Under these beliefs, preferred types prefer to
deviate and enter at t1 instead. Thus, pooling on t2 fails the intuitive criterion.
    On the other hand, pooling on t1 is a PBE that survives the intuitive criterion. Suppose a pre-
ferred type tried to deviate to t2 . Because of single-crossing, she cannot credibly send a message
that convinces a man that women who deviate and delay marriage must be preferred types--if a
preferred type prefers to deviate and delay, a non-preferred type has an even stronger preference to
do the same thing. A non-preferred type could convince men that she is non-preferred type, but men
do not like marrying non-preferred types, so the dowry a man would charge a woman entering at t2
whom he believes is non-preferred type with certainty exceeds her budget constraint.
    Thus, child marriage results as an inefficient consequence of signaling when women with the
undesired unobservable type are known to have higher marginal returns (or lower marginal costs)
from delaying marriage, for example, as a result of differential returns to staying in school and
increasing education.


3.3    Incentive to Delay Marriage
    Our first set of results reveals that, if signaling is what is driving child marriage, then a policy that
hopes to reduce child marriage must strengthen the preferred woman's incentive to delay marriage
at least as much as the non-preferred.

                                                     13
    Suppose a conditional incentive C is given randomly and privately to a fraction   (0, 1) of
women, if they enter the marriage market at t2 . Thus, treatment status is unobserved, and orthogonal
to unobservable type.
    We are interested in small transfers that operate through their effect on signaling, rather than
through income effects that alter the intrinsic structure of the marriage market.29 Thus, suppose
that the dowry a man requires to be willing to marry an educated woman who is known to be
non-preferred type still exceeds her budget constraint, even if she receives the conditional transfer
C .30
    Now, unobserved type is two-dimensional--treatment status by . A fraction  f of women are
treated preferred types, (1 -  )f are untreated preferred types,  (1 - f ) are treated non-preferred
types, and (1 -  )(1 - f ) are untreated non-preferred types. Since neither type nor treatment status
is observable, men continue to condition dowry only on marriage timing.31
    Our first result is that a small and random conditional incentive does not enable a separating
equilibrium where one was not possible before.

Result 3. A separating equilibrium cannot be sustained for any  . That is, men are unable to offer
dowries D|t1 and D|t2 such that  (L )  {0, 1} and  (H ) = 1 -  (L ).

    See appendix A.1.1.3 for a formal proof. The key insight is that, because the treatment is random
and therefore independent of type, preferred and non-preferred types are equally likely to have the
eased liquidity constraint in t2 . Crucially, the conditional incentive does not increase the difference
between the non-preferred and preferred type's marginal gains from education, or the relative ability
of the non-preferred type to pay (since an equal fraction of preferred types are also more able to
pay).
    Our second result is that the conditional incentive does enable a semi-separating equilibrium in
unobservable type. In particular, untreated preferred types continue to enter early at t1 , but all other
women delay until t2 . Bayes' rule implies that beliefs are:

                                            P r( = H |t1 ) = 1
                                                           f
                                  P r( = H |t2 ) =                   f
                                                        f + (1 - f )
    Note that f < f --as treatment coverage  increases, f approaches f . Let µ(EH ) denote the
expected quality of a match with a highly-educated woman when the fraction of preferred types is
f . This leads us to our main result.

Result 4. Suppose the size of the conditional transfer C satisfies:

                       C > µ(H , EL ) - µ(EH ) - [µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL )]

   29
      In our experiment, the annual value of the transfer is approximately 2% of average dowry and 7% of average
household income.
   30
      Small transfers are also unlikely to change the bargaining power of women.
   31
      We discuss the observability of the treatment status in section 5.3.


                                                      14
Then a semi-separating equilibrium in unobservable type exists, and Pareto-dominates the equilib-
rium where all women enter at t1 :
(i) Untreated preferred types marry at t1 , while untreated non-preferred types, treated preferred
types, and treated non-preferred types marry at t2 .
(ii) Men propose dowries:
        D|t1 = M - µ(H , EL )
        D|t2 = M - µ(EH )
(iii) Beliefs are P r( = H |t1 ) = 1 and P r( = H |t2 ) = f .

    See appendix A.1.1.4 for a formal proof. Note that as treatment coverage  increases, the size
of the transfer C needed decreases. We discuss this further in the next subsection.
    As delaying marriage is no longer a certain signal of non-preferred type, untreated non-preferred
types also prefer to delay marriage until t2 , even though they do not receive a conditional transfer
for doing so. In other words, the treatment generates spillovers. However, untreated preferred types
will prefer to enter at t1 and pay the cheaper dowry that results from men knowing that t1 entrants
are preferred type with certainty.
    Because men compete for women, men receive their outside options in equilibrium. Hence, men
are indifferent between marrying untreated preferred types early and receiving a lower dowry D|t1 ,
and waiting to marry a woman who may be a treated preferred type, a treated non-preferred type, or
an untreated non-preferred type, and receiving a higher dowry D|t2 . The equilibrium dowries are
determined by this competition.
    Thus, this semi-separating equilibrium candidate is a PBE that survives the intuitive criterion,
although it is not unique. Pooling on t1 continues to be an equilibrium as well. However, it is
Pareto-dominated by the semi-separating equilibrium. All women are strictly better off. Untreated
preferred types still enter at t1 , but they pay a lower dowry, since men now know they are preferred
type with certainty (non-preferred types no longer pool with them). The remaining women are
better off because their education is increased, and the returns to education are not extracted through
dowry, because men compete for women. In fact, because increased education increases marriage
utility (increases the total pie to be divided), women pay a lower dowry than they would in the
absence of the conditional incentive.32
    Men are indifferent, because competition for women drives them to receive their outside options,
which are not affected by the small conditional incentive. However, since the total pie has increased
through increased education, it is easy to see that slightly relaxing perfect competition for women
would result in a strict improvement for every individual, including men.
    This set of results shows why a random conditional incentive might effectively reduce signaling-
driven child marriage and lead to a Pareto improvement. In the next subsection, we think about the
optimal way to structure this type of treatment. That is, we shed light on how to maximize the
impact of the treatment (including positive spillovers), given the cost of the transfer.

  32
       The more imperfect the competition for women, the smaller the decrease in dowry.



                                                         15
3.4     Optimal Policy
    First, we observe that, if it is the case that under treatment coverage  , every treated woman
delays marriage (fixing transfer size), then it is the case that under treatment coverage T >  , every
treated woman delays. This is because increasing treatment coverage increases the beliefs that t2
entrants are preferred types (since untreated preferred types continue to enter at t1 ). Thus, giving
every woman the conditional incentive would be likeliest to cause all women to delay marriage.
    However, we show that this is not the policy that yields the most benefit for cost, given linear
benefits and costs. This is because treating every woman mechanically eliminates the scope for
positive spillovers.
    We formalize this in the following result. Suppose that delaying marriage for a woman yields
unit benefit B , and that total cost of the treatment is the transfer C multiplied by the number of
women receiving the treatment (the monetary cost of the treatment). Suppose that the conditional
incentive is given randomly. Then:
Result 5. (i) Interior treatment coverage maximizes total social welfare when benefits and costs
are linear in the number of women treated. (ii) The minimal treatment coverage needed to induce
treated preferred types to delay if the size of the transfer is C is:

                                             2µ(H ,EL )-[µ(H ,EH )+µ(L ,EH )]-C
                                                    [µ(H ,EH )-µ(L ,EH )]                 (1 - f )
                      min (C ) =
                                          1-   2µ(H ,EL )-[µ(H ,EH )+µ(L ,EH )]-C            f
                                                      [µ(H ,EH )-µ(L ,EH )]


    Observe that the more widespread the coverage, the smaller the transfer that is needed.
    Thus, if child marriage persists due to signaling motives, the most cost-effective random condi-
tional incentive is one with lower coverage and larger transfers if non-preferred types are believed to
be prevalent (to maximize spillovers), while greater coverage and smaller transfers are preferred if
non-preferred types are believed to be less prevalent.33 We discuss the optimal policy with random
treatment in online appendix OA.3.3.34


3.5     Changing Distribution of Bride Types
    Our last theoretical prediction is that, in a signaling environment, an intervention that decreases
the fraction of potential brides who adhere to traditional gender norms weakly increases the like-
lihood of pooling on early marriage. The intuition is akin to the above result on optimal transfer
amounts. As the likelihood grows that a girl in a given marriage market is a non-preferred type,
there is greater incentive for preferred types to deviate from marriage delay. We formalize this in
the following corollary:
Corollary 2. The smaller f is ­ that is, the larger the share of non-preferred types ­ the more likely
it is that women will pool on early marriage and low education.
   33
       Of course, non-preferred types must be a significant presence in the population for there to be a signaling story in
the first place.
    34
       We discuss non-random treatment in online appendix OA.3.4.


                                                           16
    See appendix A.1.1.5 for a formal proof. The key insight is that, given a mix of preferred and
non-preferred types such that there is still reasonable uncertainty about type in the population, a
decrease in f will cause men to face a higher risk of marrying a non-preferred type, and thus will
strengthen women's desire to signal they are preferred by entering the marriage market early and
foregoing education, which everyone knows yields differentially higher returns to non-preferred
women.


3.6      Testable Predictions
    In the previous subsections, we formally described the conditions of the environment under
which reputation concerns lead to child marriage as well as the effects of a financial incentive to
delay marriage and an intervention that decreases the fraction of docile brides in this environment.
    We test the model's predictions using a field experiment in which a financial incentive to delay
and an empowerment program are offered in randomly chosen communities. Using data on the
marriage timing, education, and husband characteristics of preferred and non-preferred types, we
test the following predictions:

Prediction 1. A conditional incentive to delay marriage offered to a randomly chosen subset of
women delays marriage timing and increases education among treated women of all types.

Prediction 2. When a conditional incentive to delay marriage is offered to a randomly chosen
subset of all women, non-preferred types who do not receive the incentive also delay marriage
when eligibility is not fully observable.

Prediction 3. Treated women pay weakly smaller dowry and do not have lower quality marriages
than untreated women.

Prediction 4. An exogenous increase in the fraction of non-preferred types weakly decreases mar-
riage age and increases dowry among all types.

    The rest of the paper tests predictions 1 to 4 to provide rigorous empirical evidence of the
signaling model.


4        A Child Marriage Policy Experiment
   In this section, we describe the design of the field experiment and data used to test the predictions
described in the previous section.


4.1      Experimental Design
   Between January 2007 and September 2017, we ran a clustered randomized trial in collaboration
with Save the Children (USA) to test whether a conditional incentive would reduce child marriage.35

    35
    The trial was registered at the AEA Registry prior to endline data collection, #204 (https://www.
socialscienceregistry.org/trials/204). In registering our trial we also included a preanalysis plan for


                                                  17
The study was carried out in 460 rural communities within six sub-districts (Daulatkhan, Babuganj,
Muladi, Patuakhali Sadar, Bauphal and Bhola Sadar) in south central Bangladesh, where Save the
Children was managing a food security program that provided transfers to pregnant and lactating
mothers (a map of the study region can be found in online appendix OA.4.2).36 Out of 610 rural
communities in these subdistricts, 460 met eligibility criteria based on size and accessibility.37
    Alongside the incentive program, we also tested the effect of Save the Children's girls' empow-
erment program in a cross-randomized design. Using a stratified randomized design in the ratio
1:2:1:2, our sample communities were randomized to receive either i) the conditional incentive to
delay marriage, ii) the basic empowerment program, iii) empowerment plus conditional incentive,
or iv) the status quo. We stratified by union, an administrative grouping of roughly ten communities,
and within union by community size (the randomization procedure is described in detail in online
appendix OA.4.3). Sample communities were semi-rural to rural, with an average of 351 house-
holds per community, and 16% were more than one hour away from the closest motorable road.
About half had a primary school in 2007 while 25% had a secondary school (see online appendix
OA.4.1 for full community summary statistics).
    In 2007, we conducted a census of all households with adolescent girls in our sample commu-
nities that collected data on the marital satus, age, and education of all household members. Our
analysis sample includes all unmarried girls in study communities who were age 15-17 at program
start, the age range eligible for the incentive treatment. Baseline characteristics were balanced
across treatment arms in this sample (appendix A.1.2.1).


4.2     Conditional Incentive and Empowerment Programs
    All girls in conditional incentive communities aged 15-17 and unmarried at program start were
issued ration cards indicating their eligibility to receive cooking oil every four months until they
married or turned 18. Eligibility was based on age as reported in the baseline survey which was
collected prior to any announcement of the program, thus minimizing the incentive for misreporting.
Every four months, from April 2008 to August 2010, marital status was verified by CHVs and/or
independent monitors who conducted unannounced household visits to verify that the girl was still
residing in her parents' home, and interviewed family members, neighbors, and community leaders
about her marital status.38 Those found to be married or who had reached 18 had their names
removed from the eligibility list and their cards taken away. Girls themselves collected the oil by

the analysis of detailed data collected on a subsample of young women, which includes variables on health, employ-
ment, and empowerment. This paper only uses data from the much shorter survey conducted for every woman in the
sample communities (referred to in the PAP as the census). Our PAP states "As the census survey has very few outcomes
and is thus less susceptible to data mining, we did not prepare pre-analysis plans for either wave 2 or wave 3 census
surveys."
   36
      The conditional incentive program that we evaluate used the distribution infrastructure of this existing program,
which operated in all treatment and control communities in our study.
   37
      In particular, to determine which communities were included in the study, we surveyed households in all 610
communities in the six sub-districts between January and February 2007. Communities were excluded if they were too
remote for distribution or had less than 40 or more than 490 adolescent girls, leaving 460 eligible communities.
   38
      Because girls move in with husbands' families upon marriage, they generally relocate outside the community upon
marriage; hence, finding them at their parents' home is a reasonable proxy for marital status in this setting.


                                                         18
presenting their ration card, which was checked against a separate beneficiary list at oil distribution
points. The value of the incentive was approximately $16 per year. Cooking oil has to be purchased
regularly by every family in Bangladesh and thus is a close substitute to cash. It also has a high
value to volume ratio, which minimized transport costs. A total of 5,734 unmarried adolescent girls
received the conditional incentive at least once, or 73% of the girls eligible at baseline and 92% of
girls who received an incentive card (online appendix OA.4.4).
    In communities randomized to receive the empowerment program, all girls aged 10-19 were
invited to participate in the Kishoree Kontha (KK), or "Adolescent Girl's Voice" program for one
six-month cycle. To accommodate all eligible girls, communities received up to four cycles of the
program between December 2007 and August 2010. Girls met 5 to 6 days per week for 1-3 hours
per day in "Safe Spaces", identified at the start of the program as centralized locations where up to
20 girls could meet, socialize, and receive training.39 Monitoring data show Safe Spaces averaged
six meetings, or 7.8 hours, per week, and 41,347 girls, or 93% of girls in target communities, were
reached (online appendix OA.4.4).
    Two to four girls per safe space were trained to deliver an empowerment curriculum includ-
ing education support and social competency training. These peer trainers were provided with a
structured curriculum containing activities to be completed during each session and visited every
few weeks by a KK staff member. The empowerment curriculum was similar in content to many
empowerment programs being implemented worldwide, including those designed by BRAC and
UNICEF. The social competency component trained girls in life skills, negotiation, legal rights
of women, and nutritional and reproductive health knowledge via a curriculum designed by Save
the Children USA. The education component aimed to enhance the basic literacy, numeracy, and
oral communication of both school-attending and illiterate girls. In randomly selected communities
(50%), financial literacy and encouragement to generate own income was added to the curricula.


4.3     Survey Data
    To collect data on marriage, schooling and childbearing outcomes, we attempted to resurvey
parents in all 22,667 households in two separate rounds of data collection conducted 1 and 4.5
years after program completion (see online appendix OA.4.5 for a timeline of all surveys). Parents
were asked both current marital status and age of marriage if their daughter was reported to have
ever married. While parents had no obvious incentive to misreport their daughters' marriage timing
given that the program had finished 4.5 years before endline surveying and women were far too old
to qualify, we nonetheless carefully assess the quality of the marriage age data collected in light
of potential reporting bias. In particular, we assess whether parents appear to overreport marriage
age of girls using three methods (online appendix OA.5): First, for a subsample of 1,160 young
women, we interviewed young women themselves and compared the parents' report to the young
woman's report.40 Second, for a subsample of approximately 100 young women, we collected

   39
    Safe Space committees with adult community members were organized to support the safe spaces.
   40
    We are primarily interested in overreporting of marriage age because it could bias our estimates of the key out-
comes, whether a woman married under age 18 and 16. It is also possible that parents of girls who marry later than


                                                        19
marriage certificates and compared both the parents' report and the woman's report with the date
on the marriage certificate.41
    Overall, marriage age reported by parents was largely consistent with that reported by women
and had no significant bias. On average, parents' reports were 1.8 months higher than young
women's reports and 0.3 months higher than the marriage age calculated from certificates. Young
women's reports were on average 5.5 months lower than the marriage age calculated from certifi-
cates. The differences were balanced across treatment arms for all three comparisons. While it is
possible that monitoring activities could have influenced survey reports in treatment communities, it
would only bias us towards finding a program effect if parents and daughters in control communities
are prone to exaggerating underage marriage, which is inconsistent with survey data on preferences.
    There are three sources of missing data from the 2017 endline survey: 1,340 observations were
lost due to errors by the data entry firm, which lost hard-copy data from 567 households and in-
correctly entered IDs so that 742 individuals could not be linked across survey waves; 1,006 young
women were living in communities (N =14) that were entirely displaced by cyclone damage;42 and
3,054 of the 21,749 women we attempted to follow-up could not be tracked either because parents
could not be reached or refused to be surveyed (14% attrition, balanced across treatment arms, see
table A.1.2.2). Of those with endline data, a further 3,119 are excluded due to incomplete outcome
data or marriage before the program start in January 2008.43 Our final analysis sample thus contains
15,576 women.44
    Table 2 presents summary statistics on women in our analysis sample from the 2017 endline
survey. By age 22-25, 84% are married, including 28% married before the legal age of 18 and 4%
before age 16. Moreover, by endline 63% of women in our sample have started childbearing and
24% gave birth before age 20. As women had to be 15-17 and unmarried at program start to be
included in the study, these figures greatly underestimate the extent of early marriage and child-
bearing, and in particular marriage before 16, that takes place among this cohort. By comparison,
among girls aged 18 at program start, 41% were married under 18 and 20% were married under 16.
    Women in our sample have completed an average of 10 years of school at endline and 12% are
engaged in income-generating activities with a mean income of $46 per month. Moreover, 22%
were still in school at endline, of which 54% were married. At first blush, this figure seems in-
congruous in Bangladesh, where it is socially unacceptable for married adolescent girls to attend

average would have an incentive to underreport marriage age because of stigma from marrying old. However, we as-
sume that this stigma does not kick in until at least age 20, and that women marrying at or above 20 who are ashamed of
marrying late would not report a marriage age of less than 18. Under this assumption, these mismeasured underreports
would not bias the dummy indicator of underage marriage.
    41
       We do not find that either of the treatments is correlated with the probability of having a marriage certificate.
    42
       Both data entry errors and cyclone damage are unrelated to treatment, minimizing the risk of bias.
    43
       CHVs were instructed to inform communities about the program in January 2008 - four months before the first
distribution round.
    44
       There is higher attrition in the 2011 survey, which affects only the outcomes "In school at midline" and "Married at
midline". Towards the end of the survey, rumors spread in one sub-district (Muladi) that enumerators were abducting or
converting girls to Christianity. Survey operations were suspended for several months until confidence could be restored
but attrition rates were higher in the affected area due to the greater time lapse and lower willingness to participate in
data collection. This impacted 27 communities where data collection had not been completed.



                                                           20
secondary school.45 However, norms appear to be different for participation in the increasingly com-
mon part-time vocational training programs that female students in their 20s are almost exclusively
enrolled in.


                                  Table 2: Sample summary statistics

 Age at Program Start:                                Girls age 15-17 (N=15576)          Girls age 15 (N=5871)

                                                           Mean             S.D.           Mean             S.D.

 Age at Endline                                            23.4             0.8             22.5              0.3
 Ever married (%)                                          84.1            36.6             82.1             38.3
 Married<18 (%)                                            27.7            44.8             36.6             48.2
 Married<16 (%)                                             4.2            20.1             11.0             31.3
 Ever birth (%)                                            62.9            48.3             59.5             49.1
 Birth<20 (%)                                              24.0            42.7             32.0             46.6
 Dowry (USD, conditional on married)                       786.3          1327.0           753.5            870.5
 Arranged marriage (%)                                     88.7            31.6             88.9             31.4
 Age gap (Husband-Wife)                                     5.6             4.4             5.9               4.3
 Husband from outside village (%)                          90.3            29.6             89.7             30.4
 Still in school (%)                                       21.6            41.1             24.0             42.7
 Last class passed                                          9.8             4.3             9.7               4.1
 Currently working (%)                                     11.9            32.3             11.7             32.1



 Notes: Sample includes all women in study villages age 15-17 and unmarried at program start and followed-
 up at endline.




4.4     Estimation Strategy
    We estimate the impact of the incentive and empowerment programs with the following empir-
ical specification:

                       Yicu =  + 1 Ic + 2 Ec + 3 (Ic × Ec ) + 4 Xic + µu +                 icu                      (1)

    where Yicu is outcome Y for person i in community c and union u. Ic is assignment of commu-
nity c to the incentive program and Ec is assignment of community c to the empowerment program.
Since not every eligible girl in the program communities received the incentive or participated in
the empowerment program, these are intention-to-treat estimates, although it is worth noting that

   45
      In fact, the government's Girls' Scholarship Program precludes married girls from attending school and receiving
a stipend. Consistent with this, at midline we find only 7% of married girls aged 17-19 are in secondary school. While
those who have gone through the marriage ceremony but have not moved in with their husbands often do continue in
school, this period of separation only lasts a matter of months, so is unlikely to pertain to women at endline who are
ages 22-25.



                                                         21
the vast majority of girls in treatment villages are eligible for the incentive at the start of the pro-
gram and take-up of both programs is extremely high (73% of eligible girls received the financial
incentive and 93% of eligible girls enrolled in the empowerment program, see section 4.2).
    Our estimates include a vector of individual and community controls Xic measured at baseline
for strata (village population tercile and union fixed effects, µu ), age, household size, the presence of
an older unmarried sister in the household, school enrollment, mother's level of education, whether
the community is accessible via public transport (a proxy for remoteness), and the ratio of unmarried
adult boys to unmarried adult girls in the community (a proxy for marriage market conditions). We
also test a specification excluding controls other than strata fixed effects. Errors are clustered at the
unit of randomization (community).
    Since potential program impacts vary widely across girls depending on their age at enrollment,
we compare effects on the whole sample with effects on women eligible to receive the incentive for
at least two years (aged 15 at distribution start).


5     Results
    In this section, we present the results pertaining to our model's predictions. First, we investigate
how the availability of the conditional incentive to delay marriage and the empowerment program
altered the marriage timing of treated women. Second, we use data on marriage market transac-
tions and husband characteristics to test auxiliary predictions that distinguish a signaling model of
marriage timing from a non-signaling environment. In particular, if an entrenched preference for
bride youth were the main driver of underage marriage, then women who delay marriage would
have to financially compensate husbands by paying higher dowry or have lower-quality marriages.
Third, we test the theoretical prediction on spillovers by estimating effects on the marriage timing
of women in the same marriage market who were ineligible to receive the incentive.


5.1     Direct Effects on Marriage Timing
    We first evaluate the effect of the conditional incentive on marriage timing, testing prediction
1 of our signaling model: If child marriage persists due to signaling motives, then a random con-
ditional incentive should delay marriage and increase education among treated women. As shown
in table 3, consistent with our theoretical prediction, the incentive reduced child marriage by 17%
(-4.9ppts, p<0.01) overall and 19% (-7.5pts, p<0.01) for women age 15 at distribution start who re-
ceived the incentive for two years. The likelihood of being married under 16 fell by 18% (-2.0ppts,
p<0.10) among women age 15 at distribution start. This result is consistent with our model's pre-
diction that a relatively small incentive can have a substantial impact on the proportion of women
marrying early.46

    46
       Results excluding controls, including women married before program start, and correcting for potential program
inclusion errors yield similar results (online appendix OA.6). We also show in appendix A.1.2.3 that the above effects
hold among both women with and without schooling at baseline and with and without a father who is employed full-
time (we have father's employment for a subset of women in our sample) at baseline, which suggests that the incentive


                                                         22
    These patterns are also observed in the continuous measure of marriage age. As 16% of our
sample is still unmarried, our marriage age data are censored. However, since by endline, marriage
rates have converged between treatment arms to statistically indistinguishable levels (columns (6)-
(7)), differences in marriage age among the married can be expected to capture an unbiased impact
of the program on those who have married. Figure 3 shows the distribution of marriage age of
women age 15 at program start by treatment arm, demonstrating a shift in marriages from the two
years before 18 to the four years after 18. As shown in columns (8)-(9), the incentive increased
average age of marriage by 2.5 months (0.21 years, p<0.01) overall and 3.9 months (0.33 years,
p<0.01) among women age 15 at distribution start.
    While this difference may at first appear small in magnitude, two things are important to keep in
mind in interpreting the mean effect size: First, the average number of months of program eligibility
was only 12 for girls age 15-17 and 24 for girls age 15. In addition, our estimates capture the average
program effect across those on the margin of child marriage as well as on those who would have
married after 18 in the absence of the program (for whom no program effect should be possible).
    Based on control group data, a full 62% of women in incentive communities who participated
in the program were not at risk of marrying young. Using the control group as a counterfactual and
making the assumption that the program did not change the marriage age of those who would have
married after 18 without the program, we can calculate the maximal number of months of delay we
would observe if all women at risk of early marriage responded to the full duration of the incentive.
This back-of-the-envelope calculation implies that if all 38% of control group women age 15 at
distribution start who married under 18 were persuaded to wait until age 18, average marriage age
would have increased by 6.9 months. Thus, our estimated treatment effect of 3.9 months of delay is
the equivalent of more than half (57%) of families at risk responding to the incentive for the duration
of the program.
    As shown in figure 3, we observe differences in marriage age across incentive and non-incentive
communities even beyond the age of 18, despite no incentive being offered to remain unmarried at
that age. That some marriages were delayed well past 18 by the offer of an incentive at younger
ages could be explained by marriage market search frictions. 116 qualitative interviews support
this view (Field et al., 2018): marriage proposals come at infrequent intervals and parents will
often wait many months for the right match for their daughter. Another possible explanation is
that delaying marriage may endow women with greater bargaining power in negotiating marriage
proposals, which they can then parlay into even further marriage delays once the program is over
on account of being older.
    The decline in child marriage also translated into a 7% (-1.6ppts, p<0.10) decline in teenage
childbearing for those receiving the incentive overall and a 12% (-4.0ppts, p<0.05) reduction for
women age 15 at distribution start. The childbearing results provide strong evidence that the mar-
riage effects are not driven by underreporting, as bias is much less of a concern in reporting birth
histories.


does not work as a nutritional incentive or income support.


                                                          23
                                                      Table 3: Marriage outcomes, women age 15-17 and unmarried at program start

                                  Married<18              Married<16        Ever married at midline         Ever married at endline              Marriage age                    Birth<20

                             Age 15-17        Age 15         Age 15         Age 15-17         Age 15        Age 15-17         Age 15       Age 15-17         Age 15       Age 15-17       Age 15
                                  (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)            (9)            (10)          (11)
     Empowerment                -0.007        -0.007          0.006            0.011           0.008           0.006          0.002           0.013          0.013           0.005         0.003
                               (0.008)       (0.015)         (0.009)          (0.011)        (0.017)         (0.008)         (0.012)         (0.040)        (0.065)        (0.007)        (0.013)
     Incentive                  -0.049        -0.075          -0.020           -0.025         -0.054          -0.009          -0.018          0.211          0.328          -0.016         -0.040
                               (0.010)       (0.019)         (0.012)          (0.013)        (0.019)         (0.010)         (0.016)         (0.051)        (0.079)        (0.009)        (0.016)
24




     Incen.*Empow.               0.019        0.028           -0.002           -0.011          0.008          -0.002          0.005          -0.052         -0.095          -0.002         0.012
                               (0.014)       (0.026)         (0.016)          (0.019)        (0.026)         (0.014)         (0.022)         (0.074)        (0.118)        (0.014)        (0.023)
     Control Mean              0.29324       0.38495         0.11262          0.45829        0.41492         0.83701         0.81990        18.96879       18.29337        0.24092        0.32554
     Observations               15549          5861            5861            14891           5604           15562            5864           12993          4773           15494           5847
     FE                         Union         Union           Union            Union          Union           Union           Union           Union          Union          Union          Union
      Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions with Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level in parentheses. The regressions control for strata (union and village size
     tercile) and a vector of baseline controls, including age, household size, an older unmarried sister in the household, school enrollment, mother's level of education, whether the community is
     accessible via public transport (a proxy for remoteness), and the ratio of unmarried adult boys to unmarried adult girls in the community (a proxy for marriage market conditions). Columns
     (1)-(3) and columns (6)-(11) present results from the endline parents' survey and columns (4)-(5) show results from the midline parents' survey. The sample includes all women age 15-17
     and unmarried at program start. The sample excludes washedout households as well as households with insufficient tracking data. "Empowerment" is an indicator that is 1 if the woman lived
     in any of the empowerment communities (empowerment only or empowerment plus incentive) and "Incentive" is an indicator that is 1 if the woman lived in any of the incentive communities
     (incentive only or empowerment plus incentive).
    Consistent with our theoretical prediction, the incentive to delay marriage also has a large pos-
itive impact on school enrollment (table 4). We restrict our sample to women that are in school at
program start because it is extremely rare for women to return to secondary school once they have
unenrolled.47 Women aged 15 at distribution start and eligible for the incentive were 18% (5.0ppts,
p<0.05, column (4)) more likely to be in school at age 22 and had completed 3 months (0.25 years,
p>0.10, column (6)) of additional schooling. That is, encouraging girls to delay marriage has a
strong indirect effect on schooling attainment even when that education is not directly incentivized.

                                    Figure 3: Distribution of marriage age




Notes: The figure plots the distribution of age at first marriage among women age 15 at program start and unmarried at
baseline by community treatment status.


    Meanwhile, although the empowerment program was effective in reducing girls' adherence to
traditional gender norms (see appendix A.1.3), we do not observe any effect of empowerment on
marriage outcomes or childbearing. For all marriage outcomes, we see null effects of the program,
and the point estimate is positive for the majority of outcomes, consistent with theoretical prediction
4 that an exogenous shift in the fraction of non-preferred types in the marriage market should weakly
increase rates of early marriage. Moreover, we find a significant increase in child marriage among
the subsample of women we surveyed (appendix table A.6). Since the same effects are not observed
with precision in the larger sample, we see this as suggestive rather than conclusive evidence of a
significant perverse effect of adolescent empowerment on marriage age. However, because the
in-depth survey data are likely to contain substantially less measurement error, it is possible that
our small sample results are a more accurate estimate of program effects on marriage age than the
census results. Moreover, there is reason to anticipate less reporting bias among daughters compared
   47
   We test this assumption in appendix A.1.2.3 and find no evidence of impact of the incentive on schooling for those
women who were out of school at program start.


                                                         25
to parents, who may feel guilt or face legal consequences for marrying their daughters underage
(consistently, parents' reports are slightly higher than daughters'). That is, while the oil incentive
program effects are nearly identical across the two samples, one interpretation for the difference in
empowerment results across samples is that only in the more precisely measured subsample do we
have the statistical power to pick up the smaller, negative effect of the empowerment program on
marriage age.
    This result underscores the importance of understanding the role of signaling considerations
when deriving predictions on the impact of programs such as standard adolescent empowerment
interventions, which are widespread and growing in number throughout the developing world. Pro-
grams that fail to find changes in marriage or childbearing are often deemed "unsuccessful" and
assumed to have failed to influence participants' aspirations or first-order beliefs. In fact, as our
theoretical model illustrates, the more successful a program is on the margin of female adolescents'
adherence to traditional gender norms, the less likely it might be to change girls' marriage timing.
The finding on the KK empowerment program is consistent with the prediction that reducing girls'
social conservatism (while holding that of men and older adults constant) is likely to be particularly
ineffective in altering marriage behavior in settings where marriage age sends a strong signal of a
bride's marriage market value.
               Table 4: Education outcomes, unmarried women age 15-17 and in school at program start

                          In school at midline        In school at endline            Last class passed          Secondary complete


                         Age 15-17       Age 15      Age 15-17        Age 15      Age 15-17        Age 15        Age 15-17       Age 15

                              (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)

 Empowerment               0.012          0.015         0.014         0.024          0.178          0.174           0.016         0.018
                          (0.013)        (0.019)       (0.011)       (0.016)        (0.092)        (0.123)        (0.012)        (0.017)
 Incentive                 0.030          0.086         0.023         0.050          0.129          0.250           0.020         0.039
                          (0.015)        (0.022)       (0.015)       (0.021)        (0.117)        (0.187)        (0.016)        (0.024)
 Incen.*Empow.             0.014          -0.005        0.007         -0.018        -0.071          -0.168         -0.006         -0.017
                          (0.022)        (0.030)       (0.022)       (0.029)        (0.179)        (0.242)        (0.024)        (0.033)
 Control Mean             0.46585        0.48183       0.27990       0.27760       11.33658       10.83291        0.44360        0.40641
 Observations              10226           4272         10930          4545          10857           4518          10857           4518
 FE                        Union          Union         Union         Union          Union          Union          Union          Union

 Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions, adjusted for baseline characteristics and stratification (see notes to table 3), with
 Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level. Columns (1)-(2) present results from the midline parents survey and columns
 (3)-(8) present results from the endline parents survey. "Secondary completion" is an indicator that is 1 if the woman completed at least
 secondary school.


    There is, however, some evidence that the empowerment program influenced schooling attain-
ment, although to a lesser degree than the incentive, which altered schooling solely through mar-
riage age (table 4). Women eligible for the empowerment program completed 2.1 months (0.18
years, p<0.10) of additional schooling relative to those in control communities, but were no more
likely to be enrolled at either midline or endline. As with the incentive, program effects are larger

                                                                   26
for women eligible for the full two years, a pattern that supports the general conclusion that both
the incentive and the empowerment program encouraged schooling: Women age 15 at distribution
start in the empowerment group are 9% (2.4ppts, p<0.10) more likely to be in school.48 As with
the marriage results, the coefficient on the interaction term between the incentive and empowerment
program is insignificantly different from zero in all specifications.
    Figure 4 shows the probability density function of last class passed by treatment arm, demon-
strating a shift in education resulting from participation in both programs that extends from the
median education level at baseline to secondary and even tertiary education.

                                 Figure 4: Distribution of last class passed




Notes: The figure plots the distribution of last class passed among women age 15 at program start and unmarried and
in school at baseline, as reported at endline, by community treatment status. The red line marks the median level of
education at baseline.


    The positive effects of the empowerment program on schooling do not contradict the absence
of a marriage result, but rather are consistent with the observed impact on girls' norms and beliefs,
insofar as they are indicative of participants responding to the curricular components that actively
encouraged them to pursue education and aspirations of labor market engagement. They are also
in line with the marriage results when considered alongside the timing of educational impacts ob-
served across the two treatment arms. In particular, while the incentive and empowerment programs
both increased grade attainment, only the incentive program increased enrollment at midline when
women were ages 18-21. This difference in the timing of program effects is also observed in sec-
ondary school completion: Women in the incentive program but not the empowerment program are
significantly more likely to have completed secondary school (columns (7)-(8) of table 4).

   48
     Results excluding controls, including women married before program start, and correcting for potential program
inclusion errors yield similar results (online appendix OA.6).


                                                        27
    Consistent with the marriage result, this pattern indicates that the empowerment program en-
couraged girls who were dropping out of school well before marriage to stay in school only up until
the time of marriage, which would increase their grade attainment but preclude a large difference
in enrollment at higher ages or secondary school completion. In contrast, the incentive, by relaxing
the age constraint on schooling attainment, allowed some women to stay in school well past the age
of 18 who would have otherwise dropped out to get married before age 18.
    Together, this pair of results suggests that, although both programs encouraged girls to stay in
school, they should not be viewed as policy substitutes in terms of their potential to increase female
schooling attainment since they have different possible magnitudes of influence. In particular, an
empowerment program can only increase schooling insofar as girls in a given environment are drop-
ping out before marriage, whereas a conditional incentive has the potential to influence schooling
enrollment well beyond the life of the program.


5.2     Effects on Dowry and Husband Quality
     Given the results on marriage timing, we turn to impacts on marriage market outcomes. Ac-
cording to theoretical prediction 3, later marriage arising through a reduction in the signaling value
of marrying young should not increase average dowry of treated women and might even reduce
it through the gains in girls' education. In contrast, if the incentive simply compensates families
for the marriage market penalty of marrying later, we would expect dowries to (weakly) increase
among treated women and marriage quality to (weakly) fall.
     The results on observable husband characteristics, a proxy for marriage quality, are presented
in table 5. Note that all outcome data are collected from women's parents, which increases our
confidence in dowry payment reports, but lowers our ability to capture a rich set of husband char-
acteristics relative to data that were collected from the bride and groom. On average, women in
incentive communities do not pay a dowry penalty for marrying later (column (1)), as predicted in
our model. In addition, there are no statistically significant differences across treatment arms in
the husband's education (column (2)), the most meaningful indicator of husband quality that can
be readily collected from parents in a short survey, nor the husband's age or income generation
(columns (3)-(4)).
     The absence of an effect on dowry among women eligible for the incentive indicates that men
do not perfectly compete for women but that there is sufficient competition for the treatment to be
a Pareto improvement. That is, the returns to education are not offset by an increase in dowry (see
footnote 32).49
     Meanwhile, women eligible for the empowerment program saw a 7% (USD 44, p<0.05) in-
crease in dowry and no corresponding change in husband quality relative to women in control

   49
      Dowry is determined by many other husband characteristics, which we do not model or observe in our data. It is
possible that the incentive increased the possibility set available to families by making it feasible to delay marriage and
increase women's education without a big penalty in the marriage market. This does not necessarily mean that they will
pick exactly the same combination of characteristics in a groom as they would before the possibility set was extended,
just that average groom quality remains constant.



                                                           28
communities, despite the fact that their schooling attainment increased as a result of the program.
This combination of results could be suggests that participation in the empowerment program ­ and,
hence, empowerment itself ­ has a penalty in the marriage market, consistent with the predictions
of our model. In other words, as socially conservative brides become more scarce, women either
have to pay more or marry earlier to match with the same quality husband. The dowry result, in
combination with the weakly observed increase in child marriage in empowerment communities,
suggests that marriage market effects easily undo the positive norms' impacts of a girls' empower-
ment curriculum.
 Table 5: Husband characteristics, unmarried women age 15-17 at program start and married at endline

                         Dowry (USD)         Hus. edu.      Hus. age      Hus. IGA Outside comm.               Outside up.
                                (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)                (5)                (6)
 Empowerment                 43.660             0.022         0.113         0.007              0.009              0.005
                            (21.213)          (0.100)        (0.099)       (0.009)           (0.007)             (0.011)
 Incentive                   33.683            -0.163         -0.244        -0.018            -0.008              -0.010
                            (39.561)          (0.120)        (0.135)       (0.013)           (0.009)             (0.014)
 Incen.*Empow.               -47.787            0.180         0.139         -0.011             0.006              0.014
                            (52.155)          (0.182)        (0.193)       (0.018)           (0.013)             (0.018)
 Control Mean              636.44779          9.66751       29.00445       0.52855           0.90080             0.20776
 Observations                 11937            11577          12269         12727             12941               12941
 FE                           Union            Union          Union         Union             Union               Union
  Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions, adjusted for baseline characteristics and stratification (see notes to
 table 3), with Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level. The sample includes all women age 15-17 at pro-
 gram start and unmarried at program start and married at endline. "Hus. IGA" is an indicator that is 1 if the husband is
 formally employed. "Outside comm." and "outside up." are indicators that are 1 if the woman married a husband from out-
 side her community or outside her upazila (sub-district).




5.3     Spillover Effects on Marriage Timing
    According to theoretical prediction 2, if social conservatism is first-order in men's marriage
preferences and if less conservative women gain more from getting educated, then treated preferred
and non-preferred types as well as untreated preferred types should delay marriage. To test this
prediction, we analyze whether the conditional incentive led to spillovers among untreated women
whose treatment status is observed with noise, and whether spillovers are stronger among untreated
non-preferred, or less socially conservative, women.
    First, we find that knowledge about the incentive program spread to untreated households: 79%
of untreated women in incentive communities and 25% of untreated women in non-incentive com-
munities had heard about the incentive program at midline (online appendix OA.2.4). Furthermore,
at midline, 8% of in-laws of women who did not receive the treatment incorrectly believed that their
daughter-in-law received the treatment, suggesting that not only was knowledge about the treatment
widespread, but also that we are correct in assuming the treatment was observed with noise.
    If the treatment was observed with noise, then we should see spillovers precisely to those un-
treated women who are hardest to distinguish from the treated women. Indeed, women who lived

                                                             29
close to incentive communities were almost 50% more likely to have heard about the incentive pro-
gram (35% of women living within 500 meters vs. 24% of women living farther than 500 meters
from the closest incentive community center). Hence, using communities' geo-locations, we test
for spillovers among women who live in untreated communities but are close to treated commu-
nities. Reports of in-laws at midline also support that treatment status was observed with noise in
these communities: 23% of in-laws of women from these communities incorrectly believed that
their daughter-in-law had received the treatment compared to <1% of in-laws of women living in
farther-away communities. Our regression estimates of program spillovers in columns (1)-(2) in
table 6 thus include all households in untreated communities at endline and compare women living
within 500 meters to women living farther than 500 meters from the closest incentive community
center. To ensure that distance to closest incentive community does not simply capture urbanicity,
the regressions also control for distance to the geographic center of the closest community.

         Table 6: Market spillovers on child marriage (married<18) in non-incentive com-
         munities, by girl's social conservatism (SC)

                                                 Parents' Survey             Young Women's Survey

                                                   Married<18               Married<18 (Age 15-17)

                                             Age 15-17        Age 7-14      Low SC            High SC
                                                (1)             (2)           (3)               (4)

          Close to incentive village           -0.028          -0.008        -0.128            0.090
                                              (0.016)         (0.015)       (0.060)           (0.095)
          Control Mean                        0.28841         0.38989       0.34888           0.48580
          Observations                         10544           40136          628               386
          FE                                   Union           Union         Union             Union
           Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions, adjusted for baseline characteristics
          and stratification (see notes to table 3 for the parents' survey and notes to table 1 for the young
          women's survey), with Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level in parenthe-
          ses. "High Social Conservatism" is an indicator that is 1 if the woman has an above median
          social conservatism. "Close to incentive village" is an indicator that is 1 if the community is
          less than 500 meters away from the closest incentive community center. The regressions also
          control for distance to the closest community center to ensure that distance to closest incentive
          community is not simply proxying for urbanity.

    As shown in column (1), women age 15-17 at program start who lived close to incentive com-
munities are 10% (-2.8ppts, p<0.10) less likely to have married under the age of 18 than women
who did not live close to an incentive community. As a placebo test, we estimate the same regres-
sion for women aged 7-14 who are thus observably not eligible for the incentive in any community
and find no spillover effect (column (2)). It does not appear that treatment effect spillovers to nearby
non-treatment communities is due to a pure change in the acceptability of later marriage, but rather
operate through a more subtle channel that only benefits those women that have the potential to be
mistaken for incentive program participants.

                                                         30
    According to predictions 1 and 2, if child marriage persists due to signaling motives, then all
treated women but only less socially conservative, or non-preferred type, untreated women should
delay marriage. As women's social conservatism is not fully observable from household conser-
vatism (online appendix OA.2.2), we test these predictions among the subsample of program par-
ticipants who were tracked and surveyed directly.50 Consistent with our theoretical prediction, we
observe spillovers only on less socially conservative women (columns (3)-(4)): Less socially con-
servative women who lived close to incentive communities are 37% (-12.8ppts, p<0.05) less likely
to have married under the age of 18 compared to less socially conservative women who did not live
close to an incentive community. We find no such effects on socially conservative women who lived
close to incentive communities. Our signaling explanation is also consistent with reports of in-laws
at midline: 34% of in-laws of less socially conservative women living close to treatment communi-
ties incorrectly believed that their daughter-in-law had received the treatment ­ as opposed to 12%
of in-laws of socially conservative women living close to treatment communities. Meanwhile, con-
sistent with our theory, we find no heterogeneity in social conservatism among eligible women (see
appendix table A.7).
    These cross-community spillovers on less socially conservative women provide strong empiri-
cal support for our signaling model of marriage delay. If the incentive merely compensated families
for a utility loss from marriage delay, we would not anticipate a corresponding delay among those
not receiving the incentive. If spillovers were driven by norms changes in the acceptability of later
marriage driven by the direct program effects, we would see as large or larger an effect on younger
women, since norms changes generally have a delayed impact on behavior. If child marriage per-
sisted due to "unraveling" that leads all brides to marry early for fear of missing out on the highest
quality husbands, then we should find spillovers on all women and not only less socially conser-
vative women who lived close to incentive villages. In addition, the presence of cross-community
spillovers implies that the direct impacts of the program we measure in tables 1-4 are likely to sub-
stantially underestimate the full market-level program impact on marriage and schooling, and thus
the potential of a scaled up incentive policy to delay marriage.


6        Cost Effectiveness
    As our model predicts, the program effects we estimate are high relative to the size of the condi-
tional marriage incentives, suggesting that these incentives could be a highly cost-effective approach
to reducing underage marriage in settings in which child marriage persists due to signaling motives.
We show in a companion paper that the conditional incentive translates into 4.9 years of delayed
marriage, 1.1 averted child marriages, and 3.7 years of schooling for every $1,000 invested by the
implementer (Buchmann et al., 2021). We also calculate the benefits of delayed marriage based
on the cumulative education wage premium by assuming that, absent the study, study participants
would have started engaging in productive activity at age 17.6 (the mean marriage age in the control

    50
    These women were randomly sampled and fully tracked to all parts of the country with a 14% attrition rate (see
Buchmann et al. (2018), in progress for details of the subsample survey.


                                                       31
group among all women age 15-17 at program start) and continued until age 60.51 This analy-
sis suggests that the conditional incentive generated $1,010 in Net Present Value for every $1,000
spent (costs to implementer and beneficiary) ­ the highest impact among rigorously evaluated inter-
ventions affecting marriage age in a comprehensive cost-efficacy analysis. These estimates do not
account for the effects on untreated girls discussed above, the importance of which would depend
on how comprehensively the program is implemented. They therefore underestimate the program's
full cost-effectiveness if replicated at anything less than full coverage.
    However, while our experience was that the conditional incentive program was straightforward
to implement and highly effective on a relatively small scale, scalability of the program depends
on the feasibility of monitoring marriage status in a larger sample. While the risk of monitoring
collusion may increase with scale, the rising rate of digitization of identification in Bangladesh
and elsewhere will greatly reduce the costs of monitoring over time, making it more feasible to
implement a similar program at scale. Moreover, the delivery costs will also fall as digital payment
systems become more widespread.


7        Conclusion
    To understand why progress against child marriage in Bangladesh has been slow despite declines
in fertility and increased education and work opportunities, we develop a model of the marriage
market in which women remain in a child marriage equilibrium because delaying marriage is seen
as a signal of low adherence to traditional gender norms, which is undesirable to grooms. In such
a setting, a small conditional transfer has the potential to generate a significant delay in marriage
while an intervention that reduces women's adherence to traditional gender norms might actually
increase early marriage.
    The empirical predictions of this model are supported by results from a large-scale RCT of a
financial incentive to parents that is conditional on girls remaining unmarried and a traditional em-
powerment program. Our results demonstrate that a relatively small transfer not only significantly
delays marriage for participating families, but also delays marriage for women who live nearby
but were ineligible for the transfer­a key implication of the signaling story. Meanwhile, the em-
powerment program reduced girls' adherence to traditional gender norms, but failed to generate a
reduction in adolescent marriage rates.
    The results provide novel evidence that child marriage is not a deeply-held preference that is
hard to move in Bangladesh. Rather, the theoretical model and corresponding empirical results
indicate that underage marriage and female school dropout are a consequence of adverse selection
based on a hidden desirability type that is correlated with returns to education. Women more likely
to adhere to conservative gender norms of behavior are both desirable in the marriage market and

    51
      We assume that wage returns to education are constant across their working life and that the returns to years of
secondary education are equal for women in and out of the workforce. We further assume that extra education delays
girls' entry into the workforce, and that they begin working immediately after finishing their studies, provided they are
older than the median age of marriage.



                                                          32
get relatively lower returns to education than less socially conservative women who are more likely
to work after marriage. The results are not consistent with child marriage persisting as a result of
a strong cultural preference for underage brides. Because age and physical appearance are both
observable, a conditional transfer could not generate spillovers if the latter two mechanisms were at
play.
    This set of findings has important implications for policy surrounding child marriage. Child
marriage driven by signaling is inefficient ­ everyone, including men and parents, would be happier
with collective delay, but cannot coordinate on this in the status quo. Hence, although the steady
rates of child marriage in Bangladesh over the past two decades might have suggested that a large
cultural shift is needed, our work demonstrates that policies aimed at changing preferences may
be misdirected. Instead, relatively modest economic incentives can be highly effective in reducing
the number of underage brides. Small conditional transfers are a potential cost-effective policy
approach to child marriage that can be implemented at any scale, which is important given that
many governments have demonstrated limited political will to enforce legal mandates.
    More generally, our results highlight the primacy of understanding the underlying determinants
of child marriage in identifying the most cost-effective policy strategies for combating it.


References
Ambrus, A., E. Field, and M. Torero (2010). Muslim family law, prenuptial agreements, and the
  emergence of dowry in bangladesh. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3).
Anderson, S. (2007a). The economics of dowry and brideprice. The Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 21(4), 151­174.
Anderson, S. (2007b). Why the marriage squeeze cannot cause dowry inflation. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory 137 (1), 140­152.
Becker, G. S. and H. G. Lewis (1973). On the interaction between the quantity and quality of
  children. Journal of political Economy 81(2, Part 2), S279­S288.
Buchmann, N., E. Field, and R. Glennerster (2021). The marriage market value of bride age and
  education: A vignette approach to decomposing marriage transfers in rural bangladesh. Working
  Paper.
Buchmann, N., E. Field, R. Glennerster, and K. Murphy (2021). Cost-benefit analysis of strategies
  to reduce child marriage in bangladesh. Working Paper.
Buchmann, N., E. Field, R. Glennerster, S. Nazneen, S. Pimkina, and I. Sen (2018). Power vs
  money: Alternative approaches to reducing child marriage in bangladesh, a randomized control
  trial. Working Paper.
Bursztyn, L., A. L. Gonz´
                        alez, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2020). Misperceived social norms: Women
  working outside the home in saudi arabia. American economic review 110(10), 2997­3029.
Chari, A., R. Heath, A. Maertens, and F. Fatima (2017). The causal effect of maternal age at
  marriage on child wellbeing: Evidence from india. Journal of Development Economics 127,
  42­55.
Cho, I.-K. and D. M. Kreps (1987). Signaling games and stable equilibria. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 102(2), 179­221.
EngenderHealth, U. (2003). Obstetric fistula needs assessment report: Findings from nine african
  countries.



                                                 33
Field, E. and A. Ambrus (2008). Early marriage, age of menarche, and female schooling attainment
   in bangladesh. Journal of political Economy 116(5).
Field, E., R. Glennerster, and S. Nazneen (2018). Economic empowerment of young women in
   bangladesh: barriers and strategies. Policy in Focus 15(1).
Goody, J. (1990). The Oriental, the Ancient and the Primitive: Systems of Marriage and the Family
   in the Pre-industrial Societies of Eurasia. Cambridge University Press.
Hamid, S., E. Johansson, and B. Rubenson (2010). Security lies in obedience-voices of young
   women of a slum in pakistan. BMC public health 10(1), 1­7.
Jain, S. and K. Kurz (2007). New insights on preventing child marriage: A global analysis of factors
   and programs. International Center for Research on Women (ICRW).
Krishnan, A., R. Amarchand, P. Byass, C. Pandav, and N. Ng (2014). "no one says `no'to money"­a
   mixed methods approach for evaluating conditional cash transfer schemes to improve girl chil-
   dren's status in haryana, india. International Journal for Equity in Health 13(1), 1.
Loaiza Sr, E. and S. Wong (2012). Marrying too young. end child marriage. UNFPA Reports.
Mathur, S., M. Greene, and A. Malhotra (2003). Too young to wed: The lives, rights and health of
   young married girls. International Center for Research on Women.
Mitra, N. I. o. P. R. Associates, and I. I. Training (NIPORT) (2016). Bangladesh demographic and
   health survey 2014.
Nour, N. M. (2009). Child marriage: a silent health and human rights issue. Rev Obstet Gy-
   necol 2(1), 51­56.
Ortner, S. B. (1978). The virgin and the state. Feminist studies 4(3), 19­35.
Raj, A. (2010). When the mother is a child: the impact of child marriage on the health and human
   rights of girls. Archives of Disease in Childhood, archdischild178707.
Rao, V. (1993). The rising price of husbands: A hedonic analysis of dowry increases in rural india.
   Journal of political Economy 101(4), 666­677.
Unicef (2014). Ending child marriage: Progress and prospects. New York: UNICEF .
Unicef (2017). Child marriage is a violation of human rights, but is all too common. Weblink:
   https://datauniceforg/topic/child-protection/child-marriage/(Accessed June 1, 2019).
Wahhaj, Z. (2018). An economic model of early marriage. Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 152, 147­176.




                                                34
A.1       Appendix

A.1.1       Theory Appendix
A.1.1.1     Proof of Result 1: Liquidity Constraints Prevent Separating Equilibrium in Control
            Communities

    Observe that we have single-crossing: for any dowries charged in t1 and t2 , if the preferred type
weakly prefers entering in t2 , then the non-preferred type strictly prefers entering in t2 (because of
higher marginal gains from education).
    In order to screen, M has to exploit that L gets higher marginal gains from education, by
charging a higher dowry for t2 entrants, where the gap between the dowry for t1 entrants and t2
entrants exceeds µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL ) but is less than µ(L , EH ) - µ(L , EL ) (such that non-
preferred type women would prefer to enter late while preferred type women would not).
    The minimum dowry M can charge without violating his participation constraint in t1 is M -
µ(H , EL ). Hence, D|t2 = M -µ(H , EL )+, where   (µ(H , EH )-µ(H , EL ), µ(L , EH )-
µ(L , EL )). Thus, the minimum separating dowry for later entrants is D|t2 = M + µ(H , EH ) -
2µ(H , EL ).
    Hence, if M + µ(H , EH ) - 2µ(H , EL ) > Y , then the cheapest separating equilibrium is not
feasible at this D|t2 (L is willing but unable to enter at t2 ).

A.1.1.2     Proof of Result 2: The Unique Equilibrium in Control Communities is Pooling on t1

A.1.1.2.1    Pooling on t2 does not survive the Intuitive Criterion

    As the separating equilibrium is not feasible, and there are no mixed-strategy equilibria (see
online appendix OA.3.2), the candidate equilibria are "pooling on t1 " and "pooling on t2 ".
    First consider "pooling on t2 ". If all women enter at t2 , then Bayes' rule implies that men must
have beliefs Pr( = H |t2 ) = f . Since men compete for women, this implies that the dowry offered
in t2 is:
                         D|t2 = M - [f µ(H , EH ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EH )]

Since entry at t1 is a probability 0 event, Bayes' rule does not impose any restriction on the off-
equilibrium beliefs Pr( = H |t1 ) =   [0, 1]. It should be clear that if  = 0 (to give an
example), then this can sustain "all women enter at t2 " as a sequential equilibrium, since given
these beliefs, the preferred type clearly prefers to get a higher utility and pay a lower dowry by
entering at t2 :

 µ(H , EH ) - [M - [f µ(H , EH ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EH )]] > µ(H , EL ) - [M - µ(L , EL )]

By single-crossing, the non-preferred type also prefers to enter at t2 . So, we ask whether this
equilibrium survives the Intuitive Criterion (IC).



                                                 35
    Suppose H deviated to t1 and received the most favorable treatment possible from M . That is,
suppose she receives the lowest dowry possible, which is the dowry M would offer if he believed
she were preferred type for sure:

                                     Dbest |t1 = M - µ(H , EL )

Then H prefers deviating and entering at t1 over entering at t2 iff:

                  µ(H , EL ) - [M - µ(H , EL )] > µ(H , EH )
                                                      - [M - [f µ(H , EH ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EH )]] 
µ(H , EL ) - [f µ(H , EH ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EH )] > µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL )

On the other hand, deviating to t1 is equilibrium-dominated for L iff:

                  µ(L , EL ) - [M - µ(H , EL )] < µ(L , EH )
                                                      - [M - [f µ(H , EH ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EH )]] 
µ(H , EL ) - [f µ(H , EH ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EH )] < µ(L , EH ) - µ(L , EL )

Thus, "pooling on t2 " fails the IC iff:

µ(H , EH )-µ(H , EL ) < µ(H , EL )-[f µ(H , EH )+(1-f )µ(L , EH )] < µ(L , EH )-µ(L , EL )

    This condition reflects that: (i) "type" is first-order in marriage, (ii) education has more mar-
riage value-added for a non-preferred type than a preferred type, and (iii) the population fraction of
preferred types is not too large.
    If these features are true in the environment, then "pooling on t2 " fails the IC because the
preferred type should be able to deviate to entering at t1 and convince men that she is preferred type
because a non-preferred type would still prefer to enter at t2 . Men would then offer her the best
possible terms, which she would accept over delaying marriage and entering at t2 , as prescribed by
the equilibrium.

A.1.1.2.2   Pooling on t1 does Survive the Intuitive Criterion

   Now consider "pooling on t1 ". Then Pr( = H |t1 ) = f by Bayes' rule, while the off-
equilibrium belief Pr( = H |t2 ) could be anything. M offers dowry in t1 :

                          D|t1 = M - [f µ(H , EL ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EL )]

If Pr( = H |t2 ) = 0, then D|t2 = M - µ(L , EH ). H prefers entering at t1 iff:

µ(H , EL ) - [M - [f µ(H , EL ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EL )]] > µ(H , EH ) - [M - µ(L , EH )] 
         [f µ(H , EL ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EL )] - µ(L , EH ) > µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL )

                                                 36
which we have by assumption. (Intuitively, this is saying that type is first-order in marriage and thus
preferred types do not gain much from education.)
    This is a sequential equilibrium. But does it survive the intuitive criterion?
    Suppose H deviated and entered at t2 . The best possible terms she could receive for this is the
dowry that M offers if he believes she is preferred type for sure:

                                      D|t2 = M - µ(H , EH )

    Clearly, D|t2 < D|t1 since µ(H , EH ) > µ(H , EL ) > µ(L , EL ). Then H clearly prefers to
delay marriage, receive a higher marriage utility (she gets educated) and pay a lower dowry. Since
we have shown the single-crossing property holds in our setting, L also strictly prefers deviating
to t2 at the best possible terms.
    But then, since both types prefer to deviate under the best possible terms, deviation is not infor-
mative to men about type. Thus, "pooling on t1 " is the unique sequential equilibrium that survives
the intuitive criterion in control communities.

A.1.1.3   Proof of Result 3: Liquidity Constraints Prevent Separating Equilibrium in Treat-
          ment Communities

     Does easing liquidity constraints for some randomly chosen women, conditional on delaying
marriage, enable a screening menu of dowries?
     Note that there are now two dimensions of unobserved type: type and treatment. Since untreated
L still cannot afford the higher dowry for entering later (under our original liquidity constraint),
it's clear that the treatment does not enable men to induce all H to enter at t1 and all L to enter
at t2 .
     Does the treatment enable men to achieve semi-separation by charging a D|t2 that induces only
treated L to enter at t2 ? D|t1 and D|t2 would have to satisfy:

                           D|t2 - D|t1 < C + µ(L , EH ) - µ(L , EL )
                           D|t2 - D|t1 > C + µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL )

If treated non-preferred types entered at t2 and everyone else entered at t1 , Bayes' rule dictates that
Pr( = H |t1 ) = f +(1-f  )(1-f )
                                  f , where f > f . Then to satisfy his participation constraint, the
minimum dowry M charges is D|t1 = M - (f µ(H , EL ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EL )). But:

       D|t2 = M - (f µ(H , EL ) + (1 - f )µ(L , EL )) + C + µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL )
            > M - 2µ(H , EL ) + µ(H , EH ) + C
            > Y + C.

So, the treatment does not make the separating contract feasible­although some women have been
enriched, the very fact that this enrichment is random in type means that there is no way to sepa-


                                                  37
rate treated preferred types from treated non-preferred types, for the same reason separation is not
feasible in control communities. A separating contract would have to fully extract C and charge a
rent on top of that for those who delay marriage, where this rent is the same as in the analysis for
control communities, and therefore unaffordable.

A.1.1.4     Proof of Result 4: Equilibria in Treatment Communities

A.1.1.4.1    Pooling on t2 does not Survive the IC

     Because men compete for women, the transfer given to treated women is not extracted from
them. Thus, if all women enter at t2 , the dowry that men charge is the same as the dowry they
would charge if they thought all women entered at t2 in the absence of any treatment. Clearly, this
is still a sequential equilibrium. By the same reasoning as in the control section above, the untreated
preferred type prefers to deviate at t1 under the best possible terms than to abide by the equilibrium
and enter at t2 . That is, she can make a credible speech to men that she is a preferred type if she
enters at t1 . Hence, this sequential equilibrium continues to fail the IC.

A.1.1.4.2    Pooling on t1 Survives the IC

    We showed that this sequential equilibrium survives the IC in the control setting. It continues
to survive the IC in the treatment setting, since the treatment strengthens the treated women's pref-
erence to enter at t2 and doesn't change anything else. Thus, since untreated non-preferred and
preferred types would rather deviate to t2 at the best possible terms in the control, the untreated and
treated non-preferred and preferred types would rather deviate to t2 at the best possible terms in the
treatment. Therefore, this is still an equilibrium. However, we will show that the treatment creates
a new, semi-separating equilibrium, in which every agent's welfare is higher.

A.1.1.4.3    There is a Semi-Separating Equilibrium, and it Pareto Dominates the Pooling
             Equilibrium

    There is no separating equilibrium in the control communities because there were only two types
of women, non-preferred and preferred type, and the only way for men to generate separation would
be to charge a high enough dowry such that non-preferred types prefer to pay the higher dowry and
delay marriage (because they get relatively large gains from further education), while preferred
types prefer to enter early and pay the smaller dowry (because unobservable type is first-order and
they do not have as much value-added from education, relative to non-preferred types). Because
we do not observe separation in our setting, we infer that the extra dowry that men would need to
charge for women who delay marriage is too much for non-preferred types to afford.
    There is no semi-separating equilibrium in the control communities because again, there are only
two types of women, and due to single-crossing, only one type (the preferred type) could possibly be
mixing. We showed that there is no lower dowry D|t1 that M can charge that simultaneously keeps
preferred types indifferent between entering at t1 and t2 , and satisfies M 's participation constraint.


                                                  38
    Without assuming anything different about liquidity constraints, the treatment makes a semi-
separating equilibrium possible because it generates a second dimension of type, and in particular,
this second dimension is orthogonal to type. Now, we have treated preferred, treated non-preferred,
untreated preferred, and untreated non-preferred types, where crucially treatment is not informative
about the unobservable type.
    Consider the following equilibrium candidate: untreated preferred types enter at t1 , and every-
one else enters at t2 .
    Then Bayes' rule implies that M have the following beliefs:

                               Pr( = H |t1 ) = 1
                                                       f
                               Pr( = H |t2 ) =                   f
                                                    f + (1 - f )

Note that f  1 f . Thus, dowries charged are:

                        D|t2 = M - f µ(H , EH ) - (1 - f )µ(L , EH )
                        D|t1 = M - µ(H , EL )

   Treated preferred types prefer t2 to t1 if and only if (Condition 1):

µ(H , EH ) - [M - f µ(H , EH ) - (1 - f )µ(L , EH )] + C > µ(H , EL ) - [M - µ(H , EL )]

   If treated preferred types prefer t2 to t1 , then so do treated non-preferred types.
   Untreated non-preferred types prefer t2 to t1 if and only if (Condition 2):

  µ(L , EH ) - [M - f µ(H , EH ) - (1 - f )µ(L , EH )] > µ(L , EL ) - [M - µ(H , EL )]

   Untreated preferred types prefer t1 to t2 if and only if (Condition 3):

 µ(H , EL ) - [M - µ(H , EL )] > µ(H , EH ) - [M - f µ(H , EH ) - (1 - f )µ(L , EH )]

    Condition 3 holds by assumptions (we showed in the control analysis that preferred types prefer
t1 under the belief that t1 entrant is preferred type for sure over t2 under the belief that t2 entrant
is preferred type with probability f . Here, the belief that t2 entrant is preferred type is f < f , so
Condition 3 holds as an implication).
    Condition 2 is the least likely to hold for f = 0, in which case it holds by the substitutes
condition 2.
    Condition 1 holds by assumption as long as the transfer is non-trivial.
    A key observation is that the treatment's impact is all about the common knowledge that treated
preferred types now have a stronger incentive to delay marriage and not at all about women getting
richer.
    Recall that the dowry charged in the "pooling on t1 " case is M -f µ(H , EL )-(1-f )µ(L , EL ).


                                                  39
Note that every woman is strictly better off in this semi-separating equilibrium, and no man is worse
off (since men compete for women, they always get their outside option M in every equilibrium).
    Untreated preferred types are strictly better off, because they still enter at t1 and are uneducated,
but pay a strictly lower dowry than they do in the "pooling on t1 " equilibrium, because now men
believe they are preferred type for sure. Everyone else is strictly better off because they do even
better by entering at t2 than entering at t1 and paying that strictly lower dowry. So, even though
"pooling on t1 " continues to be a sequential equilibrium that survives the IC, this semi-separating
equilibrium is also a sequential equilibrium, and Pareto dominates.

A.1.1.5     Proof of Corollary 2: Changing Distribution of Bride Types

   From result 2, we know that, if liquidity constraints preclude a separating equilibrium, then
pooling on child marriage happens when:

      µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL ) < µ(H , EL ) - µ(L , EH ) - f (µ(H , EH ) - µ(L , EH ))
                                  < µ(L , EH ) - µ(L , EL ).

   The left-hand side is more likely to hold as f decreases, since µ(H , EH ) - µ(L , EH ) > 0.
The right-hand side always holds, since it holds for f = 0 by condition 2 of our model:

          µ(H , EH ) - µ(H , EL ) < µ(H , EL ) - µ(L , EH ) < µ(L , EH ) - µ(L , EL ).

   Hence, pooling on early marriage and low education grows more likely as f decreases.




                                                   40
     A.1.2 Empirical Appendix
     A.1.2.1   Baseline Balance


                                          Table A.1: Baseline characteristics in the parents' survey, women age 15-17 at program start

                                                                       Empowerment                          Incentive                        Empow.+Incen.                   Control                    Total

                  Married & Unmarried at Baseline

                                                                           8,739                              4,176                              4,503                              8,990                   26,408
                  N

                                                               Mean        S.D.        Diff.      Mean        S.D.        Diff.      Mean        S.D.        Diff.      Mean        S.D.        Mean            S.D.

                  Ever Married (%)                               8.5       28.0        -0.1        9.4        29.1        0.7          8.8       28.4         0.2         8.7       28.1         8.8            28.3
                  Still in-school (%)                           60.2       48.9        -0.9        59.2       49.2        -2.0        60.2       48.9        -0.9        61.2       48.7        60.4            48.9
                  Highest Class Passed                           6.2        2.6        0.0         6.1         2.7        -0.1         6.3        2.7         0.1         6.2       2.7          6.2             2.6


                  Unmarried at Baseline
41




                                                                           7,992                              3,785                              4,106                              8,212                   24,095
                  N

                                                               Mean        S.D.        Diff.      Mean        S.D.        Diff.      Mean        S.D.        Diff.      Mean        S.D.        Mean            S.D.

                  Still in-school (%)                          64.6         47.8       -1.2        64.1        48.0        -1.7       65.1       47.7         -0.8       65.8        47.4        65.0            47.7
                  Highest Class Passed                          6.4          2.6       0.0         6.3          2.6        -0.1        6.4        2.6          0.1        6.4        2.6          6.4             2.6
                  Age                                          14.9          0.8       -0.0        14.9         0.8        0.0        14.9        0.8         -0.0       14.9        0.8         14.9             0.8
                  Father Education (0-17)                       4.1          4.4       0.2         3.8          4.1        -0.1        4.0        4.2          0.0        3.9        4.2          4.0             4.2
                  Mother Education (0-17)                       3.2          3.3       0.1         3.0          3.3        -0.1        3.0        3.1         -0.0        3.1        3.3          3.1             3.3
                  HH Size (members)                             6.0          1.9       0.0         6.1          2.0        0.1         6.0        2.0          0.0        6.0        2.0          6.0             2.0
                  Unmarried older sister in HH (%)             18.9         39.1       0.3         18.0        38.5        -0.5       18.0       38.4         -0.5       18.5        38.9        18.5            38.8
                  Community Boys/Girls Ratio                    1.9          0.7       -0.1        2.0          0.8        0.0         1.9        0.8         -0.1        2.0        0.9          1.9             0.8
                  Community size (girls age 10 to 19)          265.9       121.3       -9.2       251.2       119.4       -23.9      261.3       118.6       -13.7      275.1       126.2       265.9           122.5



                  Notes: The table shows baseline characteristics by treatment arm of women age 15-17 at program start. The differences are calculated from OLS regressions with modified Huber-White SEs clustered
                  at the community level.
A.1.2.2   Attrition


                      Table A.2: Outcome: Attritted, unmarried women age
                      15-17 at program start (excluding prefill errors and
                      washed-out households)

                                                                 (1)          (2)

                       Empowerment                             -0.019       -0.019
                                                              (0.012)      (0.012)
                       Incentive                               -0.011       -0.011
                                                              (0.014)      (0.014)
                       Incen.+Empow.                           -0.021       -0.021
                                                              (0.015)      (0.015)
                       In school (BL)                                       -0.030
                                                                           (0.006)
                       Mother's education (BL)                              0.003
                                                                           (0.001)
                       Unmarried older sister                               -0.008
                                                                           (0.006)
                       Village remote                                       0.001
                                                                           (0.010)
                       Age (BL)                                             -0.002
                                                                           (0.003)
                       Control Mean                           0.15165      0.15165
                       Observations                            21749        21749


                       Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions with
                       modified Huber-White SEs clustered at the community level.
                       The sample includes women age 15-17 at program start and
                       unmarried at baseline and excludes women for which track-
                       ing data was lost at baseline as well as washedout households.




                                                    42
     A.1.2.3   Heterogeneity

                                       Table A.3: Marriage and education outcomes, unmarried women age 15-17 at program start, by whether woman was in or out of school at baseline

                                                                                                   Out of school                                                                             In school

                                                                       Married<18                  Still in school            Last class passed              Married<18                   Still in school            Last class passed

                                                                 Age 15-17        Age 15      Age 15-17        Age 15      Age 15-17        Age 15      Age 15-17        Age 15      Age 15-17        Age 15      Age 15-17     Age 15
                                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)            (10)         (11)         (12)

                    Empowerment                                      0.002        0.000          -0.003        -0.023          0.062        -0.041         -0.010        -0.011         0.014         0.024          0.178       0.174
                                                                   (0.015)       (0.031)        (0.007)       (0.013)        (0.117)       (0.212)        (0.009)       (0.016)        (0.011)       (0.016)        (0.092)     (0.123)
                    Incentive                                       -0.015        -0.033         -0.001        -0.001          0.048        0.094          -0.060        -0.082         0.023         0.050          0.129       0.250
                                                                   (0.021)       (0.044)        (0.009)       (0.018)        (0.182)       (0.303)        (0.013)       (0.022)        (0.015)       (0.021)        (0.117)     (0.187)
                    Incen.*Empow.                                   -0.000        0.024          -0.010        0.001          -0.017        -0.120          0.022         0.027         0.007         -0.018        -0.071       -0.168
                                                                   (0.029)       (0.059)        (0.012)       (0.023)        (0.229)       (0.394)        (0.017)       (0.029)        (0.022)       (0.029)        (0.179)     (0.242)
                    Control Mean                                   0.35925       0.50218        0.03780       0.05240        5.69767       5.51762        0.26644       0.35144        0.27990       0.27760       11.33658    10.83291
                    Observations                                     4615          1314           4628          1317           4597          1306          10933          4546          10930          4545          10857        4518
                    FE                                              Union         Union          Union         Union          Union         Union          Union         Union          Union         Union          Union       Union
43




                    Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions, adjusted for baseline characteristics and stratification (see notes to table 3), with Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level.



                                         Table A.4: Marriage and education outcomes, unmarried women age 15-17 at program start, by whether father was working full-time at baseline

                                                                                                   Not full-time                                                                             Full-time

                                                                      Married<18                  Still in school             Last class passed               Married<18                  Still in school            Last class passed

                                                                 Age 15-17       Age 15       Age 15-17       Age 15      Age 15-17         Age 15       Age 15-17       Age 15      Age 15-17        Age 15      Age 15-17     Age 15
                                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)           (9)            (10)         (11)         (12)

                    Empowerment                                    -0.036         -0.018         0.025         -0.010        0.479          0.435          -0.029         -0.012         0.013         0.022         0.240        0.369
                                                                  (0.029)        (0.053)       (0.037)        (0.055)       (0.316)        (0.444)        (0.018)        (0.031)       (0.023)       (0.034)        (0.160)     (0.248)
                    Incentive                                      -0.095         -0.095         0.080         0.169         0.594          0.781          -0.039         -0.055         0.013        -0.001         0.214        0.339
                                                                  (0.034)        (0.057)       (0.042)        (0.067)       (0.371)        (0.584)        (0.025)        (0.041)       (0.031)       (0.040)        (0.259)     (0.354)
                    Incen.*Empow.                                   0.127         0.123         -0.034         -0.034       -0.186          -0.511         0.006          -0.004        -0.031        -0.035        -0.105       -0.526
                                                                  (0.049)        (0.082)       (0.066)        (0.088)       (0.513)        (0.729)        (0.037)        (0.059)       (0.042)       (0.058)        (0.345)     (0.455)
                    Control Mean                                  0.34351        0.47399       0.18345        0.17054      10.20578       10.00000        0.33852        0.41129       0.28894       0.30052       11.19772    10.59424
                    Observations                                    1212           528            852           399           847            395            2998           1324          2152          1036          2135         1028
                    FE                                             Union          Union         Union          Union         Union          Union          Union          Union         Union         Union          Union       Union

                    Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions, adjusted for baseline characteristics and stratification (see notes to table 3), with Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level.
A.1.3   Treatment Effects on Girls' Social Conservatism

                     Table A.5: Social Conservatism Index, un-
                     married girls age 10-17 at program start

                                         Age 10-17      Age 15-17

                                              (1)           (2)

                      Empowerment           -0.053        -0.022
                                           (0.023)       (0.031)
                      Incentive             0.034         0.059
                                           (0.027)       (0.037)
                      Incen.*Empow.         0.027         -0.006
                                           (0.038)       (0.049)
                      Control Mean         0.00000       0.00000
                      Observations           3391          1598
                      FE                    Union         Union

                       Notes: The table shows results from OLS
                      regressions, adjusted for baseline charac-
                      teristics and stratification (see notes to ta-
                      ble 1), with Huber-White robust SEs clus-
                      tered at the community level in parenthe-
                      ses. The "girls' social conservatism in-
                      dex" is a Kling mean effects index of
                      whether the girl believes wives should be
                      less educated than men, girls should be al-
                      lowed to wear what they want (entering
                      negatively), boys should be given more
                      education resources than men, she stops
                      activities when she menstruates, and the
                      highest age the girl finds acceptable for
                      marriage (entering the index negatively).




                                           44
Table A.6: Marriage and childbearing outcomes, unmarried girls age 15-17 at program start in the young women's subsample survey

                         Married<18          Married<16         Ever married            Marriage age              Birth<20


                     Age 15-17    Age 15       Age 15      Age 15-17     Age 15    Age 15-17     Age 15     Age 15-17     Age 15

                         (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)

 Empowerment            0.057      0.080        0.053         0.007        0.013      -0.346     -0.504       0.033        0.054
                      (0.030)     (0.049)      (0.034)       (0.022)     (0.034)     (0.127)     (0.199)     (0.026)     (0.041)
 Incentive             -0.033      -0.095       -0.062        -0.009      -0.049      -0.048      0.195       -0.041      -0.097
                      (0.035)     (0.057)      (0.034)       (0.026)     (0.042)     (0.137)     (0.230)     (0.028)     (0.045)
 Incen.*Empow.          0.013      0.033        0.007         0.003        0.072      0.236       0.355       0.008        0.019
                      (0.053)     (0.084)      (0.053)       (0.035)     (0.060)     (0.214)     (0.350)     (0.043)     (0.068)
 Control Mean         0.36742     0.46288      0.13974       0.84528     0.83117    18.25153    17.70125     0.21172     0.28821
 Observations           1604        685          685           1609         687        1350        568         1609         687
 FE                    Union       Union        Union         Union       Union       Union       Union       Union       Union

 Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions, adjusted for baseline characteristics and stratification (see notes to table
 1), with Huber-White robust SEs clustered at the community level.



A.1.4        Treatment Effect Heterogeneity by Girls' Social Conservatism

                     Table A.7: Child marriage, unmarried girls age 15-17 at program
                     start in the young women's subsample survey, by girl's social con-
                     servatism (SC)

                                                         Low SC                        High SC
                                               Age 15-17         Age 15          Age 15-17       Age 15
                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)

                       Empowerment                0.038            0.016           0.094          0.121
                                                 (0.040)         (0.068)          (0.050)       (0.083)
                       Incentive                  -0.032          -0.087           -0.023        -0.119
                                                 (0.042)         (0.068)          (0.056)       (0.094)
                       Incen.*Empow.              0.082            0.052           -0.114        -0.044
                                                 (0.063)         (0.106)          (0.083)       (0.142)
                       Control Mean              0.32188         0.42963          0.43750       0.51064
                       Observations                991              411             613            274
                       FE                         Union           Union            Union         Union
                        Notes: The table shows results from OLS regressions, adjusted for baseline
                       characteristics and stratification (see notes to table 1), with Huber-White ro-
                       bust SEs clustered at the community level in parentheses. "High Social Con-
                       servatism" is an indicator that is 1 if the woman has an above median social
                       conservatism.




                                                               45
