                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            SYSTEMIC DISCRIMINATION AMONG LARGE U.S. EMPLOYERS

                                       Patrick M. Kline
                                         Evan K. Rose
                                     Christopher R. Walters

                                      Working Paper 29053
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29053


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2021, Revised August 2021




We thank Sendhil Mullainathan, Sapna Raj, and Jenny Yang for helpful conversations, our
discussant Peter Hull, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Chicago Booth, the University of
Chicago HCEO Working Group, CEPR, IZA, the NBER Labor Studies meetings, and CESifo for
useful comments. We also thank the J-PAL North America Social Policy Research Initiative for
generous funding support. A pre-analysis plan for this project can be found under AEA RCT
registry number AEARCTR-0004739. Outstanding research assistance was provided by Jake
Anderson, Hadar Avivi, Elena Marchetti-Bowick, Ross Chu, Brian Collica, Nicole Gandre, and
Ben Scuderi. We are grateful to our determined team of undergraduate volunteers, without whom
this project would not have been possible: May Adberg, Jason Chen, Stephanie Cong, Simon
Duabis, Daniel Dychala, Samuel Gao, Alexandra Groscost, Victoria Haworth, Camille Hillion,
Ben Keltner, Mary Kruberg, Jiaxin Lei, Carol Lee, Collin Lu, Oliver McNeil, Riley Odom, Sarah
Phung, Eric Phillips, Stephanie Ross, Marcus Sander, Pat Tagari, Quinghuai Tan, Lydia Wen,
Zijun Xu, Xilin Ying, Andy Zhong, Leila Zhua, Yingjia Zhang, and Yiran Zi. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Patrick M. Kline, Evan K. Rose, and Christopher R. Walters. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Systemic Discrimination Among Large U.S. Employers
Patrick M. Kline, Evan K. Rose, and Christopher R. Walters
NBER Working Paper No. 29053
July 2021, Revised August 2021
JEL No. C11,C9,C93,J7,J71,J78,K31,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the results of a massive nationwide correspondence experiment sending more than
83,000 fictitious applications with randomized characteristics to geographically dispersed jobs
posted by 108 of the largest U.S. employers. Distinctively Black names reduce the probability of
employer contact by 2.1 percentage points relative to distinctively white names. The magnitude
of this racial gap in contact rates differs substantially across firms, exhibiting a between-company
standard deviation of 1.9 percentage points. Despite an insignificant average gap in contact rates
between male and female applicants, we find a between-company standard deviation in gender
contact gaps of 2.7 percentage points, revealing that some firms favor male applicants while
others favor women. Company-specific racial contact gaps are temporally and spatially persistent,
and negatively correlated with firm profitability, federal contractor status, and a measure of
recruiting centralization. Discrimination exhibits little geographical dispersion, but two digit
industry explains roughly half of the cross-firm variation in both racial and gender contact gaps.
Contact gaps are highly concentrated in particular companies, with firms in the top quintile of
racial discrimination responsible for nearly half of lost contacts to Black applicants in the
experiment. Controlling false discovery rates to the 5% level, 23 individual companies are found
to discriminate against Black applicants. Our findings establish that systemic illegal
discrimination is concentrated among a select set of large employers, many of which can be
identified with high confidence using large scale inference methods.

Patrick M. Kline                                 Christopher R. Walters
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley               University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880                             530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720                               Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                         and NBER
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu                         crwalters@econ.berkeley.edu

Evan K. Rose
Becker Friedman Institute
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL
ekrose@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
Employment discrimination is a stubbornly persistent social problem. Title VII of the
Civil Right Act of 1964 forbids employment discrimination on the basis of race, sex, color,
religion, and national origin. A large social science literature uses resume correspondence
experiments to document that these protected characteristics influence employer treat-
ment of job applications (Bertrand and Duflo, 2017; Baert, 2018; Quillian et al., 2017),
with some studies finding that this disparate treatment predicts later hiring decisions
(Quillian, Lee and Oliver, 2020). Less is known, however, about the extent to which
discrimination varies across employers. Is the U.S. labor market characterized by a small
faction of severe discriminators adrift in an ocean of unbiased firms, or do most companies
exhibit roughly equivalent biases?
     The answer to this question has a host of important ramifications. As emphasized by
Becker (1957), if discrimination is confined to a small minority of firms, workers may be
able to avoid prejudice by sorting to non-discriminatory firms. The organizational struc-
ture of discrimination is also of great interest to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC), which is charged with preventing and remedying unlawful employ-
ment discrimination. In fiscal year 2020, the EEOC launched 558 investigations into sys-
temic discrimination, defined as "a pattern or practice, policy and/or class cases where
the discrimination has a broad impact on an industry, profession, company or geographic
location" (U.S. EEOC, 2006b). If discrimination is concentrated among a small minority
of firms, it may be possible to identify those firms with sufficient confidence to enable
better decisions by the EEOC and other regulatory bodies. Evidence of discrimination
could also potentially be shared directly with firms or made public, allowing companies
to preemptively reform their practices.
     This paper reports the results of a massive nationwide correspondence experiment
designed to measure patterns of discrimination by large U.S. companies. The experiment
sent over 83,000 job applications to job vacancies posted by 108 Fortune 500 employers.
For each company, we sought to sample 125 entry-level jobs in distinct U.S. counties.
Each sampled job received eight fictitious applications, with phone lines and email ad-
dresses monitored for contact. By sampling a large number of geographically distinct
jobs from each company, we are able to average out idiosyncrasies associated with par-
ticular geographic areas, establishments, or hiring managers, revealing organization-wide
patterns.
     Following a large social science literature (Bertrand and Duflo, 2017; Baert, 2018),
the experiment manipulated employer perceptions of race by randomly assigning racially
distinctive names to job applications. Each job received four pairs of applications, with
one member of each pair assigned a distinctively Black name and the other a distinctively
white name. We also randomly varied signals of applicant sex, age, sexual orientation,


                                            2
gender identity, and political leaning. To filter out the potential effects of fluctuations in
aggregate labor market conditions, jobs were sampled in five waves, with firms sampled
in random order in each wave.
    We find that distinctively Black names reduce the likelihood of employer contact
relative to distinctively white names by 2.1 percentage points, an effect equal to 9% of
the Black mean contact rate. This gap in contact rates varies substantially across the
firms in our study. After adjusting for sampling error, the cross-firm standard deviation of
racial contact gaps is 1.9 percentage points, only slightly below the mean contact penalty
for Black names. Racial discrimination is heterogeneous but one-sided: we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that all 108 firms in our experiment weakly favor white applicants.
An application of Efron's (2016) empirical Bayes (EB) deconvolution estimator reveals
that the distribution of racial contact gaps is highly skewed, with most firms exhibiting
mild discrimination against Black applicants but a few exhibiting very large biases. We
estimate that the top quintile of discriminating firms are responsible for 46% of the lost
contacts to Black applicants in our experiment.
    Companies also vary enormously in their treatment of applicant gender. On average,
male and female applicants are equally likely to be contacted, but the standard deviation
of gender contact gaps across companies is 2.7 percentage points, with a distribution
that is roughly symmetric about zero. This "bi-directional" discrimination result accords
with the findings of Kline and Walters (2021), who conclude, using different methods, that
some jobs sampled in a correspondence experiment of Mexican employers (Arceo-Gomez
and Campos-Vazquez, 2014) discriminated against women, while others discriminated
against men. Our analysis shows that a similar pattern holds across large U.S. employers
with geographically isolated establishments. Like racial discrimination, gender discrimi-
nation is highly concentrated in particular firms, with the top quintile of discriminating
firms responsible for 57% of contacts lost to gender discrimination.
    While our main focus is on race and gender, we also assess the extent of discrimina-
tion on several other dimensions. We find a modest contact penalty of 0.6 percentage
points for applicants listing high school graduation dates implying an age over 40. This
gap also varies across employers, with a cross-firm standard deviation of 1.1 percentage
points. In contrast to race, gender, and age, we find no significant penalty for member-
ship in a Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, or Queer (LGBTQ) club or evidence of
heterogeneity in that penalty across firms. Likewise, we find insignificant effects of listing
gender-neutral pronouns next to an applicant's name, though estimates for LGBTQ clubs
and gender-neutral pronouns are less precise than estimates for race, gender, and age.
    Having shown that discrimination varies substantially across employers, we assess
whether this variation is predicted by geography, industry, and other establishment and
firm characteristics. Surprisingly, geographic variation in race, gender, and age discrimi-
nation is extremely muted. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that mean contact gaps

                                              3
for gender and age are equal across all 50 states, and we find only marginally significant
evidence against this null for racial contact gaps. In contrast, we estimate that 2-digit
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes explain roughly half of firm-level variation
in contact gaps for both race and gender. Race and gender contact gaps also vary signif-
icantly by job title but this variation is indistinguishable from noise conditional on firm
fixed effects. Contact gaps exhibit limited variation across third party intermediaries that
power firms' hiring websites.
    Both racial and gender contact gaps are estimated to be larger at jobs requiring social
interaction. Racial contact gaps are larger at establishments in geographic areas with
more prejudice as measured by Implicit Association Tests (IATs) and internet searches
for racial epithets. In line with the predictions of Becker (1957), racial contact gaps are
smaller at more profitable firms. Contact gaps also tend to be smaller among federal con-
tractors. Finally, we find that firms with more centralized points of contact (i.e., callbacks
originating from the same phone numbers) have much smaller contact gaps, suggesting
that human resources practices may be an important mediator of discrimination.
    The finding of significant employer heterogeneity in discrimination motivates an in-
vestigation of which particular organizations are likely violating the Civil Rights Act.
Following Efron (2016), we use non-parametric estimates of the cross-firm distribution of
discrimination to form EB posterior mean estimates of the contact gap at each individual
firm. Forty-six of the 108 firms in our sample have posterior mean racial contact gaps in
excess of 2 percentage points. These firms are disproportionately clustered in customer
facing sectors including the auto services and sales sector and certain forms of retail. We
find large posterior mean contact gaps favoring women at apparel stores but favoring men
in the wholesale durable sector.
    While posterior means provide best predictions of the extent of discrimination at
each firm, it is also of interest to provide an assessment of which companies are likely
to be discriminating at all. Applying large-scale multiple testing techniques introduced
by Storey (2002, 2003), we find that 23 of the firms in our study discriminate against
Black applicants with at least 95% posterior certainty (i.e., controlling false discovery
rates to no more than 5%). This implies that at least 22 of these 23 individual firms
should be expected to have non-zero racial contact gaps. These discriminating firms
are over-represented in the auto sector, in general merchandising, and among eating and
drinking establishments. In contrast, we find only one firm that can be reliably labeled as
discriminating against men, and are unable to reliably identify any firms that discriminate
against women while limiting false discovery rates to 5%. Our sharper detection power
for racial discrimination stems from the fact that a larger share of firms in the population
are estimated to discriminate based upon race than upon gender, increasing the prior
probability of discrimination used to draw inferences about the conduct of individual
firms. The single firm identified as discriminating against men is an apparel retailer that

                                              4
also discriminates against Black applicants with high posterior certainty.
     In principle, firm-wide contact gaps may be driven by a small share of heavily biased
jobs. We develop a simple lower bound on the prevalence of job-level discrimination
based on split-sample estimates of the job-level variance of contact gaps. At least 7%
of all jobs in our experiment discriminate against distinctively Black names. Among the
23 firms we can reliably label as engaged in racial discrimination, at least 20% of the
jobs discriminate against Black names. At the modal firm in this group, this bound
implies racial discrimination took place in at least 25 distinct U.S. counties out of the
125 sampled in our experiment, indicating a widespread national pattern.
     We conclude with an economic analysis of optimal auditing strategies meant to mimic
the objectives and constraints of regulatory authorities such as the EEOC. A hypothetical
auditor seeks to investigate firms with large racial contact gaps. Informational constraints
limit the expected yield on audits relative to the first-best investigation rule. We show
that auditing strategies controlling the false discovery rate can be justified by a scenario in
which the auditor seeks to avoid investigations of non-discriminators and faces ambiguity
regarding the share of discriminatory firms in the population. In practice, we find that
making decisions based upon false discovery rates rather than posterior means yields
little reduction in the expected yield on investigations. The set of 23 firms that we
can reliably classify as discriminating against Black names are estimated to account for
40% of lost contacts to Black applicants in our experiment. Our findings demonstrate
that it is possible to identify individual firms responsible for a substantial share of racial
discrimination while maintaining a tight limit on the expected number of false positives
encountered.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on em-
ployment discrimination and the law. Section 3 details the experimental design, Section
4 describes the data, and Section 5 reports basic experimental impacts. Section 6 docu-
ments variation in discrimination across firms, while Section 7 examines variation across
other groupings of jobs. Section 8 investigates relationships between discrimination and
observed employer characteristics. Section 9 reports estimates of the full distribution
of discrimination across firms. Section 10 uses this distribution to construct posterior
estimates for individual firms and assesses the conclusions that can be drawn about dis-
crimination by specific employers. Section 11 considers the consequences of our findings
for regulatory auditing decisions. Finally, Section 12 concludes with a discussion of im-
plications for anti-discrimination policy and directions for future research.


2     Policy Background
Much of the economics literature has focused on separating the contributions of taste-
based and statistical discrimination to observed disparities, an exercise that requires

                                              5
inferring the extent to which employer conduct is motivated by beliefs regarding the
productivity of different groups of workers (Becker, 1957, 1993; Aigner and Cain, 1977;
Charles and Guryan, 2008; Bohren et al., 2019). Recent empirical and methodological
work looks at group differences in the treatment of equally-productive individuals in
bail decisions, motor vehicle searches, probation revocations, and other settings (Arnold,
Dobbie and Yang, 2018; Arnold, Dobbie and Hull, 2020; Canay, Mogstad and Mountjoy,
2020; Rose, 2020; Feigenberg and Miller, 2021; Hull, 2021). In the employment context, it
is widely understood that both taste-based and statistical discrimination typically involve
disparate treatment of individuals according to legally-protected characteristics, which is
prohibited by the Civil Rights Act.1
    This paper is concerned with measuring such illegal disparate treatment, however mo-
tivated. The correspondence experiment we study was designed to manipulate employer
perceptions of protected characteristics. Although the legal standing of organizations
eliciting evidence of discrimination via "testing" remains unresolved (U.S. EEOC, 1996),
an employer whose decision to contact a job applicant is influenced by the applicant's per-
ceived race or sex has nonetheless engaged in disparate treatment and nominally violated
the provisions of the Civil Right Act.2
    Our use of the word "systemic" is motivated by the legal definition of this term as
a "pattern or practice" of discrimination (U.S. EEOC, 2006b; Kim, 2015). The EEOC's
systemic cases may concern either patterns of disparate treatment on protected character-
istics or practices that target non-protected characteristics but nonetheless have disparate
impacts on protected groups.3 Key to either sort of case is evidence that the pattern or
practice is widespread, affecting a company's hiring behavior at multiple locations. While
our analysis will not reveal the specific polices or practices giving rise to systemic discrim-
ination, we will be able to assess whether a nationwide pattern of disparate treatment is
present at particular companies. This information may be of use both to the EEOC and
to local organizations interested in promoting fair hiring practices.4 Evidence of patterns
   1
      Federal guidelines clearly state that "an employer may not base hiring decisions on stereotypes and
assumptions about a person's race, color, religion, sex (including gender identity, sexual orientation, and
pregnancy), national origin, age (40 or older), disability or genetic information" (see https://www.ee
oc.gov/prohibited-employment-policiespractices).
    2
      See U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Target Corp 460 F.3d 946 (7th Cir. 2006),
Onwuachi-Willig and Barnes (2005), and footnote 27 of Fryer Jr and Levitt (2004) for discussion of the
legal ramifications of handling fictitious applications based upon perceptions regarding race. In cases
where no aggrieved individual has claimed standing, the EEOC can file a commissioner's charge alleging
Title VII violations or launch a directed investigation into violations of either the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act or the Equal Pay Act. In fiscal years 2016-2019, the EEOC averaged 13 commissioner's
charges and 138 directed investigations per year.
    3
      For instance, in 2019, the EEOC brought a systemic lawsuit against Schuster trucking for subjecting
job applicants to a physical abilities test that was alleged to have a disparate impact on women (U.S.
EEOC, 2019). However another 2019 case, against Sactacular Holdings LLC, an adult retail chain,
alleged disparate treatment after a male job applicant was told by employees at two separate stores that
the company does not consider men for sales associate positions (U.S. EEOC, 2020).
    4
      For example, the New York City Commission on Human Rights has a mandate to test for discrimi-


                                                    6
of disparate treatment in hiring by federal contractors is especially pertinent to the Office
of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP), which has broad discretion to audit
contractors for compliance with executive orders prohibiting employment discrimination.
    In deciding whether to launch investigations or audits, federal agencies often rely on
analyses of employment data. For instance, the "inexorable zero" standard of Justice
O'Connor, which refers to the complete absence of a group from a company's employees,
has been taken as an indicator of discrimination, despite the difficulties of ascertaining
whether qualified applicants were actually passed over by the firm (Huang, 2004).5 In
contrast, the correspondence experiment we study directly manipulated employer per-
ceptions, permitting inferences to be drawn regarding average causal effects of protected
characteristics on employer conduct. Examining effects across a large set of establish-
ments tests for a systemic pattern of discrimination. While such patterns may be driven
by official hiring practices, they may also reflect implicit biases on the part of employees
with hiring authority. In either case, documentation of such nationwide patterns can aid
efforts to ensure compliance with the law.


3     Experimental Design
Our study aims to measure the distribution of discrimination across the largest employers
in the U.S. Figure 1 summarizes the sampling frame for the experiment. We began
with the Fortune 500, splitting holding companies into brands with separate proprietary
hiring websites.6 Data from InfoGroup and Burning Glass were used to determine the
geographic distribution of establishments and vacancies, and each company's hiring portal
was investigated for compatibility with our auditing methods. We determined that 108
companies (i.e., separate brands with distinct hiring websites and systems) had both
enough geographic variation and routinely posted enough entry-level jobs on an easily-
accessible portal to satisfy our sampling criteria.
    We sampled 125 entry-level job vacancies for each employer, each corresponding to an
establishment in a different U.S. county. Sampling was organized in a series of 5 waves,
with a target of 25 jobs sampled for each firm in each wave. As shown in Figure 1, 72
of the 108 firms were sampled in all waves; some firms were excluded from the first wave
nation in housing and labor markets and has assisted in the staging of matched-pairs audits of bias by
landlords (Fang, Guess and Humphreys, 2019) and employers (Pager, Bonikowski and Western, 2009).
   5
     The EEOC compliance manual references this standard in its guidelines for evaluating systemic
discrimination: "a pattern or practice would be established if, despite the fact that Blacks made up 20
percent of a company's applicants for manufacturing jobs and 22 percent of the available manufacturing
workers, not one of the 87 jobs filled during a six year period went to a Black applicant" (U.S. EEOC,
2006a). As the Supreme Court notes in Teamsters v. United States (1977) "the proof of the pattern or
practice supports an inference that any particular employment decision, during the period in which the
discriminatory policy was in force, was made in pursuit of that policy."
   6
     10 out of 108 firms in the final sample were subsidiaries of Fortune 500 firms.



                                                  7
due to an interruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, while others were excluded in
later waves due to new technological barriers in their job portals. We randomly ordered
firms at the beginning of each wave and moved sequentially through the list, sampling
the most recent job posting in a new county for each firm and randomizing ties. Each
sampled job received 8 job applications with randomized characteristics. This sampling
protocol yields a sample size for each employer of 1,000 applications, spread across the
125 jobs, for a total target of approximately 100,000 applications.
    Applications were sent to each job in pairs. To minimize the chances of detection
by employers, we allowed a gap of 1-2 days between consecutive pairs.7 Though some
vacancies closed while applications were still being sent, 87% of sampled jobs received the
full 8 applications and 99% of jobs received at least two. As a result of vacancy closures
and the exclusion of some firms from some waves, our final sample size amounted to
roughly 84,000 applications.
    As in many previous experiments measuring discrimination (Bertrand and Duflo,
2017), we signal race using racially-distinctive names. Our database of distinctive first
names starts with those used by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), who used 9 unique
names for each race and gender group, and supplements this list with 10 additional names
per group from a database of speeding tickets issued in North Carolina between 2006 and
2018. We classified a name as racially distinctive if more than 90 percent of individuals
with that name are of a particular race, and selected the most common distinctive Black
and white names for those born between 1974 and 1979. We assembled distinctive last
names from the 2010 U.S. Census, selecting names with high race-specific shares among
those that occur at least 10,000 times nationally.8 Together with our database of first
names, this list generates about 500 unique full names for each race and gender category.
One application within each pair is randomly assigned a distinctively white name while
the other is randomly assigned a distinctively Black name. We draw names without
replacement to ensure that no two applications to the same firm shared a name.
    Our experiment also randomly assigns other legally-protected applicant characteris-
tics. Sex is conveyed by applicant names. Fifty-percent of our names are distinctively
female, and the rest are distinctively male. Assignment of sex is not stratified; therefore,
each job receives between zero and eight female applications. Applicants are randomly
assigned a date of birth implying an age between 22 and 58 years old, with ages uni-
formly distributed over this range. Because the Age Discrimination Act of 1967 prohibits
discrimination against individuals aged 40 or older, we focus on differences between ap-
   7
     Pairs were sent every other day during wave 1, when most applications were submitted by human
research assistants, to manage workloads. Beginning in wave 2, when the majority of applications
were submitted automatically by software we developed, one pair was sent per day. Some pairs were
occasionally sent with longer time lags due to workload or technological constraints, but overall 94% of
applications were sent within 8 days of the first.
   8
     All names used are presented in Appendix B along with additional details on experimental design.



                                                   8
plicants over and under 40.
    In Bostock v. Clayton County, Georgia (2020), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that
discrimination based upon sexual orientation or gender identity violates Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act. We began measuring discrimination on these dimensions starting in
wave 2 of the experiment. Sexual orientation is conveyed by randomly assigning 10% of
applicants to list LGBTQ high school clubs on their resumes. To distinguish between
sexual orientation and general effects of clubs we randomly assign an additional 10%
of applicants to be members of political or academic clubs. We convey gender identity
by randomly assigning pronouns to 10% of resumes. Half of resumes with pronouns
are assigned gender-typical pronouns (he/him for applicants with male names, she/her
for applicants with female names), and the other half receive gender-neutral pronouns
(they/them). Pronouns are listed on applicants' PDF resumes below their names.
    Each fictitious applicant receives a large set of additional characteristics. All appli-
cants graduated from high school in the year of their 18th birthday, with school names
drawn randomly from a set of public high schools near the target job. Half of applicants
receive associate degrees. Work histories consist of two or three jobs with nearby employ-
ers providing relevant experience. For example, retail job applicants have employment
experience at local restaurants and retailers. In addition to populating fields in the em-
ployer's online job portal, we also upload a formatted PDF resume where possible, with
resume templates and formatting drawn from a database of possible layouts. Some ex-
ample resumes are provided in Appendix Figure A1. For employers requiring personality
tests or other assessments, we pre-populate all answers to the assessments and randomly
assign responses subject to the constraint that the applicant must pass the assessment.
Random assignment of all supplementary characteristics takes place automatically, and
these characteristics are independent of legally protected attributes and each other.
    Our primary outcome is whether an employer attempted to contact the fictitious
applicant. Phone numbers and e-mail addresses assigned to the fictitious applicants
were monitored to determine when employers reached out for an interview. Contact
information was assigned to ensure that no two applicants to the same firm shared an e-
mail address or phone number. Our analysis focuses on whether the employer attempted
to contact an applicant by any method within 30 days of applying. We also report
results for other follow-up windows and specific contact types. Further details on the
experimental design are available in our registered pre-analysis plan and in Appendix B.9
  9
     The pre-analysis plan is stored in the AEA RCT registry with number AEARCTR-0004739. The
full pre-analysis plan will not be available for public download until the conclusion of the study.




                                                9
4    Summary Statistics
Table 1 provides summary statistics on two analysis samples. The baseline sample in-
cludes all 108 firms that were included in at least one wave. As a robustness exercise, we
also consider a second sample that restricts to the 72 firms sampled in all waves of the
experiment.
    In both samples, roughly half of the applications were assigned distinctively Black
names. The slight discrepancy between white and Black sample sizes arises because
job vacancies were occasionally taken offline before the second application of a race-
balanced pair could be submitted. As expected, other resume characteristics are balanced
across Black and white applications. About half of applications in each group are female.
Slightly more than half of applications have high school graduation dates implying ages
over 40, a consequence of the fact that the set of applicant birth years was not updated
between waves 1 and 2. In subsequent waves we updated birth years to maintain a mean
age of 40. By chance, white resumes are slightly less likely than Black resumes to list an
associate degree.
    On average, roughly 24% of applications were contacted by firms within 30 days.
Most of these contact attempts arrived within 14 days. While the most common form
of contact was voicemail, a substantial minority of applications were contacted via email
or text message. In what follows we pool these forms of contact together and focus on
effects of protected characteristics on the probability of any contact.


5    Average Contact Gaps
Employers are significantly less likely to contact applicants with distinctively Black
names. The bottom panel of Table 1 reveals that the contact rate in the 30 days following
an application is 2.1 percentage points (9%) higher for white applications than for Black
applications in the pooled sample. The corresponding difference in the balanced sample is
2.2 percentage points (again 9%). These effects are driven primarily by gaps in the prob-
ability of contact by voicemail. Appendix Figure A2 shows race-specific Kaplan-Meier
estimates of contact rates and hazards by days since an application was sent. Thirty days
after submission, Black and white contact rates differ by 2 percentage points and contact
hazards have equalized across groups. We therefore focus on 30-day contact rates for the
remainder of the analysis.
    Parent income, education, and other features of family background vary across dis-
tinctive names within race and gender groups (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004; Fryer Jr
and Levitt, 2004; Gaddis, 2017). Appendix Figure A3 assesses whether employers respond
to this variation by estimating separate contact rates for each first name. We fail to reject
that first names have no causal effect on contact probabilities within each race-by-sex cat-


                                             10
egory (p  0.24). A corresponding analysis of last names, depicted in Appendix Figure
A4, also fails to reject the absence of a causal effect of names on contact rates within each
race category (p  0.13). These findings suggest that the primary effect of distinctive
names is to convey race and gender to the employer.
    While the overall contact rate fluctuated during the course of our study, Black ap-
plicants faced a consistent contact penalty relative to white applicants. Figure 2 shows
monthly Black and white contact rates (left axis) along with the percentage gap between
the rates (right axis). Contact rates fell between October 2019 and February 2020 as
hiring for seasonal jobs concluded. We paused the experiment from March to August
2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Contact rates were variable in the months after
the experiment resumed, and sharply elevated in the final wave of our study as many
states eased restrictions in the wake of widespread vaccine distribution. The measured
contact rate for white applicants exceeded that for Black applicants in 12 of 13 months of
the study, and we cannot reject at the 5% level that either the level or percentage contact
gaps between white and Black applicants were constant across the study's five waves (or
13 months).
    Our finding of a contact penalty for Black applicants corroborates a large body of
evidence from resume correspondence studies reviewed in Bertrand and Duflo (2017).
The 9% proportional contact gap in our study is somewhat smaller than corresponding
estimates from previous work. For example, a meta-analysis by Quillian et al. (2017) con-
cludes that white applicants typically receive 36% more callbacks than Black applicants
in recent U.S. correspondence experiments. One potential explanation for the smaller
proportional effect in our study is that larger firms exhibit less severe discrimination,
as reported in a Canadian correspondence experiment described in Banerjee, Reitz and
Oreopoulos (2018). On the other hand, the 2.1 percentage point average contact gap
between white and Black applicants in our experiment aligns closely with the findings of
other recent studies. For example, Nunley et al. (2015) report an average contact gap
between white and Black applicants of 2.6 percentage points (17% of the Black mean),
while Agan and Starr (2018) report a contact gap of 2.4 percentage points (23% of the
Black mean). The lower proportional gap in our experiment is a consequence of the higher
overall contact rate for our applications combined with a similar level gap in contact rates.
    Our study randomized multiple protected applicant characteristics in addition to race.
To summarize the overall effects of all randomized characteristics, Table 2 reports esti-
mates of simple models of employer contact. Column (1) shows the results of fitting a
linear probability model for employer contact as a function of race, sex, age, club mem-
bership, and pronouns, controlling for associate degrees, region indicators, and wave indi-
cators. Consistent with the mean differences in Table 1, Black applications are contacted
2.1 percentage points less often than whites, a highly statistically significant difference
(p < 10-32 ). The corresponding estimate from a logit specification implies that Black

                                             11
applications face roughly 12% lower odds of a callback.
    In contrast to the effect of race, the estimated average effect of sex is small and
statistically insignificant. Table 2 shows that the difference in contact rates for male
and female applicants is almost exactly zero, and we can reject average contact gaps of
roughly 0.6 percentage points or larger in absolute value. This result is consistent with
previous studies showing mixed or zero average impacts of sex on employer callbacks in
the U.S. and elsewhere (Nunley et al., 2015; Baert, 2018).
    We find a modest contact penalty for older applicants. The third row in Table 2 reports
a statistically significant gap of 0.6 percentage points between contact rates for applicants
under and over age 40. The estimate for the balanced sample is similar in magnitude
but statistically insignificant. As shown in Appendix Figure A5, the probability of an
employer contact declines modestly but monotonically with age, and we can reject the
hypothesis that callback rates are constant across quintiles of applicant age at marginal
significance levels (p = 0.052). Our findings for age confirm the result of Neumark, Burn
and Button (2018) that age discrimination is present in the U.S. labor market, though
the magnitude of age effects is somewhat smaller in our experiment.
    We find limited evidence of effects of sexual orientation and gender identity, though we
have less statistical precision to detect effects of these attributes than for race, gender, and
age. The estimated effect of LGBTQ clubs is small and statistically insignificant in both
the full and balanced samples. Gender-typical pronouns are associated with a marginally
significant contact penalty of 1.3 percentage points, but this estimate is not significant in
the balanced sample. Gender-neutral pronouns are associated with a comparably sized
penalty that is statistically insignificant in the full sample but marginally significant
in the balanced sample. Standard errors for LGBTQ clubs and pronouns are roughly
three times as large as for race, a consequence of the fact that fewer than 10 percent of
resumes were assigned these characteristics. We can, however, reject the 4.2 percentage
point effect of LGBTQ clubs reported by Tilcsik (2011) for an earlier sample of jobs
and employers. We also find no effect of listing an associate degree, a null result that is
consistent with the findings of Deming et al. (2016) for non-selective jobs.
    A large literature emphasizes the "intersectionality" of race and gender discrimina-
tion (Crenshaw, 1989, 1990). Table 3 investigates such interactions by comparing the
effects of resume characteristics for white and Black applicants. Female names generate
a marginally significant increase in contact rates for white applicants and a marginally
significant decrease for Black applicants. The difference between these effects is a sta-
tistically significant 1.4 percentage points, implying that the effect of a female name is
more positive for whites (or, equivalently, that the penalty for a Black name is larger for
women). We also find evidence of an interaction between race and LGBTQ club status:
while white applicants face a contact penalty of 1.6 percentage points for listing mem-
bership in an LGBTQ club, Black applicants receive a small, statistically insignificant,

                                              12
contact bonus. This difference is large enough to eliminate the contact penalty for Black
names among applications listing LGBTQ club membership. While we find insignificant
differences in effects for several other attributes, a joint test rejects the null hypothesis
of no interaction effects across all dimensions in Table 3 (p = 0.035), suggesting that the
gender and LGBTQ interactions are not an artifact of statistical noise.


6     Variation in Discrimination Across Firms
A central objective of our study is to measure heterogeneity across firms in the effects
of protected characteristics on contact rates. If all firms have the same expected contact
gap, a job seeker will have little scope to evade discrimination by redirecting their search
towards less biased employers. Likewise, regulators at the EEOC or OFCCP would
have little to learn from the parent company of an establishment about whether that
establishment is likely engaged in discrimination.
    In what follows, we use a variety of methods to document that racial and gender con-
tact gaps vary widely across employers and are spatially and temporally stable, suggesting
that the organizational structure of employment is in fact highly informative about dis-
crimination at particular establishments. Before doing so, however, we first clarify the
statistical framework used to analyze and interpret the experimental results.


6.1    Statistical framework
Denote the realized contact gap at job j  {1, ..., Jf } of firm f by   ^ f j . For most of
our analysis ^ f j measures the difference between white and Black contact rates at job j ,
but the same construction is used to study other binary protected characteristics such as
gender. Denote by f the average causal effect of race on contact rates at jobs within firm
            ^f = 1      Jf ^
f , and let        Jf   j =1 f j be the corresponding experimental estimate given by the
white/Black difference in mean contact rates at this firm. As explained in Appendix D,
the population contact gap f measures the expected difference in contact rates between
white and Black resumes in our experiment when sent to an average job posted by firm f .
Loosely speaking, if we had repeated our experiment many times, sampling many more
jobs from the same firms, each estimated firm gap   ^ f would tend towards its population
gap f .
    We are interested in characterizing the distribution of f in the finite population
of 108 firms in the experiment. Below, we report simple tests for whether f equals
a constant  for all firms, as well as tests for whether f  0 (or  0) for all firms,
implying, for example, that all firms weakly favor white applicants. Having established
the direction of discrimination, a key measure of heterogeneity in discrimination will be



                                             13
the variance of f . This target parameter is defined as

                          F                           F             2
                  1                             1
                =               2
                                f     -                     f
                  F      f =1
                                                F    f =1
                                                 F                                     F       f -1
                        F -1              1                        2
                  =                                    2
                                                       f     -                                         f k          ,
                          F               F     f =1
                                                               F (F - 1)              f =2 k=1


where F = 108 is the total number of firms.
   The fundamental difficulty in estimating  is that estimation error leads the contact
gap estimates  ^ f to be more variable across firms than their population counterparts f .
                                                             2
Formally, the "plug-in" squared contact gap estimate    ^ f is an upward-biased estimate
of 2                              ^
     f . The standard error sf of f can be used to correct this bias. In particular, a
bias-corrected estimator of  can be written
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                      F           F     2       F
                                                                      
            ^ =     F -  1      1         ^f - 1     ^k -    1      2
                                                                      
                                                                   sf
                      F       F - 1 f =1       F k=1        F f =1    
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                            plug-in                                    correction
                                          F                                                        F    f -1
                      F -1        1                 ^ 2 - s2 -                   2                             ^ f^k
              =                                       f    f                                                            .
                        F         F      f =1
                                                                             F (F - 1)         f =2 k=1


Variants of this estimator have been applied to estimate effect variation in several litera-
tures (e.g., Krueger and Summers, 1998; Aaronson et al., 2007), though typically without
                           -1
the adjustment factor of FF   .
   Our analysis employs the finite-sample unbiased (squared) standard error

                                                              Jf
                                         1                              ^ fj - ^f
                                                                                           2
                             s2
                              f   =                                                            .
                                    Jf (Jf - 1)              j =1


With this choice of sf , ^ becomes an unbiased leave out variance component estimator of
the sort proposed by Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020). In particular, it can be shown
that
                                                                        Jf    j -1
                          ^2                     2                                   ^ fj^f ,
                           f    -   s2
                                     f    =                                          
                                            Jf (Jf - 1)               j =2    =1


which reveals that bias correcting with s2                               2
                                           f generates an estimate of f based entirely on
cross-products of job-level gaps. In this sense, the bias-corrected variance can be thought
of as an average covariance between jobs from the same firm, which captures the common


                                                            14
firm component of discrimination.
    Generalizing this idea, we also report a "cross-wave" estimator measuring the average
covariance between firm-by-wave contact gaps     ^ f t and ^ f t for all pairs (t = t ) of waves.
Because the noise in each wave's estimated contact gap is independent of the noise in each
other wave, this "cross-wave" covariance estimator will also yield an unbiased estimate of
 if contact gaps are stable across time. Likewise, we report a cross-state estimator that
gives the average covariance between firm-by-state contact gaps       ^ f s and ^ f s for all pairs
(s = s ) of U.S. states in which we sampled jobs from firm f . The ratio of the cross-wave
estimator to the bias-corrected estimator provides a measure of the temporal persistence
of the firm component of discrimination, while the ratio of the cross-state estimator to
the bias-corrected estimator provides a measure of the geographic stability of the firm
component.


6.2     Graphical evidence of firm components
We begin with a simple graphic test for the presence and stability of firm-level variance
components. As above, let      ^ f t be the estimated effect of race (or another binary protected
characteristic) on contact gaps at firm f of jobs sampled in wave t. Likewise, define               ^ f (t)
as the estimated effect of the protected characteristic for all jobs at firm f except those
sampled in wave t. Both objects estimate f , but leaving out wave t ensures that
estimation errors in the latter are uncorrelated with errors in the former.
    Figure 3 compares     ^ f t to its leave-wave-out mean             ^ f (t) . To construct the figure,
averages were taken of  ^ f t within vingtile of     ^ f (t) . If there were no variation in population
contact gaps across firms these conditional means would all be centered around zero. In
contrast, if there exists substantial variation in population contact gaps and there were
no sampling error in our experiment, then these points would lie along the dashed 45
degree line. In practice, because        ^ f (t) measures f with error, the attenuated slope of
this relationship gives a measure of the signal-to-noise ratio in                ^ f (t) .
    The strong positive relationship between firm-specific contact gaps across waves im-
plies a persistent firm component to discrimination. The points in panel (a) of Figure
3 are clustered along a line with slope 0.36, suggesting that 36% of the variation in the
leave-wave-out mean of racial contact gaps is attributable to firm effects. The fact that
the slope is statistically distinguishable from zero indicates that temporally persistent
firm variation is detectable in our data.
    Panel (b) finds a greater slope for gender contact gaps, suggesting that 46% of the
variation in the leave-wave-out mean of gender contact gaps is attributable to firm effects.
Given that assignment of sex was not stratified in our experiment, we expect the error
variance of estimated gender contact gaps to be greater than that of racial contact gaps.
Consequently, the greater reliability of the estimated gender contact gaps suggests that


                                                    15
the population gender gaps are more variable than the population racial contact gaps
across firms. Panel (c) finds an insignificant slope for age contact gaps.
    Finally, panel (d) of Figure 3 plots the relationship between racial contact gaps and
leave-wave-out mean gender contact gaps. The slope of the relationship is indistinguish-
able from zero, suggesting that firms with contact gaps favoring women are no more
or less likely to exhibit discrimination against Black applicants. Overall, the strongly
significant cross-wave correlations depicted here indicate that temporally persistent firm-
specific contact gaps are present for both race and gender.


6.3    Formal tests of firm components
To test formally for the significance of firm-level contact gap variation, we report a classic
Pearson 2 test of the null hypothesis that all of the population contact gaps are equal
across firms. The p-values derived from this test would be exact if each firm's sample con-
tact gap were normally distributed and centered around its population gap with variance
equal to its squared standard error s2  f.
    We are also interested in whether gaps are non-negative or non-positive for all firms,
which implies a common direction of discrimination. A simple but conservative test of the
null hypothesis that contact gaps are weakly positive for all firms would be to compare
the minimum z -score (   ^ f /sf ) across firms to the distribution of the minimum of 108
standard normal random variables. Because this approach would be very conservative,
we instead employ the high-dimensional moment inequality testing procedure of Bai,
Santos and Shaikh (2021), which drops firms with strongly positive z -scores in order to
improve power while still asymptotically controlling size.
    The first two columns of Table 4 report the results of these tests. Column (1) shows
that the null hypothesis that racial contact gaps are equal across firms is decisively re-
jected by the 2 test. Column (2) reveals that the null hypothesis that no firms discrim-
inate against white applicants cannot be rejected and yields a p-value of 1.00, while the
null that no firms discriminate against Black applicants is decisively rejected (p < 0.01).
The combination of these results indicates that all firms weakly favor white applicants,
but some discriminate against Black applicants more than others.
    Corresponding estimates for gender reveal that the overall zero effect of perceived sex
masks a significant firm component to gender discrimination. As can be seen in the second
row of Table 4, the 2 test decisively rejects that gender contact gaps are equal across
firms. In conjunction with our earlier finding of no average effect of gender, this result
strongly suggests the presence of systemic discrimination against men at some firms and
against women at others. Consistent with this idea, column (2) shows that we can reject
both the null hypothesis of no firms discriminating against men and the null hypothesis of
no firms discriminating against women at conventional levels (p  0.05). These findings


                                             16
extend and corroborate recent work by Kline and Walters (2021) and Hangartner, Kopp
and Siegenthaler (2021) who conclude that gender discrimination varies bi-directionally
across jobs in Mexico and Switzerland, respectively.
    The third row of Table 4 demonstrates that age discrimination also varies across firms,
though less strongly than for race and gender. Column (1) shows that the 2 test rejects
the null hypothesis of constant age discrimination across firms (p = 0.011). As shown
in column (2), we cannot reject the hypothesis that all employers weakly favor younger
applicants, but the null hypothesis that no firms discriminate against older applicants is
rejected at conventional levels (p = 0.03).


6.4    Variance components estimates
The remaining columns of Table 4 report estimates of the standard deviation of firm-
level contact gaps for race, gender, and age, calculated as the square root of the unbiased
variance estimate   ^. The estimates for racial contact gaps reported in the first row imply
substantial dispersion in discrimination across firms. As shown in column (3), the bias-
corrected estimator yields a precisely-estimated standard deviation of racial contact gaps
of 1.9 percentage points. The magnitude of this gap is only slightly smaller than the mean
effect of 2.1 percentage points reported in Table 2. Similarly, the cross-wave and cross-
state estimators yield estimated standard deviations of 1.6 and 1.8 percentage points,
respectively. The similarity of the bias-corrected, cross-wave, and cross-state estimates
imply that the firm component of racial discrimination is both temporally and spatially
stable.
    Estimates for gender in the second row of Table 4 also show large and stable firm-level
discrimination components. The bias-corrected estimator reported in column (3) yields a
standard deviation of gender contact gaps of 2.7 percentage points. The cross-wave and
cross-state estimators produce standard deviations of 2.9 and 2.7 percentage points, again
signaling temporal and spatial stability. Consistent with the weaker evidence for firm-
level variation in age discrimination reported above, the cross-firm standard deviation in
the effect of age over 40 equal is smaller and equal to 1.0 percentage points. The cross-
wave and cross-state estimators produce positive but small estimated firm components,
suggesting modest spatial and temporal persistence in age effects.
    Appendix Table A2 reports corresponding evidence on firm variation in contact gaps
in LGBTQ club membership, same-gender pronouns, and gender-neutral pronouns. Our
study is less powered to detect firm components along these dimensions than for race,
gender, and age. The estimated variance components for the effects of LGBTQ clubs and
pronouns are all statistically insignificant. Appendix Table A1 shows that patterns for
all protected characteristics change little in the sample of firms present in all 5 waves of
the experiment.


                                            17
6.5    Effects on levels vs. proportions
Some of the variation in contact gaps documented in Table 4 may stem from overall
differences in firm contact rates. To assess this possibility, we fit logit, Poisson, and linear
probability models (LPMs) predicting employer contact with an intercept and a Black
indicator, separately by firm. We then apply the bias-corrected estimator to estimate the
variances of intercept and slope parameters across firms for each model. To determine
whether firms with larger contact gaps in levels also exhibit larger proportional gaps, we
report bias-corrected estimates of the correlation between LPM and logit or Poisson race
coefficients, netting out the portion of the correlation due to sampling error. This exercise
omits the five firms with overall contact rates below 3 percent, for which estimates of odds
and ratios are unlikely to be reliable.
    The logit and Poisson estimates establish that our finding of a substantial firm com-
ponent to racial discrimination is not driven by functional form. As shown in columns (4)
and (6) of Table 5, we find large and statistically significant cross-firm variation in logit
and Poisson race coefficients, with estimated standard deviations comparable to the mean
effect of race in each case. Moreover, the bottom row of Table 5 reveals that the logit
and Poisson coefficients are very highly correlated with the LPM contact gap, exhibiting
bias-corrected correlations of 0.89 and 0.81 respectively. This strong correlation implies
that conclusions regarding which firms discriminate most are likely to be very similar
when discrimination is measured in levels, odds ratios, or proportions. For the remainder
of our analysis we focus on levels, which have the advantage of providing a transparent
measure of total contacts lost to discrimination.


7     Alternative Groupings of Jobs
Taken together, the results of the previous section establish substantial variation across
firms in their average contact gaps. In this section, we investigate how the magnitude of
this variation compares to other groupings of jobs.
    Table 6 reports estimates of the dispersion of population contact gaps across several
alternate groupings of jobs, some of which are also groupings of firms. To maximize
comparability with the firm level results reported in Table 4, we adjust for imbalance in
the number of jobs per firm by weighting the job level microdata in inverse proportion
to the size of each job's parent firm. As described in Appendix D, this weighting ensures
that variance components from groupings that nest firms, such as industry or job portal
intermediary, can be given an R2 interpretation. In cases where job groupings that do not
nest firms have explanatory power, we investigate whether these groupings are significant
conditional on firm fixed effects.



                                              18
7.1    State
The first panel of Table 6 reports estimates of the dispersion of population contact gaps
across U.S. states. In contrast to the firm-level results in Table 4, we are unable to reject
the absence of a geographic component to gender or age discrimination at even the 10%
level. While geographic variation in racial discrimination can be distinguished from zero
at the 5% level, the estimated standard deviation of racial contact gaps across states is
only 0.9 percentage points, less than half the size of the firm component reported in Table
4.
     Controlling for firm effects reduces the modest state variation in contact gaps even
further. Table 7 uses the methods of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020) to decompose job-
level contact gaps into components attributable to state and firm fixed effects. For both
race and gender, the job-weighted standard deviations of firm fixed effects are close to the
estimates from Table 4, while the standard deviations of state fixed effects are negligible.
The estimated variance of state gender gap fixed effects is actually negative, suggesting
that this component is very small or zero. To formally test whether the state fixed effects
can be distinguished from noise we employ the high dimensional heteroscedasticity-robust
testing procedure of Anatolyev and Sølvsten (2020), which yields joint p-values of 0.19
and 0.48 for the state race and gender gap fixed effects, respectively. By contrast, the
null hypothesis that the firm fixed effects jointly equal zero is decisively rejected for both
race and gender (p < 0.001). Together, these results establish that the company-level
variation documented in Table 4 is not explained by differences in the spatial distribution
of firms' job postings.


7.2    Industry
In contrast to the results for state, the second row of Table 6 reveals substantial dis-
persion in discrimination across industries. Each firm in the experiment was assigned
a 2-digit SIC code, grouping together industries that only contained a single firm (see
Table 10 for a list). The firm-weighted standard deviation of racial contact gaps across
2-digit industries is 1.4 percentage points, while the corresponding standard deviation of
gender contact gaps is 1.9 percentage points. Age contact gaps are small and statistically
insignificant. Comparing the industry-level and firm-level standard deviations, we con-
clude that industry effects explain roughly (0.141/0.185)2 × 100 = 58% of the variation
in racial contact gaps and (0.186/0.267)2 × 100 = 49% of the variation in gender contact
gaps across firms.




                                             19
7.3     Job titles
The finding that industry is an important predictor of multiple dimensions of discrimi-
nation leads naturally to the question of whether the sorts of jobs posted by firms are
an important predictor of contact gaps. To examine this question, job titles for each
job sampled in the experiment were standardized and merged to O*Net job titles using
methods described in Appendix C. To maximize statistical precision, we map the 131
standardized job titles used in our O*Net merge to 41 SOC-3 codes.10
    The third row of Table 6 reports that the standard deviation of racial contact gaps
across SOC-3 codes is 1.4 percentage points and strongly statistically significant. Gender
contact gaps also vary significantly across SOC-3 codes, though that variability appears
to be somewhat more muted than was the case with industry. Job title heterogeneity in
age contact gaps is small and statistically insignificant.
    To parse the separate influence of job titles and firms, Table 7 reports a decomposition
of job level contact gaps into job title and firm fixed effects. Applying the bias correction
of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020), the estimated standard deviation of firm effects
across jobs is 0.015, while the estimated variance of SOC-3 job title effects is negative.
Using the procedure of Anatolyev and Sølvsten (2020) to test that the job title effects
are jointly zero yields a p-value of 0.33, suggesting that job title effects are not a major
source of variation in firm contact gaps in our experiment.11 The firm effects, by contrast,
are strongly significant (p < 0.001).
    Job titles also explain a limited share of job level variation in contact rate gaps between
male and female names: the estimated standard deviation of firm effects on gender contact
gaps is 0.026, while corresponding SOC-3 job title effects exhibit a standard deviation of
only 0.008. The estimated covariance between firm effects and average job title effects at
the firm is small and negative. As was the case with race, the null hypothesis that firm
effects on gender contact gaps are jointly zero is easily rejected (p < 0.001) while job title
effects are jointly insignificant (p = 0.24).


7.4     Intermediaries
The hiring websites of many large companies are hosted by third party providers of online
application systems. These intermediaries often tout their ability to promote diverse and
inclusive workplaces via automated screening routines (Raghavan et al., 2020). Eighty-
three of the 108 firms in our experiment used an intermediary of some sort. We create
  10
     We suspect little meaningful variation is lost from this aggregation as the bias corrected variance of
racial contact gaps across SOC-3 codes is numerically indistinguishable from the bias-corrected variance
across standardized job titles.
  11
     Recall however that the experiment only sampled entry level jobs that were easy to audit with our
resume technology. It may be that job titles are an important predictor of discrimination in the broader
population of jobs.



                                                    20
11 intermediary categories, one of which corresponds to the 25 firms hosting their own
proprietary job portals and another of which groups together intermediaries employed by
a single firm.
    The bottom panel of Table 6 reports that the standard deviation of racial contact
gaps across these intermediary codes is only 0.006. However, this component is precisely
estimated and easily distinguishable from zero (p < 0.01). Gender gaps may also vary
somewhat across intermediaries, though this component is estimated less precisely (p =
0.05). As with other groupings, we lack the precision necessary to detect variation in
age discrimination across intermediaries. Though intermediaries seem to predict racial
contact gaps, they explain only (0.006/0.185)2 × 100 = 0.1% of the variation across firms.
This finding suggests intermediaries are not an important mediator of employer conduct
towards racially distinctive names.


8     Job, Establishment, and Firm Predictors
We next summarize relationships between discrimination and observed employer char-
acteristics. While such relationships may not capture the causal impacts of employer
attributes on discrimination, they provide a concrete description of jobs, establishments,
and firms where discrimination tends to be more or less severe. Figures 4, 5, and 6 report
coefficients from regressions of contact gaps on job, establishment, and firm attributes,
with results for white/Black gaps in panel (a) and estimates for male/female gaps in panel
(b) of each figure. Details on the measurement of all covariates appear in Appendix C.


8.1    Job characteristics
The analysis of Section 7.3 showed that contact gaps vary substantially across job titles
but that this variation is insignificant conditional on firm effects. While this suggests
that variation in discrimination across job titles is mostly attributable to the identity of
the parent firm, it is nonetheless of interest to ask whether the task content of job titles
predicts contact gaps. Figure 4 projects job-level contact gaps onto measures of the task
content of the job title, constructed based on task requirements in the O*Net following
Deming (2017).
    The contact penalty for Black names is more pronounced among jobs requiring cus-
tomer interaction (panel (a)). This result may be an artifact of customer discrimina-
tion, the empirical importance of which has been debated (Holzer and Ihlanfeldt, 1998;
Leonard, Levine and Giuliano, 2010). Jobs requiring manual skills also exhibit larger
racial contact gaps. Panel (b) shows that jobs requiring social or customer interaction
are more likely to favor women, while jobs requiring manual skills tend to favor men.
This pattern may signal discrimination on the basis of gendered stereotypes regarding


                                            21
characteristically female or male tasks (Goldin, 2014; Dahl, Kotsadam and Rooth, 2021).
Consistent with our earlier analysis of job title effects, including firm fixed effects ren-
ders the relationships between racial discrimination and task content jointly insignificant
(p = 0.20). For gender, the task content variables are marginally significant with firm
fixed effects (p = 0.01), suggesting the presence of some within-firm variation in gender
discrimination across job types.
    Appendix Figure A6 decomposes the relationship between contact gaps and job task
content into within and between industry components. Within industry relationships
between racial contact gaps and task content are weak and statistically insignificant,
indicating that the task content correlations documented in Figure 4 are driven primarily
by between industry variation. Contact gaps are especially strongly related to industry
average customer interaction scores (p = 0.001). In contrast, the relationship between
gender contact gaps and task content is strong both within and between industries. These
results show that discrimination against both Black and male names is more intense in
customer facing sectors.


8.2     Establishment characteristics
Moving to establishment-level predictors, we find that racial discrimination is unrelated
to county- and block-level racial mix. Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows insignificant relation-
ships between job-level racial contact gaps and county and block racial composition, as
measured in the workplace area characteristics (WAC) file derived from the Longitudinal
Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) database.12 It is worth noting, however, that
many jobs in our sample did not specify an exact establishment address, so block-level
data are unavailable for roughly half of establishments. Our finding of no relationship
between discrimination and local racial mix contrasts with the results of Agan and Starr
(2020), who show that neighborhood racial composition predicts contact gaps in a sample
of jobs in New York and New Jersey. This difference may be explained by our focus on
large employers or the broader set of geographies included in our sample.
    Racial discrimination is more severe in geographic locations with more prejudiced
populations, as proxied by measures of implicit bias and racially-charged web searches.
Specifically, counties with average Implicit Association Test (IAT) scores indicating more
bias against Black individuals or women (measured from Harvard's Project Implicit) tend
to have larger racial contact gaps (Figure 5, panel (a), top section). Similarly, contact
gaps are elevated in designated media areas (DMAs) where households submit more
  12
    The WAC block-level data appear to provide an accurate measure of workplace racial composition.
For a small number of the firms in our sample we were able to obtain EEO-1 records documenting the
racial mix of establishments with 50 or more workers. Among the 426 establishments for which we have
these data, the correlation between the EEO-1 and block-level WAC measures of the fraction of Black
workers is 0.79.



                                                22
frequent web searches for racial epithets, a measure of prejudice developed by Stephens-
Davidowitz (2014). Estimates by region show that racial contact gaps are also lower in
Western states.
    We see little relationship between racial contact gaps and other establishment char-
acteristics, including log establishment employment and the fraction of managers listed
in the Reference USA database that are non-white or female. Moreover, the bottom of
panel (a) in Figure 5 shows that including firm fixed effects renders the establishment
characteristics jointly insignificant (p = 0.34). Similar to our analysis of job titles, this
suggests that the bivariate correlations between establishment characteristics and racial
contact gaps are explained by the identity of the parent firm.
    Gender contact gaps are less strongly related to workplace covariates than are racial
gaps. Panel (b) of Figure 5 shows insignificant relationships between gender contact gaps
and local demographics, measures of prejudice, and establishment characteristics. We
do see significant negative relationships between the male/female contact gap and the
block-level share of female workers as well as the share of managers that are female, sug-
gesting that the gender composition of the establishment predicts gender discrimination.
These may be chance findings given the many characteristics examined, however, as the
establishment characteristics are jointly insignificant with or without firm fixed effects
(p  0.35).


8.3     Firm characteristics
Firm characteristics are stronger predictors of discrimination than job or establishment
characteristics. Consistent both with Becker's (1957) classic model of discrimination
and the empirical findings of Pager (2016), we find that more profitable firms are less
biased against Black applicants. Specifically, the top section of panel (a) in Figure 6
reveals a significant negative correlation between firm-level white/Black contact gaps
and firm profits per employee. Racial discrimination is not significantly correlated with
other measures of firm performance, including sales and overall firm ratings submitted
by employees on the Glassdoor (GD) platform.
    Racial contact gaps are smaller at companies that previously faced more regulatory
scrutiny for employment practices. As shown in the middle section of Figure 6, we see less
discrimination against Black applicants at firms with more Department of Labor citations
for wage and hour violations and for those subject to more employment discrimination
cases. Seventy-two of the 108 firms in our experiment are federal contractors.13 Federal
contractors exhibit substantially smaller contact gaps, perhaps reflecting the stronger
regulatory standards to which they are held by the U.S. government.
  13
     The federal contractor status of each firm in our experiment was obtained directly from OFCCP as
part of a FOIA request.



                                                 23
    Measures of firm diversity suggest less racial discrimination at firms with more de-
mographic diversity among individuals with decision-making authority but no factor is
individually significant. These relationships are even weaker in a multivariate regression
controlling for all of the characteristics in Figure 6, indicating that some of the apparent
correlation between diversity and discrimination is explained by other firm characteristics.
    The strongest negative predictor of racial discrimination in our experiment is "call-
back centralization," measured as the number of distinct phone numbers used by the
firm to contact applicants divided by the total number of jobs with at least one call-
back times minus one. As documented in Appendix Table C4 centralization is elevated
among federal contractors (p = 0.038) but we cannot reject that it is unrelated to our
other firm level predictors in a multivariate regression. Since this predictor is calculated
using the outcome data, to avoid any mechanical relationship between job-level callback
propensities and gaps we instrument centralization among one half of each firm's jobs
with centralization computed in the other half, a split sample IV strategy (Angrist and
Krueger, 1995). The negative coefficient estimate suggests that firms at which hiring
responsibility is more centralized are less prone to bias. Overall, the firm-level variables
in Figure 6 are significant predictors of racial discrimination (joint p < 0.001).
    As with establishment characteristics, firm-level characteristics are less correlated with
gender contact gaps than with racial gaps, though we do see some evidence of a relation-
ship between firm diversity and gender discrimination. In particular, contact gaps favor
women at firms with more female managers. Consistent with the results of Bertrand
et al. (2019), we find an insignificant relationship between the gender mix of a company's
corporate board and gender discrimination, though the point estimate suggests a weak
negative correlation between board female share and the male/female gap. Again, the
most predictive covariate is contact centralization, which is significantly lower at firms
that favor male applicants. Though most of the firm predictors of the gender contact gap
are not individually significant, the joint null hypothesis that all coefficients are zero is
decisively rejected (p < 0.001).


9     The Distribution of Discrimination
We now investigate features of the cross-firm distribution of discrimination beyond the
mean and variance by adapting the non-parametric empirical Bayes deconvolution es-
timator of Efron (2016) to our setting. This approach extracts an estimate of the full
distribution of population contact gaps f from the observed distribution of empirical
gaps  ^ f and associated standard errors sf . The deconvolution estimator is motivated
by a hierarchical model for the firm-specific z -scores zf = ^ f /sf and their population
analogues µf = f /sf :



                                             24
                      zf | µf  N (µf , 1),       µf  Gµ ,       for f = 1, . . . , 108.

The normality assumption for zf can be justified by an asymptotic approximation with
a growing number of jobs sampled for each firm. The distribution Gµ of studentized
contact gaps is assumed to belong to an exponential family flexibly parameterized by a
fifth-order spline. This procedure produces penalized maximum likelihood estimates of
the spline parameters, yielding an implied distribution G^ µ of studentized contact gaps
with corresponding density g^µ .
    Assuming that sf is independent of µf , we can then recover the distribution G of
unstudentized contact gaps f . An estimate of the contact gap density g (x) = dG (x)
is obtained at each point x by numerically evaluating the integral

                             g
                             ^ (x) =       exp(-t)^
                                                  gµ (exp(-t)x)^
                                                               gln s (t)dt,

where g ^ln s denotes a kernel estimate of the density of log standard errors ln sf . Appendix
Table A3 assesses the independence assumption by reporting coefficients from regressions
of zf on sf , as well as regressions of the resulting squared residuals on sf . To account
for possible correlated estimation error in sf and zf we also report split-sample versions
of these regressions that randomly partition the data for each firm and compute the
z -scores and standard errors in separate half-samples. These estimates show weak rela-
tionships between standard errors and z -scores for both race and gender, suggesting that
independence is a reasonable approximation.
     Panel (a) of Figure 7 displays the deconvolved density of contact gaps between white
and Black applicants, while panel (b) reports the density of gaps between male and female
applicants. The penalization parameter of the first-step maximum likelihood procedure is
calibrated to yield a variance matching the bias-corrected estimate in Table 4.14 In panel
(a) we restrict the support of the density of racial contact gaps to rule out discrimination
against whites--a shape constraint we showed earlier cannot be rejected by our data.15
For comparison with the estimated densities, the background of Figure 7 also reports
histograms of firm contact gap estimates      ^ f . As a result of the noise in these estimates,
the contact gap distributions implied by the histograms are substantially more dispersed
than the deconvolved distributions.
     The deconvolved density of racial contact gaps reveals a skewed distribution with a
  14
     As Efron and Tibshirani (1996) note in a closely related context, imposing such moment constraints
can provide an attractive balance between local adaptivity and respecting certain global properties of
the density.
  15
     For race, we set the support of Gµ to [0, maxf (zf ) + 0.5]. The support of G is assumed to
be [0, maxf (zf ) maxf (sf )]. For gender, we assume the supports of Gµ and G are [minf (zf ) -
0.5, maxf (zf ) + 0.5] and [minf (zf ) maxf (sf ), maxf (zf ) maxf (sf )], respectively. A deconvolved density
of racial contact gaps that does not impose the positive support restriction is reported in Figure A10.



                                                     25
thick tail of extreme discriminators that favor white applicants by more than 5 percentage
points. This density can be approximated closely by a log-normal distribution with the
same mean and variance. Panel (b) shows that the estimated distribution of population
gender gaps is nearly symmetric around zero and heavily leptokurtic. This distribution
turns out to be even more strongly peaked about its mode than a Laplace distribution
with identical mean and variance, indicating that many companies exhibit very little
gender bias, while a small number of severe discriminators are biased in each direction.
    The distributional estimates for both race and gender imply that a large share of
discrimination is driven by a small group of highly discriminatory firms. Figure 8 sum-
marizes the concentration of discrimination by plotting the Lorenz curve implied by the
deconvolved density g ^ . The Lorenz curve for race measures the share of the total con-
tact gap between white and Black applications in the experiment attributable to firms
below each percentile of f . Since gender discrimination operates in both directions, the
gender curve summarizes concentration of the absolute contact gap |f |.
    The discrimination Lorenz curves are strongly bowed away from the 45 degree line,
implying that discrimination is highly concentrated in particular firms. For example, the
race Lorenz curve shows that firms in the top quintile of discrimination are responsible for
46% of lost contacts to Black applicants in our study, while firms in the bottom quintile
are responsible for less than 5% of lost contacts. The gender curve exhibits even more
inequality, with firms in the top quintile responsible for 57% of aggregate absolute gender
differences in the experiment.
    The area between each Lorenz curve and the 45 degree line gives the Gini coefficient,
which ranges from 0 (perfect equality) to 1 (perfect concentration). For race, the Gini
coefficient is roughly 0.40, which is nearly as large as estimates of the Gini for modern
U.S. income inequality. For gender, the Gini coefficient is 0.54, substantially higher than
Gini income estimates in the U.S. and roughly comparable to Brazil's level of income
inequality.16


10        Firm-Specific Estimates
We have established that firms differ substantially in their average contact rates by race
and gender. We now turn to studying whether it is possible to determine which particular
firms are engaged in discrimination. Our analysis of firm-specific discrimination leverages
empirical Bayes (EB) methods that "borrow strength" from the full set of firms in the
experiment to improve estimates of contact gaps at specific firms.
 16
      See https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI/.




                                             26
10.1     Posterior estimates
The EB framework treats the mixing distributions estimated in Section 9 as priors to
construct posterior distributions for each individual firm. The EB posterior mean for the
contact gap at firm f is given by

                             ¯ f = sf ×     x(zf - x)^gµ (x)dx
                                                               ,
                                             (zf - x)^
                                                     gµ (x)dx

where  denotes the standard normal density. The posterior mean       ¯ f constitutes a
best (i.e., minimum mean squared error) predictor of the population contact gap f
                                                    ^  as background knowledge. For
when treating the estimated population distribution G
comparison, we also compute linear shrinkage estimates obtained by taking a precision-
weighted average of the estimated gap and grand mean:

                                                          108
                            ~ f = wf 
                                     ^ f + (1 - wf ) 1       ^f .
                                                             
                                                    108 f =1

                                    ^            ^
The weights are given by wf = s2       ^ , where  is the square of the between-firm standard
                                    f +
deviation estimate reported in Table 4. Estimators of this sort are used heavily in eco-
nomics (e.g., Kane and Staiger, 2008; Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff, 2014; Angrist et al.,
2017; Chetty and Hendren, 2018; Abaluck et al., 2021) but correspond to EB posterior
means only when G is assumed normal. Even if the prior distribution is not normal,
however,  ~ f retains an interpretation as a best linear predictor of the population gap f
given the estimated gap     ^ f.
    The EB posterior means are highly variable across companies, implying that the ex-
periment contains substantial information about the behavior of individual firms. Figure
A9 compares the distributions of observed contact gaps          ^ f , EB posterior means    ¯f
and linear predictions    ~ f , and the estimated prior distribution G  ^  . The distribution
of posteriors is more compressed than the observed contact gaps        ^ f or the deconvolved
prior distribution G^  , reflecting shrinkage due to the noise in the observed gaps. Unlike
the observed contact gaps, the posterior means are strictly positive, inheriting the non-
negativity constraint placed on the prior distribution. In contrast, roughly 12% of the
linear shrinkage estimates are negative, a consequence of the symmetric implicit normal
prior. The upper tail of the distribution of linear shrinkage estimates is more compressed
than is the distribution of empirical Bayes posterior mean estimates, which reflects that
the roughly log-normal shape of our estimated prior G      ^  exhibits a fat tail of heavy dis-
criminators. The EB posterior accounts for this fat tail by applying less shrinkage to
extreme positive contact gaps. Overall, 46 firms have posterior mean racial contact gaps
greater than the average gap of 2 percentage points in the experiment.
    The posterior mean racial contact gaps vary systematically across industries. Figure 9

                                              27
reports mean values of   ¯ f and  ~ f by 2-digit industry. Racial discrimination is estimated
to be particularly severe among firms in customer-facing sectors. The posterior mean
contact gap averages 4.2 percentage points among the eight firms in the auto dealers
and services sector (SIC 55), 2.9 percentage points for the five firms in the eating and
drinking sector (SIC 58), and 2.7 percentage points for the four apparel firms (SIC 56)
in the experiment. By contrast, the posterior mean racial contact gap averages only
0.9 percentage points among the two engineering services firms (SIC 87), 1 percentage
point among the five banking and credit firms (SICs 60-61), and 1.1 percentage points
among securities brokerages (SIC 62) and freight and transport firms (SICs 42-47) in our
experiment.
     Posterior estimates of gender discrimination also vary across industries. Discrimi-
nation against men appears concentrated in the apparel sector, where distinctively male
names face a severe contact disadvantage of 6.5 percentage points. Discrimination against
women appears most pronounced among the two firms in the wholesale durable sector
(SIC 50) where distinctively female names face an average contact disadvantage of 3.9
percentage points. In line with the strong peak in the prior distribution around zero
reported in panel (b) of Figure 7, however, many sectors are estimated to exhibit trivially
small gender contact gaps. Indeed, the three firms in the business services sector (SIC
73) exhibit an average posterior mean gender contact gap of zero.
     Figure 10 plots coefficients from the projection of industry characteristics (normal-
ized to have standard deviation 1) onto the firm posterior mean contact gaps. Firms
estimated to favor white applicants reside in industries with somewhat lower Black em-
ployment shares and female employees concentrated in non-management positions, but
the relationships are only marginally significant. By contrast, firms estimated to fa-
vor male applicants lie in sectors with sharply lower female employment shares, higher
unexplained gender wage gaps, and Black employees concentrated in non-management
positions. One potential interpretation of these patterns is that job seekers know that
certain sectors (e.g. women's apparel) discriminate on the basis of gender, which allows
them to sort away from biased jobs, mitigating to some extent the burden of discrimina-
tion as in Becker's (1957) classic model. Racial discrimination, by contrast, may be more
difficult to detect based on industry, leading to less pronounced sorting patterns and a
larger burden on job seekers when search is costly (Black, 1995; Bowlus and Eckstein,
2002).


10.2     Guarding against false discoveries
While the posterior mean estimates of the previous section provide a best guess of the
contact gap at each firm, it is possible that some firms with large posterior mean contact
gaps have true population gaps of exactly zero. The question of whether a firm's contact


                                             28
gap is exactly zero has direct legal relevance as the Civil Rights Act prohibits any dis-
crimination based upon protected characteristics. To assess the conclusions that can be
drawn about which employers are discriminating at all, we next consider a related class
of empirical Bayes methods that aims to limit false discoveries.
    For each firm in our experiment, we can assign a p-value p      ^f to the null hypothesis
that the firm's population contact gap is zero by comparing the firm's z -score to the
appropriate tail of a t-distribution.17 Histograms of the resulting p-values for the null
that firm specific contact gaps equal zero appear in Figure 11. Panel (a) of the figure
reports one-tailed tests of the null of no discrimination against Black applicants, while
panel (b) reports two-tailed tests of the null that racial contact gaps are exactly zero.
Panel (c) reports two-tailed tests that gender contact gaps are zero.
    If all firms had racial and gender contact gaps equal to zero, we would expect all
three histograms to be uniformly distributed. In practice, we see substantial bunching
of the p^f at small values. For example, 31 firms (28.7%) have one-tailed p-values for
the null of no racial discrimination below 0.05, while 14 firms (13.0%) have two-tailed p ^f
below 0.05 for the null of no gender discrimination. Applying Tukey's "higher criticism"
criterion (Donoho and Jin, 2004), even the modestly elevated share of small p-values for
gender discrimination indicates a significant departure from uniformity at the 5% level,
                0.13-0.05
as 108 ×         0.05×0.95
                              3.81 > 1.96. Clearly some firms are discriminating, but which
ones?
    Recall that in the deconvolution analysis of the previous section, we assumed the
population contact gaps were drawn from a continuous distribution G . Suppose instead
that a proportion 0  [0, 1] of all firms have population contact gaps exactly equal to
zero. Let Fp  ^ denote the distribution of empirical p-values. By Bayes' rule, the posterior

probability that a firm with a p    ^f less than p  (0, 1] has a contact gap of exactly zero
can be written
                                          pf < p | f = 0) 0
                                      Pr (^                       p0
                           F DR (p) =                         =         ,
                                             Pr (^
                                                 pf < p)        Fp^ (p)

where the second equality follows from the p-values being uniformly distributed among the
sub-population of firms with zero contact gaps. F DR (p) has a frequentist interpretation
as the expected proportion of null hypotheses with p-values less than p that are true, a
quantity known in the multiple testing literature as the False Discovery Rate (Benjamini
and Hochberg, 1995).18
    Storey (2002) introduced the idea of deciding on null hypotheses according to their
"q -values," which can be thought of as empirical Bayes analogues of p-values. The q -value
  17
       We set the degrees of freedom of the t-distribution equal to the number of jobs at the firm minus
one.
  18
     See Storey (2003) and Efron (2016) for more on empirical Bayes interpretations of false discovery
rates. We have implicitly assumed that at least one firm has a p
                                                               ^f less than p.




                                                    29
for rejecting all nulls with p-values less than p
                                                ^f is

                                                                   p
                                                                   ^f ^0
                                          q
                                          ^f = F DR (^
                                                     pf ) =                ,
                                                                  ^p
                                                                  F ^(^
                                                                      pf )

where F DR (p) is an estimator of false discovery rates based on the empirical distribution
of p-values.19 If F DR (p) were a consistent estimator of F DR (p) then classifying all firms
with q -values less than 0.1 as discriminators should yield a False Discovery Rate of 10%
­ i.e., we should expect 10% of these firms to actually have zero contact gaps.
    The primary difficulty in computing a suitable estimator of F DR (p) is that the
proportion 0 of nulls that are true is not point identified. The testing procedure of
Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) effectively sets 0 = 1. Efron et al. (2001) note that a
more informative upper bound on 0 is given by the minimal density minp(0,1] fp        ^(p) of

the p-values. The minimum should be achieved near the point p = 1, as large p-values are
more likely to be generated by nulls that are true. Building on this idea, Storey (2002)
proposed the tail density estimator
                                                         108
                                                            1 {p
                                                         f =1  ^f > }
                                         ^0 () =                      ,
                                                         (1 - ) 108

where   [0, 1) is a tuning parameter governing how deep to look in the right tail of
empirical p-values. Any value of  provides an upper bound on 0 . Larger values of
 will tend to yield less conservative bounds but more sampling variability. We use
the automated bootstrap procedure of Storey et al. (2015) to balance variance against
conservatism in our choice of .20 To assess the degree of uncertainty in our estimate, we
also report the upper limit of a non-parametric confidence interval for 0 developed by
Armstrong (2015).


10.3       Which firms discriminate?
Figure 11 reports choices of  and the estimated tail density    ^0 () for both one and
two-tailed tests of racial discrimination. As expected, the ^0 () correspond roughly to
the right asymptote of the plotted discrete density estimates. Super-imposed on Figure
11 are estimates of the Local False Discovery Rates (LFDRs; Efron et al., 2001) implied
by setting 0 =    ^0 (). LFDRs give posterior estimates of the probability that a null
hypothesis is true given its p-value. The mean LFDR below a threshold p-value p ^f gives
                          21
an approximation to q ^f .
  19
      In practice we follow Storey (2002, 2003) in estimating q         ^f as mintp   ^f F DR(t). This ensures that
q -values are non-decreasing for nested rejection thresholds.
   20
      For any choice of , however, the probability limit of         ^0 () should lie weakly above the true 0 .
   21
      Letting fp
               ^ denote the density of observed    p -values,  we  can  define LF DR (p) = 0 /fp  ^(p). It is straight-
                                        p
forward to verify that F DR (p) = 0 fp     ^ ( b ) LF  DR  ( b ) db/F ^
                                                                      p ( p ) . Because we use a kernel  smoother to


                                                         30
    For one tailed tests we estimate that 0  0.39; i.e., that at least 61% of firms dis-
criminate against Black applications. Unsurprisingly, allowing for bi-directional racial
discrimination dissipates power, leading to an upper bound on 0 of 0.54. Table 8 pro-
vides a sensitivity analysis involving a few other estimates of 0 . Computing the p-values
via randomization inference tends to yield more very small p-values, resulting in a cor-
respondingly smaller estimate of 0 .22 Estimating 0 with a cubic spline, as in Storey
and Tibshirani (2003), yields slightly larger estimates of 0 . The final panel of the table
reports the upper limit of a 95% confidence interval on 0 . For one-sided tests as few
as 42% of firms may be discriminating against Black applicants, while under two-tailed
tests the share discriminating may be as low as 30%.
    The resulting q -values imply that many individual firms can be reliably detected as
discriminating against Black applicants. In our benchmark specification 23 firms have
q -values less than 0.05 (Table 8, top panel, first column). Table 9 lists industry, federal
contractor status, contact gap estimates, posterior means and quantiles, and p- and q -
values for this set of companies (with firm names suppressed). Since a decision rule
based on q = 0.05 limits the False Discovery Rate to at most 5%, we should expect at
most 23 × 0.05 = 1.15 errors if these 23 firms were classified as discriminating against
Black applicants. Interestingly, the firm with the largest q -value has a posterior mean
contact gap of 1.8pp and a posterior 5th percentile gap of 0.75pp, indicating that if the
deconvolved distribution G  ^ is taken as a prior, one can be confident that a non-trivial
amount of discrimination is taking place at this firm.
    Conclusions regarding the detection of individual employers that discriminate against
Black applicants are remarkably robust to the method used to bound 0 . In fact, if we
use estimates of p-values and   ^0 based on randomization inference, the 23 firms assigned
racial discrimination q -values less than 0.05 in our baseline analysis have an average
LFDR of only 0.025, suggesting the False Discovery Rate for this collection of firms may
actually be 2.5% or less. When 0 is set to the upper limit of its 95% confidence interval
­ an extremely conservative choice ­ 20 firms have q -values below 0.05 (Table 8, bottom
panel, first column). This prior insensitivity arises because many firms have very small
p-values, as shown in Table 9.
    Consistent with the posterior mean estimates in Figure 9, we find a clear industry pat-
tern among firms with low q -values for discrimination against Black applicants. As shown
in Table 10, firms detected as discriminating against Black names are highly concentrated
in the auto dealers and services sector, where 6 of the 8 firms in our experiment have
q -values below 0.05. The mean LFDR in this sector is 0.15, implying that at least 85%
of the firms in this industry discriminate against Black applicants. Other sectors with a
estimate fp^, the running average of LFDR estimates does not numerically match q   ^f in sample.
  22
     Randomization based tests avoid reliance on asymptotics but evaluate the "sharp" null that none
of the firm's contact decisions were influenced by protected characteristics. See Ding (2017) for further
discussion of how to interpret such tests.


                                                   31
high concentration of racial discrimination include other retail (SIC 59), where 3 of the
7 firms have q -values below 0.05, and furnishing stores (SIC 57), where 2 of 4 firms have
low q -values. Mean LFDRs are substantially higher than 0.05 in these sectors, indicating
that the firm-specific p-values remain somewhat dispersed within industry. Notably, 8 of
the 23 firms with q -values less than 0.05 are federal contractors, including the firm with
the highest posterior mean level of racial discrimination.
     To further compare results based on posterior means and q -values, Appendix Figure
A11 plots the posterior mean racial contact gaps (    ¯ f ) from the previous section against
the q^f from our preferred specification. Bracketing the posterior means are 95% empirical
Bayes credible intervals (EBCIs) connecting each firm's posterior 2.5th percentile contact
                                                     ^  were estimated without error then
gap to its posterior 97.5th percentile. If the prior G
95% of the population contact gaps would be expected to lie within these confidence
intervals. The lower limit of each EBCI is positive because the estimated prior imposed
that racial contact gaps are almost surely positive. By contrast, the q -values were derived
under the assumption that 39% of firms have contact gaps of exactly zero. As expected the
posterior mean contact gaps are generally decreasing in q     ^f but the relationship between
the two measures is not perfectly monotone.
     As a result of the higher concentration of gender contact gaps near zero, it is more
difficult to detect individual firms discriminating on the basis of gender than on the basis
of race. Panel (c) of Figure 11 shows the distribution of p-values derived from tests
that gender contact gaps are zero. Here the Storey et al. (2015) procedure produces an
upper bound on 0 of 0.83, implying that at least 17% of firms discriminate on the basis
of gender. Moreover, the 95% confidence interval on 0 extends to 1, suggesting that
we cannot reject the null that none of the firms discriminate based upon gender. This
conclusion is clearly at odds with our earlier higher criticism calculation, not to mention
the tests presented in Table 4, which decisively rejected the null that gender contact gaps
are equal across firms. This discrepancy likely arises because the Armstrong (2015) test
is designed to have good power properties in settings where 0 is small, which seems
not to be the case here.23 Likewise, the 95% confidence interval for the proportion of
firms not discriminating against older applicants also includes 1, which is unsurprising
given that the tests reported in Table 4 detected only modest firm heterogeneity in age
discrimination.
     These high estimated bounds on 0 lead to high lower bounds on the posterior prob-
abilities of gender discrimination for most firms. Consequently, Table 8 shows that only
one firm has a q -value for gender discrimination below 0.05.24 Table 10 indicates that
  23
     As Armstrong (2015) notes, his procedure "looks at the larger ordered p-values in order to achieve
adaptivity to the smoothness of the distribution of p-values under the alternative in a setting where 
may not be close to 1."
  24
     Note that this firm has a q -value below 0.05 even when ^0 = 1. This occurs because p
                                                                                         ^f is well below
^
Fp
 ^(^
   pf ), so that q
                 ^f is small even when plugging in an upper bound on 0 of unity.


                                                   32
this company is in the apparel sector. Based on its posterior mean, this apparel store is
discriminating against men. Interestingly, the same store also has a q -value below 0.05
for racial discrimination. While the apparel sector (SIC 56) has a large average poste-
rior mean contact gap favoring women, the mean LFDR in the sector is relatively high,
suggesting industry membership is not, in itself, dispositive of gender discrimination.


10.4      Prevalence vs. severity
Having established with high posterior certainty that 23 firms favor white applicants on
average, we now examine whether these firms' racial contact gaps could have been gener-
ated by a small minority of discriminating jobs. This distinction between the prevalence
and severity of racial discrimination is arguably pertinent to the legal notion of systemic
discrimination as a widespread pattern of organizational behavior. Kline and Walters
(2021) show that the share of jobs that discriminate is not point identified in audit de-
signs sending a small number of applications to each job. Consequently, we rely on a
simple bounding approach to assess the prevalence of discrimination across jobs within
firms.
    To formalize the notion of job-level discrimination prevalence, it is convenient to
again work with a mixture representation. Suppose that a proportion 1 - f of the jobs
at firm f have contact gaps of exactly zero.25 With this notation, the firm-wide mean
contact gap can be written f = f        f , where   f gives the average contact gap among
discriminating jobs within firm f . Here    f provides a measure of discrimination severity,
while f indexes the prevalence of discrimination.
    The variance of job level contact gaps at firm f can be written

                                    2
                                    f = f f2
                                             + f (1 - f ) 2,
                                                          f


        2
where  f  denotes the variance of contact gaps among discriminating jobs. Note that
f2
     f (1 - f )     2 , which binds with equality when all discriminating jobs exhibit
                    f
equal population contact gaps. Substituting this bound into the expression for f and
rearranging yields the following lower bound on discrimination prevalence at firm f :

                                         f  2   2   2
                                            f /(f + f ).


    A simple rule of thumb emerges from this expression: if the mean level of discrimi-
nation is roughly equal to its standard deviation ­ as was found for the distribution of
racial contact gaps across firms ­ then prevalence must be at least one half. Interestingly,
  25
     One reason that a particular job may not discriminate is that its population contact rate may be
zero, for instance, because the job may have already been filled. Consequently, even a firm with a practice
of always discriminating in hiring might, by this definition, exhibit a f < 1.



                                                    33
the density based prevalence bounds reported in Table 8 were only slightly above one
half, suggesting this moment-based bound sacrifices little identifying information when
applied to firm-wide average gaps.
    An unbiased estimate of the variance of job-level gaps can be computed by taking the
covariance between contact gaps for the first and last two application pairs sent to each
job. Applying this approach, Appendix Table A4 reports that the standard deviation
of contact gaps across all jobs in the experiment is 0.071. The mean gap across jobs is
0.020 with associated standard error of 0.002. Consequently, the lower bound prevalence
                        (0.020)2 -(0.002)2
is estimated to be (0.020)2 -(0.002)2 +(0.071)2  0.07, indicating that at least 7% of jobs in the

experiment as a whole discriminate against Black names.
    We can conduct a corresponding calculation at each firm, using             ^ 2 - s2 as a bias
                                                                                 f    f
                                           2
corrected estimate of each firm's f . Figure 13 illustrates these firm specific estimates,
which are quite noisy, ordered by the firm's q -value. As expected, firms with lower q -
values tend to have higher job-level prevalence bounds. To reduce sampling error, the
solid line plots the average bound among jobs at firms with q -values below a threshold
level. Firms with q < 0.1 for example have a lower bound prevalence of 18%. The 23
firms with q < .05 exhibit a prevalence of at least 20%, suggesting that discrimination
against Black names is widespread among the establishments that comprise these firms.


11       Detection Possibilities
We now bring together the two empirical Bayes classification schemes considered earlier
to investigate the "price" paid for classifying firms according to their q -values rather
than their posterior means. To frame this trade-off, it is useful to tie our discussion
to the decision problem faced by a hypothetical auditor charged with deciding whether
to investigate the firms in our study. While this analysis is stylized, it is worth noting
that the EEOC, OFCCP, and several local organizations, such as the New York City
Commission on Human Rights, proactively investigate systemic discrimination on an
ongoing basis. Statistical evidence is a legally recognized basis for such decisions.26


11.1      The auditor's problem
Consider an auditor concerned with racial discrimination who can launch investigations
into the conduct of any of the firms in our experiment at cost c  (0, 1). Let f  {0, 1}
  26
    For example, the U.S. Department of Labor's Administrative Review Board ruled in Office of Federal
Contract Compliance Programs, U.S. Department of Labor v. Bank of America (2016) that "the more
severe the statistical disparity, the less additional evidence is needed to prove that the reason was race
discrimination. Very extreme cases of statistical disparity may permit the trier of fact to conclude
intentional race discrimination occurred without needing additional evidence." See Office of Federal
Contract Compliance Programs, U.S. Department of Labor v. Enterprise RAC Company of Baltimore,
LLC (2019) for a similar ruling by the Office of Administrative Law Judges.


                                                   34
be an indicator for the decision to launch an investigation into firm f and D the collection
of these indicators.
    We consider two potential specifications of the auditor's preferences that differ in
whether she is concerned with the intensive or extensive margin of discrimination. These
two objectives can be written as functions of the unobserved racial contact gaps {f }108f =1 ,
each of which is assumed to lie in the unit interval:
                                                108
                                     i
                                 U (D) =               f (f - c) ,
                                               f =1
                                                108
                                     e
                                 U (D) =               f (1{f > 0} - c) .
                                               f =1


An auditor with preferences given by U i would like to investigate every firm with f >
c, while an auditor with preferences given by U e seeks to investigate every firm with
f > 0. The latter objective arguably reflects U.S. employment law, which prohibits any
discrimination on the basis of race. One can also think of U e as capturing an extreme
form of risk aversion regarding the unobserved racial contact gaps.27
                                                                         108
    The auditor must rely on the experimental evidence E =      ^ f , sf     to make deci-
                                                                                     f =1
sions regarding which firms (if any) to investigate. Given a prior G over the distribution
of population contact gaps, the auditor's expected utility under these two preference
schemes can be written
                                                108
                                 i
                           EG [U (D)|E ] =             f ¯ f (G) - c ,
                                                f =1
                                                108
                                 e
                          EG [U (D)|E ] =              f (1 - LF DRf (0 ) - c) ,
                                                f =1


where f (G) = EG [f |E ] is the posterior mean contact gap for firm f , LF DRf (0 ) =
PrG (f = 0|E ) is the posterior probability that firm f is not discriminating, and 0 =
G(0) is the prior probability of non-discrimination.
    If, based on E , an auditor with preferences U i were to settle on beliefs over contact
gaps coinciding with the deconvolved distribution G  ^  , then she would investigate all firms
with empirical Bayes posterior means       ¯ f exceeding c. If the auditor instead believes
population contact gaps are normally distributed with a variance equal to that reported
in Table 4, she will investigate all firms with linear shrinkage estimates  ~ f exceeding c.
    The decision problem is somewhat trickier for an auditor with preferences U e who is
  27
       Both utility functions can be viewed as special cases of the more general preference scheme U (D) =
  108         1/p
  f =1 f    f - c , where p  1 governs the auditor's risk aversion. When p = 1, the auditor is risk
neutral and U = U i . As p  , the auditor grows increasingly risk averse and U approaches U e .



                                                       35
willing to entertain the possibility that a large share of firms are not discriminating at all.
Recall that the probability of non-discrimination 0 is, in general, only bounded by our
experiment (Efron et al., 2001; Kline and Walters, 2021). Faced with this ambiguity, an
auditor with preferences U e might reasonably consider the largest value of 0 consistent
                                                                                       
with the experimental evidence. Optimizing against this least favorable value 0          of 0
                                                           
leads the auditor to investigate all firms with LF DRf (0 ) < 1 - c. This minimax decision
rule coincides with a q -value based threshold, as q -values are running averages of (sorted)
LFDRs.
    A natural question raised by these derivations is how often a minimax auditor con-
cerned with extensive margin discrimination would dispute the decisions of an (empirical)
Bayes auditor concerned with the intensive margin of discrimination. In principle, LFDR
based rankings of firm behavior can differ substantially from rankings based on posterior
means (Gu and Koenker, 2020). Reassuringly, we demonstrate below that little would be
lost from investigating firms based upon q -value thresholds even from the perspective of
an auditor with preferences given by U i and smooth priors given by G      ^ .


11.2     Detection possibility frontiers
Figure 12 illustrates graphically the tradeoff the auditor faces between the costs of investi-
gating more firms and the benefits of finding additional large contact gaps. Suppose that
1,000 Black applications are sent at random to jobs equally distributed across the firms in
our experiment, and contact gaps among these firms follow the estimated distribution G     ^ .
The figure reports the contacts expected to be lost due to racial discrimination among
investigated firms under various investigation threshold rules. The dotted 45 degree line
gives the results of investigating firms at random: because the mean contact gap is 2
percentage points, investigating all the firms would "save" roughly 20 contacts per 1,000
applications, while investigating half of the firms at random would save 10 contacts.
    The solid line illustrates the detection possibilities frontier available to the auditor if
she observed the f without error. This infeasible frontier is simply a rescaled Lorenz
curve for the distribution G ^  . Reflecting that distribution's fat tail, the worst 20% of
discriminating firms are responsible for roughly half of the lost contacts. The preferences
of an auditor with objective U i can be visualized as indifference lines with slope -1000c.
An optimum occurs at a point of tangency between the indifference line and the detection
frontier.
    The dashed dotted line illustrates the frontier that arises when the auditor selects firms
based on their posterior means     ¯ f . The vertical distance between the posterior mean
frontier and the true contact gap frontier reflects the cost of ranking firms according to
their posterior means rather than their true contact gaps. Because the distribution of
posteriors is more compressed than G     ^  , the auditor must investigate roughly a quarter


                                              36
of the firms based on their posterior means to isolate those responsible for half of lost
contacts.
    Selecting firms using the linear shrinkage estimator     ~ f instead of ¯ f is estimated
to entail only a small degradation of the possibilities frontier. This robustness reflects
the high degree of rank correlation between the posterior mean and the linear shrinkage
estimator ( = 0.9). Though the firm rankings are highly correlated across shrinkage
methods, an auditor would likely choose to investigate fewer firms based on the linear
shrinkage estimator, which predicts that fewer firms are engaged in severe discrimination
against Black applicants.
    Finally, the dashed line illustrates the frontier that arises when selecting firms based
on q -values under the maintained assumption that contact gaps are distributed according
to G^  . The expected cost of ranking firms based on their q -values, as would be optimal
under preference scheme U e , rather than their posterior means is surprisingly small,
though performance degrades somewhat when more than half of the firms are investigated.
Notably, the roughly 21% (23/108) of firms with q -values less than or equal to 0.05
are responsible for roughly 40% of lost contacts. Investigating the same share of firms
based on posterior mean rankings would therefore be expected to yield less than 10% of
additional lost contacts. Evidently, the price to be paid for control over false discoveries
in our setting is fairly small. More generally, these results imply that it is possible to
detect individual firms responsible for a substantial share of racial discrimination even
while maintaining a tight limit on false-positive investigations of non-discriminators.


12     Conclusion
Our analysis establishes that many large U.S. employers exhibit nationwide patterns of
racial discrimination that are temporally and spatially stable. Racial and gender contact
gaps are highly concentrated in particular firms. We estimate that the 20% of firms
discriminating most heavily against Black names are responsible for roughly half of the
contacts lost to racial discrimination in our experiment. Racial discrimination appears
to be widespread among the jobs posted by these firms.
    In principle, the concentration of discriminatory behavior in a sub-population of em-
ployers could dampen the economy-wide consequences of discrimination, as workers can
sort away from biased firms (Becker, 1957). Such a conclusion hinges crucially, however,
on whether workers are aware of firm differences in average behavior. The relatively weak
correlations between racial contact gaps and local demographics uncovered in our analysis
give us reason to question this assumption. Rather, our impression is that the identities
of the 23 firms conclusively determined to be discriminating against Black names would
come as a surprise both to the companies involved and to the public at large. The iden-
tities of the companies likely discriminating on the basis of perceived sex are somewhat

                                            37
less surprising, conforming more closely to gendered stereotypes regarding work norms.
    The fact that we can only confidently identify 23 firms as engaging in discrimination
against Black names when using a massive correspondence experiment reveals the dif-
ficulty of the signal extraction problem associated with estimating firm specific biases
from application-level data. In future work, we will study how to use covariates to form
improved estimates of firm level biases that can be shared with the public. As described
in Avivi et al. (2021), the firm-wide patterns documented here can potentially be used
to design follow up correspondence experiments aimed at accurately measuring biases at
particular jobs, information which may be of interest both to regulators and companies
interested in monitoring their own behavior.
    The EEOC maintains an internal target for the share of its litigation docket comprised
of systemic cases. The appropriate level of this target has been a topic of recurring debate
in Congress, where oversight committees have questioned the EEOC's choice to prioritize
systemic investigations of firms over individual level claims of discrimination (Kim, 2015).
Our finding that discrimination is highly concentrated in particular companies lends
some credence to the notion that appropriately targeted systemic investigations have the
potential to remedy, and perhaps also prevent, discrimination affecting a wide swath
of the labor force. Whether the targeting of systemic investigations by the EEOC, or
of contractor audits by the OFCCP, can be improved with the adoption of statistical
methods of the sort developed here is an open and interesting question.
    Enforcement actions are inevitably costly and contentious. It is natural to wonder
whether bias at the most discriminatory firms can be preemptively reduced or eliminated
by modifying organizational hiring practices. A large experimental psychology literature
studying behavioral interventions designed to reduce prejudice has failed to produce a
"silver bullet" treatment with proven effectiveness.28 One of the strongest (negative)
predictors of both racial and gender contact gaps found in our correspondence experiment
is callback centralization, which is notably elevated among federal contractors. While
centralizing interview decisions might serve to reduce discrimination, such changes may
also simply postpone discrimination to a later stage of the hiring process. Determining
whether it is possible to improve recruiting practices in a way that promotes both equity
and productivity remains an important and active area of research (Bergman, Li and
Raymond, 2020; Raghavan et al., 2020).




  28
    A recent review of this evidence by Paluck et al. (2020) concludes that "a fair assessment of our
data on implicit prejudice reduction is that the evidence is thin. Together with the lack of evidence for
diversity training, these studies do not justify the enthusiasm with which implicit prejudice reduction
trainings have been received in the world over the past decade."


                                                   38
References
Abaluck, Jason, Mauricio Caceres Bravo, Peter Hull, and Amanda Starc. 2021.
 "Mortality effects and choice across private health insurance plans." The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 136(3): 1557­1610.

Agan, Amanda, and Sonja Starr. 2018. "Ban the box, criminal records, and racial
 discrimination: A field experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 191­
 235.

Agan, Amanda, and Sonja Starr. 2020. "Employer neighborhoods and racial dis-
 crimination." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Aigner, Dennis J, and Glen G Cain. 1977. "Statistical theories of discrimination in
 labor markets." Ilr Review, 30(2): 175­187.

Anatolyev, Stanislav, and Mikkel Sølvsten. 2020. "Testing Many Restrictions Un-
 der Heteroskedasticity." arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07320.

Angrist, Joshua D, and Alan B Krueger. 1995. "Split-sample instrumental vari-
 ables estimates of the return to schooling." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
 13(2): 225­235.

Angrist, Joshua D., Peter D. Hull, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.
 Walters. 2017. "Leveraging lotteries for school value-Added: Testing and estimation."
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2): 871­919.

Arceo-Gomez, Eva O, and Raymundo M Campos-Vazquez. 2014. "Race and
 marriage in the labor market: A discrimination correspondence study in a developing
 country." American Economic Review, 104(5): 376­80.

Armstrong, Timothy. 2015. "Adaptive testing on a regression function at a point."
 Annals of Statistics, 43(5): 2086­2101.

Arnold, David, Will Dobbie, and Crystal S Yang. 2018. "Racial Bias in Bail
 Decisions." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(4): 1885­1932.

Arnold, David, Will S Dobbie, and Peter Hull. 2020. "Measuring racial discrimi-
 nation in bail decisions." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Avivi, Hadar, Patrick Kline, Evan Rose, and Christopher Walters. 2021. "Adap-
 tive Correspondence Experiments." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 111: 43­48.

Baert, Stijn. 2018. "Hiring discrimination: an overview of (almost) all correspondence
 experiments since 2005." In Audit studies: Behind the scenes with theory, method, and
 nuance. 63­77. Springer.

                                          39
Bai, Yuehao, Andres Santos, and Azeem M Shaikh. 2021. "A Two-Step Method
 for Testing Many Moment Inequalities." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
 1­33.

Banerjee, Rupa, Jeffrey G Reitz, and Phil Oreopoulos. 2018. "Do large employers
 treat racial minorities more fairly? An analysis of Canadian field experiment data."
 Canadian Public Policy, 44(1): 1­12.

Becker, Gary S. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.

Becker, Gary S. 1993. "Nobel lecture: The economic way of looking at behavior."
 Journal of Political Economy, 101(3): 385­409.

Benjamini, Yoav, and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. "Controlling the false discovery rate:
 a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing." Journal of the Royal statistical
 society: series B (Methodological), 57(1): 289­300.

Bergman, Peter, Danielle Li, and Lindsey Raymond. 2020. "Hiring as explo-
 ration." Available at SSRN 3630630.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Esther Duflo. 2017. "Field experiments on discrimina-
 tion." In Handbook of Field Experiments. Vol. 1, , ed. Esther Duflo and Abhijit Baner-
 jee. Elsevier.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "Are Emily and Greg more
 employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimina-
 tion." American Economic Review, 94(4): 991­1013.

Bertrand, Marianne, Sandra E Black, Sissel Jensen, and Adriana Lleras-
 Muney. 2019. "Breaking the glass ceiling? The effect of board quotas on female
 labour market outcomes in Norway." The Review of Economic Studies, 86(1): 191­239.

Black, Dan A. 1995. "Discrimination in an equilibrium search model." Journal of labor
  Economics, 13(2): 309­334.

Bohren, J Aislinn, Kareem Haggag, Alex Imas, and Devin G Pope. 2019.
 "Inaccurate statistical discrimination." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bostock v. Clayton County, Georgia. 590 U.S. 1-23 (2020). https://www.suprem
 ecourt.gov/opinions/19pdf/17-1618 hfci.pdf.

Bowlus, Audra J, and Zvi Eckstein. 2002. "Discrimination and skill differences in
 an equilibrium search model." International Economic Review, 43(4): 1309­1345.



                                           40
Canay, Ivan A, Magne Mogstad, and Jack Mountjoy. 2020. "On the use of outcome
 tests for detecting bias in decision making." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. "Prejudice and wages: an
 empirical assessment of Becker's The Economics of Discrimination." Journal of Political
 Economy, 116(5): 773­809.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018. "The impacts of neighborhoods on
 intergenerational mobility I: Childhood exposure effects." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 133(3): 1107­1162.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, and Jonah E Rockoff. 2014. "Measuring the im-
 pacts of teachers II: Teacher value-added and student outcomes in adulthood." Amer-
 ican economic review, 104(9): 2633­79.

Crenshaw, Kimberle. 1989. "Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: a black
 feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics.
 Chicagounbound. uchicago. edu. 2018."

Crenshaw, Kimberle. 1990. "Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics,
 and violence against women of color." Stanford Law Review, 43: 1241.

Dahl, Gordon B, Andreas Kotsadam, and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2021. "Does integra-
 tion change gender attitudes? The effect of randomly assigning women to traditionally
 male teams." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 136(2): 987­1030.

Deming, David J. 2017. "The growing importance of social skills in the labor market."
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4): 1593­1640.

Deming, David J, Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin, and
 Lawrence F Katz. 2016. "The value of postsecondary credentials in the labor market:
 An experimental study." American Economic Review, 106(3): 778­806.

Ding, Peng. 2017. "A paradox from randomization-based causal inference." Statistical
 science, 331­345.

Donoho, David, and Jiashun Jin. 2004. "Higher criticism for detecting sparse het-
 erogeneous mixtures." The Annals of Statistics, 32(3): 962­994.

Efron, Bradley. 2016. "Empirical Bayes deconvolution estimates." Biometrika,
  103(1): 1­20.

Efron, Bradley, and Robert Tibshirani. 1996. "Using specially designed exponential
  families for density estimation." Annals of Statistics, 24(6): 2431­2461.


                                            41
Efron, Bradley, Robert Tibshirani, John D Storey, and Virginia Tusher. 2001.
  "Empirical Bayes analysis of a microarray experiment." Journal of the American sta-
  tistical association, 96(456): 1151­1160.

Fang, Albert H, Andrew M Guess, and Macartan Humphreys. 2019. "Can the
  government deter discrimination? Evidence from a randomized intervention in New
  York City." The Journal of Politics, 81(1): 127­141.

Feigenberg, Benjamin, and Conrad Miller. 2021. "Would eliminating racial dis-
  parities in motor vehicle searches have efficiency costs?" The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics. qjab018.

Fryer Jr, Roland G, and Steven D Levitt. 2004. "The causes and consequences of
  distinctively black names." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3): 767­805.

Gaddis, S. Michael. 2017. "How Black Are Lakisha and Jamal? Racial perceptions
 from names used in correspondence audit studies." Sociological Science, 4(19): 469­489.

Goldin, Claudia. 2014. "A pollution theory of discrimination: male and female differ-
 ences in occupations and earnings." In Human capital in history: The American record.
 313­348. University of Chicago Press.

Gu, Jiaying, and Roger Koenker. 2020. "Invidious Comparisons: Ranking and Se-
 lection as Compound Decisions." arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.12550.

Hangartner, Dominik, Daniel Kopp, and Michael Siegenthaler. 2021.
 "Monitoring hiring discrimination through online recruitment platforms." Nature,
 589(7843): 572­576.

Holzer, Harry J, and Keith R Ihlanfeldt. 1998. "Customer discrimination and
 employment outcomes for minority workers." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 113(3): 835­867.

Huang, Bert I. 2004. "The'Inexorable Zero'." Harvard Law Review, 117(4): 1215.

Hull, Peter. 2021. "What marginal outcome tests can tell us about racially biased
 decision-making." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kane, Thomas J, and Douglas O Staiger. 2008. "Estimating teacher impacts on
 student achievement: An experimental evaluation." National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search.

Kim, Pauline T. 2015. "Addressing systemic discrimination: Public enforcement and
 the role of the EEOC." BUL Rev., 95: 1133.


                                          42
Kline, Patrick M, and Christopher R Walters. 2021. "Reasonable doubt: Exper-
 imental detection of job-level employment discrimination." Econometrica, 89(2): 765­
 792.

Kline, Patrick, Raffaele Saggio, and Mikkel Sølvsten. 2020. "Leave-out estimation
 of variance components." Econometrica, 88(5): 1859­1898.

Leonard, Jonathan S, David I Levine, and Laura Giuliano. 2010. "Customer
  discrimination." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3): 670­678.

Narasimhan, Balasubramanian, and Bradley Efron. 2020. "deconvolveR: A G-
 Modeling Program for Deconvolution and Empirical Bayes Estimation." Journal of
 Statistical Software, 94(1): 1­20.

Neumark, David, Ian Burn, and Patrick Button. 2018. "Is it harder for older
 workers to find jobs? New and improved evidence from a field experiment." Journal of
 Political Economy, 127(2): 922­970.

Nunley, John M, Adam Pugh, Nicholas Romero, and R Alan Seals. 2015.
 "Racial discrimination in the labor market for recent college graduates: Evidence from
 a field experiment." The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 15(3): 1093­1125.

Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, U.S. Department of Labor
 v. Bank of America. ARB Case No. 13-099, ALJ Case No. 1997-OFC-016. (2016).
 https://www.oalj.dol.gov/PUBLIC/ARB/DECISIONS/ARB DECISIONS/OFC/13 099.O
 FCP.PDF.

Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, U.S. Department of Labor
 v. Enterprise RAC Company of Baltimore, LLC. Case No.: 2016-OFC-00006.
 (2019). https://www.oalj.dol.gov/DECISIONS/ALJ/OFC/2016/ENTERPRISE RAC C
 OMPA v OFCCP - WASHINGTON D 2016OFC00006 (JUL 17 2019) 103111 CADEC PD.PD
 F? ga=2.224300827.1228285145.1624651131-670965852.1624651131.

Onwuachi-Willig, Angela, and Mario L. Barnes. 2005. "By any other name: on
 being regarded as Black, and why Title VII should apply even if Lakisha and Jamal
 are white." Wisconsin Law Review, 1283.

Pager, Devah. 2016. "Are firms that discriminate more likely to go out of business?"
 Sociological Science, 3: 849­859.

Pager, Devah, Bart Bonikowski, and Bruce Western. 2009. "Discrimination in a
 low-wage labor market: A field experiment." American sociological review, 74(5): 777­
 799.


                                          43
Paluck, Elizabeth Levy, Roni Porat, Chelsey S Clark, and Donald P Green.
 2020. "Prejudice reduction: Progress and challenges." Annual Review of Psychology,
 72.

Quillian, Lincoln, Devah Pager, Ole Hexel, and Arnfinn H Midtbøen. 2017.
 "Meta-analysis of field experiments shows no change in racial discrimination in hiring
 over time." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(41): 10870­10875.

Quillian, Lincoln, John J Lee, and Mariana Oliver. 2020. "Evidence from field
 experiments in hiring shows substantial additional racial discrimination after the call-
 back." Social Forces, 99(2): 732­759.

Raghavan, Manish, Solon Barocas, Jon Kleinberg, and Karen Levy. 2020. "Mit-
 igating bias in algorithmic hiring: Evaluating claims and practices." 469­481.

Rose, Evan K. 2020. "Who gets a second chance? Effectiveness and equity in supervi-
 sion of criminal offenders." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 136(2): 1199­1253.

Silverman, Bernard W. 1986. Density estimation for statistics and data analysis.
  Vol. 26, CRC press.

Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth. 2014. "The cost of racial animus on a black candidate:
  Evidence using Google search data." Journal of Public Economics, 118: 26­40.

Storey, John D. 2002. "A direct approach to false discovery rates." Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 64(3): 479­498.

Storey, John D. 2003. "The positive false discovery rate: a Bayesian interpretation and
  the q-value." The Annals of Statistics, 31(6): 2013­2035.

Storey, John D, Andrew J Bass, Alan Dabney, and David Robinson. 2015.
  "qvalue: Q-value estimation for false discovery rate control. R package." https://gi
  thub.com/StoreyLab/qvalue.

Storey, John D, and Robert Tibshirani. 2003. "Statistical significance for
  genomewide studies." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(16): 9440­
  9445.

Teamsters v. United States. 431 U.S. 324 (1977). https://supreme.justia.com/c
  ases/federal/us/431/324/.

Tilcsik, Andras. 2011. "Pride and prejudice: employment discrimination against openly
  gay men in the United States." American Journal of Sociology, 117(2): 586---626.



                                           44
U.S. EEOC. 1996. "Enforcement Guidance: Whether "testers" can file charges and
 litigate claims of employment discrimination." EEOC Notice No. N-915.002. https:
 //www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/enforcement-guidance-whether-testers-can-
 file-charges-and-litigate-claims-employment.

U.S. EEOC. 2006a. "Directives Transmittal: Section 15 Race and Color Discrimina-
 tion." No. 915.003. OLC Control No. EEOC-CVG-2006-1. https://www.eeoc.gov/l
 aws/guidance/section-15-race-and-color-discrimination.

U.S. EEOC. 2006b. "Systemic Task Force Report To the Chair of the Equal Employment
 Opportunity Commission."

U.S. EEOC. 2019. "EEOC Sues Schuster for Sex Discrimination." Press Release, https:
 //www.eeoc.gov/newsroom/eeoc-sues-schuster-sex-discrimination.

U.S. EEOC. 2020. "Sactacular Holdings to Pay $35,000 to Settle EEOC Sex Discrimi-
 nation Lawsuit." Press Release, https://www.eeoc.gov/newsroom/sactacular-hol
 dings-pay-35000-settle-eeoc-sex-discrimination-lawsuit?utm source=elin
 fonet.

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Target Corp. 460 F.3d
 946 (7th Cir. 2006). https://casetext.com/case/us-eeoc-v-target-corp.




                                        45
Figures

                Figure 1: Overview of sampling strategy and experimental design

Holding companies split into brands with separate hiring portals (e.g.,
                                                                                           Fortune 500
Berkshire Hathaway into Geico, McLane, Fruit of the Loom, etc.)




                                                                                         123 firms with
InfoGroup and Burning Glass data merged to measure geographic
distribution of establishments and vacancies                                           sufficient expected
                                                                                        geographic scope



Hiring platforms investigated to test for feasibility of submitting fictitious            108 feasible to
applications                                                                                   audit



4 not sampled in wave 1 due to COVID interruption; 9 firms dropped                                    36 sampled
                                                                                 72 sampled
before completion due to technological constraints; 19 added in wave 2 or                             in subset of
later; 4 posted insufficient jobs to sample in all waves                         in all waves
                                                                                                         waves


                                                                                      25 vacancies in distinct
Job sampled from universe of entry-level vacancies posted on each firm's
hiring portal; most recently posted job prioritized                                     counties sampled
                                                                                            each wave


One pair of applications (1 black and 1 white name) sent every 1-2 days;
gender (50% male), age (uniform age 20-60), gender identity (5% gender-               8 applications sent to
neutral, 5% same-gender pronouns), and sexual orientation (10% LGBTQ                      each vacancy
student club, 10% other club) unconditionally randomly assigned


Notes: This figure explains the sampling strategy and design for the experiment. Gender
identity and sexual orientation attributes were assigned starting in wave 2 after the U.S. Supreme
Court ruling in Bostock v. Clayton County, Georgia.




                                                                  46
                                                  Figure 2: Mean contact rates and racial contact gaps by date
                               Wave 1                                                               Wave 2           Wave 3     Wave 4    Wave 5




                                                                                                                                                    30
               .35


                                          First state-wide
                                                                               Murder of George
                                          lockdown (CA)
                                                                                 Floyd sparks
                                                                                BLM protests




                                                                                                                                                    White-Black % contact gap
                                                                                                                                                                         20
                      .3
     Mean contact rates




                                                                                                                                                               10
           .25




                                                                             First 2 million
                                                                               US Covid
                                                                                 cases
47



               .2




                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                    -10
               .15




                      Oct 19     Jan 20                      Apr 20        Jul 20                 Oct 20               Jan 21                Apr 21
                                                                       Submission date

                                        White applications                     White-Black % gap full sample
                                        Black applications                     White-Black % gap balanced sample
        Notes: This figure plots mean contact rates for black and white applications by month and year of submission. The gray region corresponds to the
        period when the experiment was paused due to Covid-19 related shut-downs. The green and dotted black lines plot the white-Black contact rate
        gap as a percentage of the mean Black contact rate for the full and balanced samples. An F -test fails to reject that the white/Black percentage
        point difference in contact rates is the same in all waves of the experiment (F = 0.85, p = 0.50).
                                                                       Figure 3: Stability of firm contact gaps across waves
                                                                   a) Race                                              b) Gender
                                 Slope: 0.3626 (0.0956)                                                                                                 Slope: 0.4583 (0.0786)
                .1




                                                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                                         Wave male-female contact gap
Wave white-black contact gap




                                                                                                                                              .05
                   .05




                                                                                                                                     0
     0




                                                                                                                          -.05          -.1
                -.05




                                 -.05                           0                      .05                     .1                                         -.1                -.05            0               .05             .1
                                                          Leave-wave-out white-black contact gap                                                                             Leave-wave-out male-female contact gap

                                                            Regression slope             45 degree line                                                                           Regression slope          45 degree line



                                                                    c) Age                                                                                                        d) Race vs. gender
                                 Slope: 0.1304 (0.1078)                                                                                                 Slope: -0.0383 (0.0532)
                .1




                                                                                                                                        .1
Wave under-over 40 contact gap




                                                                                                                         Wave white-black contact gap
                                                                                                                                              .05
                     .05




                                                                                                                                     0
            0




                                                                                                                          -.05
 -.05




                                                                                                                                        -.1
                -.1




                                 -.1                 -.05             0               .05                 .1                                              -.1                -.05            0               .05             .1
                                                     Leave-wave-out under-over 40 contact gap                                                                                Leave-wave-out male-female contact gap

                                                            Regression slope             45 degree line                                                                           Regression slope          45 degree line



                                        Notes: This figure presents binned scatter plots of firm-specific wave-average contact gaps vs.
                                        leave-wave-out firm-specific average contact gaps. Panel (a) reports results for the white/Black
                                        difference in contact rates. Panel (b) shows results for the male/female difference in contact
                                        rates. Panel (c) displays results for the difference between contact rates for applicants under
                                        and over age 40. Panel (d) plots the correlation between race and gender contact gaps. The
                                        points are means of the dependent and independent variables within vigintiles of the independent
                                        variable. The dotted line has a slope of 1 and passes through the origin. The red line corresponds
                                        to the regression slope reported on the figure, with firm-clustered standard errors reported in
                                        parentheses. All firms present in at least 2 waves are included.




                                                                                                                    48
                                                  Figure 4: Relationships between contact gaps and job task content
                                            a) Race                                                              b) Gender

                Analytical skills (11026)                                                                           Analytical skills (10720)



                  Routine skills (11026)                                                                              Routine skills (10720)



        Social interaction skills (11026)                                                                   Social interaction skills (10720)



     Customer interaction skills (11026)                                                                 Customer interaction skills (10720)
49




                  Manual skills (11026)                                                                               Manual skills (10720)

                                            -.01      -.005      0      .005     .01     .015                                                   -.02          -.01       0         .01       .02
                                                   Effect on job white-Black contact gap                                                               Effect on job male-female contact gap

                                                           Bivariate          Multivariate                                                                    Bivariate          Multivariate
                                             P-value for joint sig w/o firm FE: 0.01, w/ firm fe: 0.20                                          P-value for joint sig w/o firm FE: 0.00, w/ firm fe: 0.01



     Notes: This figure plots the relationship between O*Net measures of job-level task content and contact gaps for race and gender. Each relationship
     is estimated with a linear regression with job-level contact gaps as the outcome. All jobs with defined contact gaps for each attribute are included.
     The number of jobs in each regression is in parentheses. Task measures are normalized to have standard deviation one in sample. "Bivariate"
     points plot coefficients from regressions of contact gaps on the covariate alone. "Multivariate" points plot effects when all covariates are included
     simultaneously. Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors. Appendix C provides a complete description of task
     definitions and sources.
                                       Figure 5: Relationships between contact gaps and establishment characteristics
                                       a) Race                                                             b) Gender
              Local demographics                                                                                Local demographics
             % county Black (11026)                                                                            % county Black (10720)
               % block Black (6958)                                                                              % block Black (6791)
              % block female (6958)                                                                             % block female (6791)

                   Local sentiment                                                                                   Local sentiment
            County race IAT (10943)                                                                           County race IAT (10639)
          County gender IAT (11000)                                                                         County gender IAT (10694)
               DMA animus (10943)                                                                                DMA animus (10639)

      Establishment characteristics                                                                     Establishment characteristics
      % managers non-white (10387)                                                                      % managers non-white (10094)
         % managers female (10387)                                                                         % managers female (10094)
                  Log emp (10645)                                                                                   Log emp (10343)
50




                           Region                                                                                            Region
                   Midwest (11026)                                                                                   Midwest (10720)
                     South (11026)                                                                                     South (10720)
                      West (11026)                                                                                      West (10720)
                                      -.04      -.02       0       .02      .04                   .06                                   -.1            -.05          0            .05
                                             Effect on job white-Black contact gap                                                            Effect on job male-female contact gap

                                                       Bivariate           Firm FE                                                                       Bivariate           Firm FE
                                      P-value for joint sig w/o firm FE: 0.03, w/ firm fe: 0.34                                         P-value for joint sig w/o firm FE: 0.35, w/ firm fe: 0.97



     Notes: This figure plots the relationship between establishment-level covariates and contact gaps for race and gender. Each relationship is estimated
     with a linear regression with job-level contact gaps as the outcome. All jobs with defined contact gaps for each attribute and matched to the listed
     covariate are included. The number of jobs in each regression is in parentheses. Covariates are standardized to be mean zero, standard deviation 1
     in sample. "Bivariate" points plot coefficients from regressions of contact gaps on the covariate alone. "Firm FE" points include firm fixed effects.
     Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors. The omitted region category is the Northeast. Appendix C provides a
     complete description of covariate definitions and sources.
                                                 Figure 6: Relationships between contact gaps and firm characteristics
                                            a) Race                                                               b) Gender
                Firm performance                                                                      Firm performance
             Log employment (108)                                                                  Log employment (108)
                 Sales / emp (108)                                                                     Sales / emp (108)
                  Profit / emp (105)                                                                    Profit / emp (105)
                    GD score (108)                                                                        GD score (108)
                Legal compliance                                                                      Legal compliance
            DOL viols / emp (108)                                                                 DOL viols / emp (108)
      Empl-discr cases / emp (108)                                                          Empl-discr cases / emp (108)
          Federal contractor (108)                                                              Federal contractor (108)
                     Firm diversity                                                                        Firm diversity
               % board Black (107)                                                                   % board Black (107)
              % board female (107)                                                                  % board female (107)
      % managers non-white (106)                                                            % managers non-white (106)
         % managers female (106)                                                               % managers female (106)
     Has chief diversity officer (108)                                                     Has chief diversity officer (108)
           GD diversity score (108)                                                              GD diversity score (108)
51




                Callback patterns                                                                     Callback patterns
       Callback centralization (106)                                                         Callback centralization (106)
                                         -.03       -.02       -.01        0         .01                                         -.02     -.01      0       .01     .02          .03
                                                Effect on job white-Black contact gap                                                Effect on job male-female contact gap

                                                         Bivariate          Multivariate                                                       Bivariate          Multivariate
                                         P-value for joint significance: 0.000                                                 P-value for joint significance: 0.000



     Notes: This figure plots the relationship between firm-level covariates and contact gaps for race and gender. Each relationship is estimated by a
     linear regression with job-level contact gaps as the outcome, except for callback centralization which is estimated via split sample IV to account for
     any mechanical correlation with the outcome. The number of firms in each regression is in parentheses. Covariates are standardized to be mean
     zero, standard deviation 1 in sample, except for the binary indicators for federal contractor status and having a chief diversity officer. "Bivariate"
     points plot coefficients from regressions of contact gaps on the covariate alone. "Multivariate" points plot effects when all covariates are included
     simultaneously, with callback centralization measured in half of the randomly split sample instrumented using its value in the other half and all
     other covariates included as exogenous regressors. Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level.
     Appendix C provides a complete description of covariate definitions and sources.
                                                    Figure 7: Deconvolution estimates of firm-level discrimination distributions
                                                  a) Race                                                                 b) Gender

                                                                                                       30
                    Implied firm mean                                                                       Implied firm mean                           Laplace density
               40    gap: 0.0212                                                                             gap: -0.00121
                    Implied between                                                                         Implied between
                     firm SD: 0.0183                                                                         firm SD: 0.0264
               30                                                                                      20                       Deconvolved density
     Density




                                                                                             Density
                                                         Deconvolved density


               20

                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                Observed gaps
52




                                                                                                                                                                Normal density
               10          Observed gaps
                                                           Log-normal density




                0                                                                                       0
                          -0.05            0.00           0.05                 0.10   0.15                  -0.2          -0.1                        0.0                    0.1
                                  Firm white-black contact rate gap                                                   Firm male-female contact rate gap
               Notes: This figure presents non-parametric estimates of the distribution of firm-specific contact gaps. Panel (a) presents estimates for white-Black
               contact rate differences, and panel (b) presents estimates for male-female differences. Red histograms show the distribution of estimated firm contact
               gaps. Blue lines shows estimates of population contact gap distributions. The population distributions are estimated by applying the deconvolveR
               package (Narasimhan and Efron, 2020) to firm-specific z -score estimates, then numerically integrating over the distribution of log standard errors
               using a Gaussian kernel and the Silverman (1986) bandwidth to recover the distribution of contact gaps. The penalization parameter in the
               deconvolution step is calibrated so that the resulting distribution matches the corresponding bias-corrected variance estimate from Table 4. In
               panel (a), the density of population z -scores is constrained to be weakly positive. Parametric comparison distributions are calibrated to have means
               and variances matching those of the deconvolved distributions.
                                       Figure 8: Discrimination Lorenz curves



                         1.00




                         0.75
Share of lost contacts




                                                                                               Top 20%
                                                                                              share: 0.46
                         0.50
                                                                                               Top 20%
                                                                                              share: 0.57

                                                         Race, Gini: 0.396
                                                                             Gender, Gini: 0.538
                         0.25




                         0.00
                                0.00      0.25               0.50               0.75                 1.00
                                                    Share of firms

Notes: This figure displays Lorenz curves implied by the non-parametric deconvolution esti-
mates of race and gender contact gap distributions in Figure 7. The solid blue curve is the
Lorenz curve for the white/Black contact gap, and the dashed red curve is the Lorenz curve for
the absolute value of the male/female contact gap. The Lorenz curve reports the share of lost
contacts in the experiment attributable to firms below each contact gap percentile. The share of
lost contacts equals the sum of contact gaps at firms below a particular contact gap percentile
as a share of the sum of contact gaps across all firms. The dashed line is the 45 degree line.
The labels for each curve also report Gini coefficients, equal to 1 minus twice the area under
each curve.




                                                        53
                                                                   Figure 9: Posterior means by industry
                                             a) Race                                                                                 b) Gender
      Engineering services                                                                   Engineering services
            Health services                                                                        Health services
      Auto / repair services                                          Posterior mean         Auto / repair services           Posterior mean
                                                                      Linear shrinkage                                        Linear shrinkage
         Business services                                                                      Business services
           Accommodation                                                                          Accommodation
     Insurance / real estate                                                                Insurance / real estate
         Securities brokers                                                                     Securities brokers
              Banks / credit                                                                         Banks / credit
                Other retail                                                                           Other retail
            Eating/drinking                                                                        Eating/drinking
          Furnishing stores                                                                      Furnishing stores
             Apparel stores                                                                         Apparel stores
     Auto dealers / services                                                                Auto dealers / services
54




                Food stores                                                                            Food stores
      General merchandise                                                                    General merchandise
          Building materials                                                                     Building materials
     Wholesale nondurable                                                                   Wholesale nondurable
         Wholesale durable                                                                      Wholesale durable
              Electric / gas                                                                         Electric / gas
           Communications                                                                         Communications
         Freight / transport                                                                    Freight / transport
       Other manufacturing                                                                    Other manufacturing
     Apparel manufacturing                                                                  Apparel manufacturing
             Food products                                                                          Food products
                               0.00          0.01         0.02        0.03           0.04                             -0.06         -0.04        -0.02   0.00     0.02
                                      Posterior mean white-Black contact rate gap                                             Posterior mean male-female contact rate gap

     Notes: This figure presents industry-level averages of posterior mean contact gaps. The pink bars show average posteriors using deconvolved
     estimates of the population contact gaps as priors. The teal bars show averages of estimates shrunk linearly towards the grand mean with weights
                                        ^ (s2 + 
     given by the signal to noise ratio /       ^).
                                            f
                                                             Figure 10: Industry correlates of contact gaps
                                         a) Race                                                                           b) Gender
         Race characteristics                                                               Race characteristics
        White - Black adj wage                                                             White - Black adj wage
                   % ind Black                                                                        % ind Black
         % mgmt - % ind Black                                                               % mgmt - % ind Black
        White - Black col share                                                            White - Black col share


       Gender characteristics                                                             Gender characteristics
        Male - female adj wage                                                             Male - female adj wage
                  % ind female                                                                       % ind female
55




        % mgmt - % ind female                                                              % mgmt - % ind female
        Male - female col share                                                            Male - female col share


               Concentration                                                                      Concentration
             Top 4 sales share                                                                  Top 4 sales share
                                  -40        -20            0           20          40                               -30     -20       -10         0       10      20
                                        Regression coefficient on white-Black gap                                          Regression coefficient on male-female gap

                                           Posterior mean      Linear shrinkage                                               Posterior mean      Linear shrinkage


     Notes: This figure presents regressions of industry characteristics on posterior mean contact gaps for race and gender. Points labeled "posterior
     means" show coefficients on posterior gaps formed using the distributions in Figure 7 as priors. Points labeled "linear shrinkage" show coefficients
     on gaps shrunk linearly towards the grand mean with weights given by the signal to noise ratio / ^ (s2 +  ^). Outcomes are normalized to be mean
                                                                                                          f
     zero, standard deviation 1 in sample. Appendix C provides a complete description of covariate definitions and sources.
                                 Figure 11: P -value distributions and local false discovery rates
                             a) Race, one-sided                                      b) Race, two-sided
          6

                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                       3
          4
Density




                                                                                                             Density
                                                                                                                       2



          2


                                                                                                                       1                                                                    LFDR

                                                                                                LFDR                                                                                       ^0 =
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.541
                                                                                               ^0 =
                                                                                               
                                                                                               0.391
          0                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                
              0.0           0.3                                        0.6         0.9                                     0.0            0.3                   0.6                  0.9
                            P-value for test that firm discriminates                                                                      P-value for test that firm discriminates

                                                                                         c) Gender, two-sided



                                                                       2
                                               Density / probability




                                                                       1                                                                            LFDR
                                                                                                                                                   ^0 =
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   0.833




                                                                       0
                                                                                         
                                                                             0.0         0.3                      0.6               0.9
                                                                                         P-value for test that firm discriminates


                    Notes: This figure plots distributions of p-values from firm-specific tests of the null hypothesis
                    of no discrimination. Panel (a) shows results for one-sided tests of no discrimination against
                    Black applicants, and panel (b) displays results for two-sided tests of equal contact rates for
                    Black and white applicants. Panel (c) shows results for two-sided tests of equal contact rates
                    for male and female applicants. Dotted black lines show estimated upper bounds on 0 , the
                    share of non-discriminating firms. Red lines trace local false discovery rates. P -values comes
                    from paired t-tests applied to job-level contact rate gaps for each firm.




                                                                                                        56
                                                         Figure 12: Detection tradeoffs




                                 20
Callbacks saved per 1,000 apps




                                 15




                                 10




                                  5
                                             True contact gap (infeasible)
                                             Posterior means
                                             Linear shrinkage
                                             q-value
                                  0
                                      0.00            0.25              0.50              0.75   1.00
                                                      Share of firms not investigated

Notes: This figure illustrates the expected number of contacts per thousand Black applications
sent that would be saved if discrimination were eliminated at all firms below a ranking threshold.
We consider four rankings: infeasible ranking by true contact gaps (f ), ranking by posterior
means (  ¯ f ), ranking by linear shrinkage estimates (~ f ), and ranking by q -values (^qf ). The
dashed black line shows the results of ranking firms randomly.




                                                                      57
                                     Figure 13: Job-level prevalence of racial discrimination



                        1.00
Prevlance lower bound




                        0.75




                        0.50




                        0.25




                        0.00
                               0.0           0.1            0.2             0.3          0.4    0.5
                                                                  q-value

Notes: This figure shows estimated lower bounds on the prevalence of job-level racial discrim-
ination within firms. Each point depicts a firm's estimated lower bound prevalence, computed
according to the formula ( ^ 2 - s2 )/(^
                                       f 2 + ^ 2 - s2 ), where  2 is the job level covariance be-
                                                               ^f
                             f    f            f    f
tween contact gaps arising in the first four and last four applications. Firm-specific bound
estimates have been constrained to fall in the unit interval. The black line plots prevalence
bounds computed by pooling jobs from all firms with q -values less than the threshold depicted
on the horizontal axis.




                                                                  58
  Tables

                                   Table 1: Summary statistics
                                          A. All firms                     B. Balanced sample
                                  White       Black     Difference     White      Black     Difference
Resume characteristics
  Female                           0.499      0.499      -0.001        0.500      0.498        0.003
  Over 40                          0.535      0.535       0.000        0.534      0.533       0.002
  LGBTQ club member                0.081      0.082      -0.001        0.079      0.080       -0.001
  Academic club                    0.040      0.042      -0.002        0.039      0.042      -0.003
  Political club                   0.042      0.042       0.001        0.042      0.041       0.001
  Gender-neutral pronouns          0.041      0.041      -0.001        0.040      0.040        0.000
  Same-gender pronouns             0.043      0.042       0.001        0.042      0.041       0.001
  Associate degree                 0.476      0.485     -0.009         0.478      0.485      -0.006
Geographic distribution
 Northeast                         0.150      0.150      -0.000        0.152      0.152      -0.000
 Midwest                           0.220      0.220      0.000         0.221      0.221      0.000
 South                             0.416      0.416      -0.000        0.423      0.423      -0.000
 West                              0.214      0.214      0.000         0.204      0.204      -0.000
Wave distribution
 Wave 1                            0.174      0.174      0.000         0.189      0.189      0.000
 Wave 2                            0.206      0.206      0.000         0.210      0.210      0.000
 Wave 3                            0.215      0.215      -0.000        0.204      0.204      -0.000
 Wave 4                            0.205      0.205      -0.000        0.198      0.198      -0.000
 Wave 5                            0.200      0.200      -0.000        0.199      0.199      -0.000
Contact rates
  Any contact in 30 days           0.251      0.230     0.020          0.256      0.234     0.022
    Voicemail                      0.178      0.159     0.019          0.185      0.166     0.019
    Email                          0.040      0.039      0.002         0.043      0.042      0.002
    Text                           0.033      0.032      0.000         0.028      0.027      0.001
  Any contact in 14 days           0.217      0.199     0.017          0.222      0.203     0.019
  Any contact in 15-30 days        0.034      0.031     0.003          0.034      0.031     0.003
N applications                    41837       41806      83643      32703         32665      65368
N jobs                                                   11114                                8667
N firms                                                   108                                  72
  1/2/3/4/5 waves                                       3/4/15/16/72
  Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the full analysis sample and balanced sample
  of firms sent applications in all five waves of the experiment. "White" refers to resumes with dis-
  tinctively white names; "Black" refers to resumes with distinctively Black names. LGBTQ club
  membership and gender-neutral pronouns were introduced in wave 2. Stars indicate significant
  differences from zero at the following levels:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                  59
                 Table 2: Effects of resume characteristics on contact rates
                                          A. All firms         B. Balanced sample
                                       (1)                 (2)          (3)         (4)
                                      LPM                Logit         LPM        Logit
         Black                   -0.0205              -0.115       -0.0222      -0.123
                                 (0.00169)            (0.00949)    (0.00193)    (0.0107)
         Female                   0.000184            0.000760     -0.000249    -0.00166
                                 (0.00300)             (0.0168)    (0.00341)    (0.0189)
         Over 40                 -0.00587             -0.0332       -0.00472     -0.0265
                                 (0.00299)             (0.0167)    (0.00341)    (0.0189)
         Political club           -0.00180             -0.00985     -0.00316     -0.0172
                                 (0.00742)             (0.0406)    (0.00848)    (0.0458)
         Academic club             0.00976               0.0520      0.00550      0.0283
                                 (0.00764)             (0.0407)    (0.00870)    (0.0461)
          LGBTQ club              -0.00513              -0.0287      -0.0000     -0.0007
                                 (0.00545)             (0.0302)    (0.00637)    (0.0342)
         Same-gender pronouns      -0.0139             -0.0765       -0.0126     -0.0677
                                 (0.00735)             (0.0412)    (0.00848)    (0.0466)
         Gender-neutral pronouns    -0.0104             -0.0572     -0.0174     -0.0946
                                 (0.00755)             (0.0421)    (0.00857)    (0.0477)
         Associate degree          0.00119              0.00665      0.00254      0.0139
                                 (0.00303)             (0.0170)    (0.00345)    (0.0191)
         Midwest                  0.0631               0.323       0.0454        0.230
                                  (0.0120)             (0.0622)     (0.0136)    (0.0692)
         South                   -0.0297              -0.170       -0.0396      -0.221
                                  (0.0103)             (0.0577)     (0.0117)    (0.0638)
         West                     -0.0266              -0.153      -0.0386      -0.216
                                  (0.0114)             (0.0650)     (0.0131)    (0.0729)
         Wave 2                   0.0535               0.318       0.0510        0.302
                                  (0.0106)             (0.0633)     (0.0116)    (0.0691)
         Wave 3                      0.0102              0.0624       0.0167       0.102
                                  (0.0101)             (0.0650)     (0.0115)    (0.0722)
         Wave 4                   0.0393               0.238       0.0416        0.249
                                  (0.0105)             (0.0640)     (0.0118)    (0.0709)
         Wave 5                    0.151               0.798         0.162       0.842
                                  (0.0113)             (0.0614)     (0.0127)    (0.0674)
         Constant                  0.207              -1.358         0.219      -1.292
                                  (0.0113)             (0.0666)     (0.0127)    (0.0728)
         N applications              83643               83643        65368       65368
Notes: This table presents the effects of randomized protected applicant characteristics on the
probability of employer contact within 30 days. Panel (a) includes all firms, while panel (b) in-
cludes the balanced sample of firms sent applications in every wave of the experiment. Columns
1 and 3 are linear probability models. Columns 2 and 4 are logistic regressions. Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the job level. Stars indicate statistical significance at the
following levels:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                60
                    Table 3: Effects of race interacted with resume characteristics
                                              A. OLS                             B. Logit
                                    (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                   White       Black     Difference     White       Black     Difference
Female                          0.00716     -0.00694      0.0141       0.0388     -0.0398      0.0786
                                (0.00423)   (0.00412)    (0.00579)    (0.0229)    (0.0236)    (0.0322)
Over 40                         -0.0104      -0.00125     -0.00915    -0.0562     -0.00711      -0.0491
                                (0.00428)   (0.00413)    (0.00590)    (0.0231)    (0.0236)     (0.0328)
Political club                   -0.00207    -0.00229    0.000220      -0.0109     -0.0126     0.00171
                                 (0.0107)    (0.0105)     (0.0150)    (0.0562)    (0.0587)     (0.0815)
Academic club                    0.00341      0.0147       -0.0113      0.0173      0.0806      -0.0633
                                 (0.0111)    (0.0107)     (0.0155)    (0.0576)    (0.0574)     (0.0817)
LGBTQ club                      -0.0165       0.00631    -0.0228      -0.0889       0.0349     -0.124
                                (0.00787)   (0.00763)     (0.0110)    (0.0431)    (0.0419)    (0.0601)
Same-gender pronouns             -0.00971     -0.0165     0.00681      -0.0515     -0.0934       0.0420
                                 (0.0106)    (0.0101)     (0.0146)    (0.0571)    (0.0587)     (0.0816)
Gender-neutral pronouns           -0.0106     -0.0103    -0.000279     -0.0564     -0.0578     0.00138
                                 (0.0108)    (0.0105)     (0.0150)    (0.0581)    (0.0598)     (0.0830)
Associates degree                 0.00573    -0.00152     0.00724       0.0309    -0.00869       0.0396
                                (0.00431)   (0.00412)    (0.00584)    (0.0233)    (0.0236)     (0.0325)
Constant                         0.201       0.185       0.0160       -1.377      -1.485       0.108
                                (0.00848)   (0.00820)    (0.00621)    (0.0514)    (0.0538)     (0.0366)
N applications                     41837       41806        83643       41837       41806        83643
2 stat for joint significance                                16.55                                16.45
  p-value                                                   0.0351                               0.0363
     Notes: This table presents the effects of race interacted with other resume characteristics.
     Columns 1 and 3 show estimates of models for employer contact among white applicants,
     columns 2 and 4 display estimates for Black applicants, and columns 3 and 6 show differences
     in coefficients between white and Black applicants. Panel (a) uses linear probability models,
     while panel (b) uses logistic regression. All models control for wave indicators. 2 statistics
     and joint p-values come from tests that all differences in reported coefficients other than the
     constant term are zero. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the job level. Stars
     indicate statistical significance at the following levels:  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                   61
                    Table 4: Firm-level heterogeneity in discrimination
                                                             Contact gap SD
                   (1)                  (2)                (3)           (4)            (5)
                2 test of         p-value for no          Bias-        Cross-       Cross-State
              heterogeneity      discrim against:      corrected       Wave
 Race             276.5              W: 1.00             0.0185        0.0168          0.0178
                 [0.000]              B: 0.00          (0.0033)       (0.0034)        (0.0035)
 Gender           205.2              M: 0.00             0.0267        0.0287          0.0269
                 [0.000]              F: 0.05          (0.0041)       (0.0037)        (0.0041)
 Over 40          144.6               Y: 0.21            0.0103        0.0044          0.0086
                 [0.011]              O: 0.03           (0.0053)      (0.0098)        (0.0059)

Notes: This table presents estimated standard deviations of firm-level contact rate gaps and
tests for heterogeneity in gaps. Column 1 displays 2 test statistics and associated p-values
from tests of the null hypothesis of no heterogeneity in discrimination. The test statistic is
      ^    ¯ 2 2           ^
   f (f - ) /sf , where f is the contact cap estimate for firm f , sf is the estimate's standard
error, and  ¯ is the equally-weighted average of contact gaps. Column 2 presents tests for one-
sided discrimination against white (W), black (B), male (M), female (F), aged under 40 (Y),
and over 40 (O) applications using the methodology in Bai, Santos and Shaikh (2021). Column
3 reports estimates of the standard deviation of average contact gaps across firms calculated
using firm-specific standard errors to correct for bias due to sampling variation in ^ f . Columns
4 and 5 report cross-wave and cross-state estimates based on covariances between firm-by-wave
and firm-by-state contact gaps. Details on these estimators appear in Appendix D. Standard
errors for all variance estimators are produced by job-clustered weighted bootstrap. Estimates
include all 108 firms.


    Table 5: Firm contact gap heterogeneity in levels, log odds, and log proportions
                             LPM                       Logit                  Poisson
                             (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)             (5)          (6)
                          Intercept     Slope         Intercept    Slope         Intercept      Slope
 Mean                       0.2547     -0.0187         -1.2715    -0.1102         -1.6046       -0.0853
                          (0.0035) (0.0018)           (0.0263) (0.0142)          (0.0222)      (0.0123)
 Std. dev.                  0.1607      0.0186         0.9755     0.1155           0.7047        0.0837
                          (0.0035) (0.0036)           (0.0366) (0.0361)          (0.0368)      (0.0370)
 Corr. w/own slope         -0.4010      1.000          0.0519      1.000          0.0685         1.000
                          (0.1123)         -          (0.1855)        -          (0.2360)           -
 Corr. w/LPM slope         -0.4010       1.000         -0.4274    0.8944          -0.5045       0.8075
                          (0.1123)         -          (0.1093) (0.0953)          (0.1155)      (0.1448)
 Number of firms                   103                        103                           103
 Notes: This table reports estimated means, standard deviations, and correlations of firm-specific
 intercept and Black slope coefficients from models for employer contact. Columns 1-2 show results
 from linear probability models (LPMs; levels), columns 3-4 display results from logit models (log
 odds), and columns 5-6 show results from Poisson regression models (log proportions). Means are
 averages of firm-specific coefficients. Standard deviations are calculated by subtracting the average
 squared job-clustered standard error from the sample variance of parameter estimates, then taking
 the square root. Correlations are computed by subtracting the average job-clustered sampling
 covariance from the sample covariance of parameter estimates, then dividing by the product of
 estimated standard deviations. The analysis is restricted to the 103 firms with callback rates above
 3 percent. Standard errors (computed by job-clustered weighted bootstrap) in parentheses.


                                                 62
                  Table 6: Heterogeneity across alternative job groupings
                                      (1)            (2)            (3)
                                     Race          Gender         Over 40
                State               0.0076            -              -
                                   (0.0029)
                                    [0.038]        [0.668]        [0.583]
                Industry               0.0141           0.0190          0.0048
                                      (0.0022)         (0.0030)        (0.0040)
                                       [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.112]
                Job title              0.0135           0.0111          0.0033
                SOC3 code             (0.0022)         (0.0039)        (0.0071)
                                       [0.000]          [0.007]         [0.527]
                Hiring platform        0.0059           0.0024          0.0024
                intermediary          (0.0023)         (0.0071)        (0.0059)
                                       [0.008]          [0.049]         [0.212]

Notes: This table presents estimates of heterogeneity in average contact rate gaps across states,
industries, job titles, and hiring platform intermediaries, along with the results of tests for
no heterogeneity across each set of groups. Estimates are standard deviations of group-level
contact rate gaps, computed using the same bias-corrected estimator employed in column 1
of Table 4. Group variance components are computed weighting jobs in inverse proportion to
the number of jobs sampled from each job's parent firm, so that groupings that nest firms are
weighted by the number of firms in each group. Standard errors, produced by job-clustered
weighted bootstrap, are reported in parentheses. Dashes indicate negative variance estimates
and hence undefined estimated standard deviations. P -values from 2 tests of no heterogeneity
in group-level contact rates are reported in square brackets. The first panel groups jobs by state,
with 51 states (including D.C.) represented in the experiment. The second panel groups firms
by the 24 two-digit SIC codes in the data. The third panel groups by the 47 three-digit SOC3
codes for job titles. The final panel groups by the 11 hiring platform intermediaries observed,
with firms that use proprietary platforms included as a single group.




                                                 63
                                               Table 7: Two-way fixed effect estimates of firm components
                                                                  Race                          Gender                       Over 40
                                                          State          Job title      State         Job title        State        Job title
                  SD firm effects                        0.0176           0.0150       0.0253          0.0255         0.0096         0.0088
                  SD job title / state effects           0.0003               -            -           0.0080         0.0004             -
                  Covariance                             0.0000           0.0001       0.0000          0.0002         0.0000         0.0002
                  N jobs                                 11026            11026        10720           10720          10652          10652
                  N firms                                  108              108          108             108            108            108
                  N job titles / states                     51               47           51              47             51             47
                  N job titles / states > 1 firm           51                43           51             43              51             43
                  Mean gap                               0.0196           0.0196       0.0023          0.0023         0.0037         0.0037
                  p-value firm effects                    0.000           0.0008        0.000           0.000          0.071           .040
                  p-value job title / state effects       0.186            0.327       0.482           0.237           0.86           0.459
     Notes: This table presents bias-corrected variance component estimates from two-way fixed effect models estimated using the leave-out procedure of
64




     Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020). Columns labeled "Job title" include fixed effects for the first three digits of each job's O*Net SOC code. Columns
     labeled "State" include fixed effects for the job's state. All variance and covariance estimates are job-weighted. Only jobs in the leave-job-out
     connected set are included for each estimate. Dashes indicate negative variance estimates and hence undefined estimated standard deviations. "N
     job titles / states > 1 firm" is the number of states or job titles in the connected set observed at 2 or more firms. The final two rows report p-values
     from tests of the joint hypothesis that all firm or job title / state fixed effects equal zero, computed using the heteroscedasticity robust procedure
     of Anatolyev and Sølvsten (2020).
                        Table 8: Sensitivity of q -values to estimation strategy
                                        Race                           Gender                     Age
                           One-tailed            Two-tailed             Two-tailed            Two-tailed
                                                          Bootstrapped 
                 ^0           0.391                 0.541                  0.833                 0.833
# q -values <= 0.05            23                     8                      1                     0
 # q -values <= 0.1            45                    21                      5                     1
                              0.550                 0.350                  0.300                 0.400
                                                Randomization inference p-values
                 ^0           0.324                 0.463                  0.818                 0.787
# q -values <= 0.05            34                     24                     8                     1
 # q -values <= 0.1            59                    38                      10                    1
                              0.600                 0.400                  0.400                 0.400
                                                             Smoothed
                 ^0           0.451                 0.882              0.854                     0.832
# q -values <= 0.05            21                     4                  1                         0
 # q -values <= 0.1            40                    18                  5                         1
                                                       95% upper CI for 0
                 ^0           0.607                 0.699                  1.000                 1.000
# q -values <= 0.05            20                     4                      1                     0
 # q -values <= 0.1            31                    18                      5                     1

     Notes: This table reports the results of estimating firm q -values for discrimination using several
     strategies. Each panel reports an estimated upper bound on the share of non-discriminating
     firms (0 ) along with numbers of firms with q -values less than 0.1 and 0.05. Estimates are
     based on p-values taken from a t-test of mean job-level contact rate gaps for each firm, except
     in the second panel, which uses p-values constructed based on 10,000 simulations permuting race,
     gender, and age labels. In accordance with how characteristics were stratified in the experiment,
     race labels are permuted within pairs, while gender and age are permuted unconditionally.
     The first two panels estimate 0 by choosing the tuning parameter  based on the bootstrap
     methodology from Storey et al. (2015). The third panel uses the smoothed estimator from
     Storey (2003). The final panel reports the upper limit of the 95% upper confidence interval for
     0 constructed using the method of Armstrong (2015).




                                                     65
                                  Table 9: Estimates of racial discrimination for firms with q -values below 0.05
                                                Federal                                                    Posterior            Posterior      Posterior
       q -value rank        Industry          Contractor? Contact gap Std. err. p-value q -value            mean                5th pctile    95th pctile
              1      Auto dealers / services      Yes           0.0952       0.0197     0.0000 0.0001       0.0833                0.0439        0.1034
              2      Auto dealers / services      No            0.0507       0.0143     0.0003 0.0061       0.0348                0.0133        0.0670
              3      Auto dealers / services      No            0.0738       0.0220     0.0005 0.0073       0.0481                0.0190        0.0974
              4      Auto dealers / services      No            0.0787       0.0249     0.0010 0.0103       0.0489                0.0199        0.1021
              5          Apparel stores           No            0.0733       0.0250     0.0022 0.0158       0.0440                0.0185        0.0917
              6           Other retail            No            0.0469       0.0159     0.0020 0.0158       0.0282                0.0118        0.0587
              7           Other retail            Yes           0.0605       0.0219     0.0033 0.0176       0.0359                0.0153        0.0731
              8       General merchandise         Yes           0.0520       0.0187     0.0031 0.0176       0.0309                0.0131        0.0631
              9      Auto dealers / services      No            0.0613       0.0240     0.0060 0.0194       0.0366                0.0157        0.0712
             10         Eating/drinking           No            0.0560       0.0222     0.0064 0.0194       0.0334                0.0143        0.0648
             11           Other retail            No            0.0560       0.0214     0.0050 0.0194       0.0333                0.0142        0.0658
             12      Auto dealers / services      No            0.0540       0.0215     0.0068 0.0194       0.0323                0.0138        0.0623
             13           Food stores             Yes           0.0511       0.0204     0.0069 0.0194       0.0305                0.0131        0.0589
             14       General merchandise         No            0.0427       0.0170     0.0068 0.0194       0.0255                0.0109        0.0493
             15         Furnishing stores         Yes           0.0400       0.0159     0.0066 0.0194       0.0239                0.0102        0.0462
66




             16      Wholesale nondurable         No            0.0386       0.0158     0.0080 0.0199       0.0232                0.0099        0.0442
             17      Apparel manufacturing        Yes           0.0350       0.0142     0.0078 0.0199       0.0210                0.0090        0.0401
             18        Building materials         Yes           0.0373       0.0157     0.0093 0.0218       0.0226                0.0096        0.0425
             19          Health services          Yes           0.0544       0.0240     0.0132 0.0292       0.0335                0.0142        0.0615
             20         Furnishing stores         No            0.0400       0.0183     0.0152 0.0322       0.0250                0.0105        0.0452
             21         Eating/drinking           No            0.0340       0.0159     0.0172 0.0346       0.0214                0.0090        0.0385
             22       General merchandise         No            0.0423       0.0210     0.0229 0.0439       0.0275                0.0114        0.0486
             23      Insurance / real estate      No            0.0278       0.0140     0.0257 0.0472       0.0182                0.0075        0.0320
     Notes: This table reports estimates of white-Black contact gaps for the 23 individual firms with q -values less than 0.05. P -values and q -values come
     from one-sided tests of the null hypothesis that the firm does not discriminate against Black applicants. To ensure that q -values are non-decreasing
     for nested decision thresholds, we follow Storey (2002, 2003) in estimating q^f as mintp ^f F DR(t), which implies firms with different p-values may
     have the same q -value. Posterior means and percentiles are empirical Bayes posteriors constructed using the estimated distribution in Figure 7 as
     the prior.
                    Table 10: Discrimination estimates and detection by industry
                                                    Race                         Gender
                                N   W-B post # q -val Mean M-F post # q -val Mean
SIC     Industry
                              firms   gap     < .05 LFDR      gap    < .05 LFDR
 20   Food products              2   0.015     0      1.000 -0.004    0      1.000
 23   Apparel manufacturing      2   0.020     1      0.197  0.007    0      0.719
24-35 Other manufacturing        4   0.018     0      0.417  0.011    0      0.679
42-47 Freight / transport        4   0.011     0      0.910  0.001    0      0.952
 48   Communications             2   0.017     0      0.393  0.013    0      0.984
 49   Electric / gas             3   0.015     0      0.392 0.002     0      0.988
 50   Wholesale durable          2   0.017     0      0.339  0.034    0      0.556
 51   Wholesale nondurable      11   0.018     1      0.512  0.005    0      0.875
 52   Building materials         3   0.014     1      0.614  0.012    0      0.853
 53   General merchandise       12   0.022     2      0.319 -0.001    0      0.878
 54   Food stores                5   0.025      1     0.411  0.009     0     0.826
 55   Auto dealers / services    8   0.039     6      0.147  0.005    0      0.887
 56   Apparel stores             4   0.025      1     0.292 -0.060     1     0.420
 57   Furnishing stores          4   0.022     2      0.351 -0.006    0      0.800
 58   Eating/drinking            5   0.027     2      0.350  0.003    0      0.934
 59   Other retail               7   0.021     3      0.363 -0.002    0      0.978
60-61 Banks / credit             5   0.010      0     0.720  0.002     0     0.798
 62   Securities brokers         2   0.010     0      0.473 -0.011    0      0.657
63-65 Insurance / real estate    8   0.013     0      0.521 -0.003    0      0.922
 70   Accommodation              2   0.015     0      0.569  0.001    0      1.000
 73   Business services          3   0.012     0      0.612  0.000    0      0.949
75-76 Auto / repair services     3   0.013     0      0.521  0.015    0      0.640
 80   Health services            5   0.016      1     0.791 -0.009     0     0.922
 87   Engineering services       2   0.009     0      0.401 -0.001    0      0.977
      Notes: This table shows the results of aggregating firm-specific posterior estimates of race and
      gender discrimination to the industry level. Industries that include only one firm are grouped
      together with proximate SIC codes. The column "W-B post gap" shows industry averages
      of posterior mean white/Black contact gaps. The column "M-F post gap" displays industry
      averages of posterior mean male/female contact gaps. The column "# q -val < .05" gives the
      number of firms in the industry with q -values below 0.05. The column "mean LFDR" reports
      the mean Local False Discovery Rate (LFDR) among firms in the industry. Firm level q -values
      and LFDRs were estimated using the procedure of Storey et al. (2015). The distribution of race
      LFDRs is depicted in Panel (a) of Figure 11. The distribution of gender LFDRs is depicted in
      Panel (c) of Figure 11.




                                                    67
         Appendix A                                       Additional Figures and Tables

                                                       Figure A1: Examples of applicant resumes

MR                                                            Maurice Randle                            Joshua Erickson                                                                                                     J|E
                                                                                                        Preferred Pronouns: They | Them | Theirs
                                                                              (781)-790-4717
                                                                             3620 232Nd St                  (224)-478-1806
                                                                                 Bothell, WA                joshuaerickson9@gmail.com
                                                                  mrandle667@verizonmail.me                 124 Carol Louise Dr
                                                                                                            Caseyville, IL




Previous         Retail Associate | Seattle, WA                             9/2018 to Present
Employment       Oiselle Running
                 Reference | Salvador Porter | (206) 160-2193                                           Education                    Young Magnet High School | Chicago, IL
                   I. Received, unpacked, tagged, and issued sales floor merchandise.                   History                      1990 to 1994
                   II. Participated in year-end inventory and cycle counts.
                   III. Served as a consultant to help customer make the right selection.
                 Cashier | Bellevue, WA                                        1/2017 to 9/2018
                 Crossroads Farmers Market
                 Reference | Ezequiel Stephens | (425) 885-1919
                   I. Operated registers, scanners, scales and credit card/debit card terminals.        Previous                     Retail Associate | O Fallon, IL
                   II. Served customers with a friendly demeanor and positive attitude.                 Employment                   11/2019 to Present
                   III. Maintained clean and orderly checkout areas and completed other
                                                                                                                                     Good Feet Store
                 general cleaning duties, such as mopping floors and emptying trash cans.
                                                                                                                                       1. Performed visual merchandising in sales areas.
                 Cashier | Redmond, WA                                          7/2015 to 1/2017
                                                                                                                                       2. Wrote up inventory logs daily.
                 Redmond Marriott Town Center
                 Reference | Kayley Gonzalez | (206) 538-2874
                   I. Used coupons effectively & discounts.                                                                          Host | Marine, IL
                   II. Other responsibilities included scanning items, processing payments,                                          10/2018 to 11/2019
                 applying coupons, providing change.
                                                                                                                                     Phyl's Chet Rose's Tavern
                   III. Operated scanners, scales, cash registers, and other electronics on a
                 daily basis.                                                                                                          1. Communicated efficiently with all restaurant staff.
                                                                                                                                       2. Monitored guests needs and workflow of the restaurant seating customers accordingly.
                                                                                                                                       3. Recognized for hard work, dedication, dependability, prompt and reliable attendance, and
                                                                                                                                     willingness to work overtime as needed.
Education        Everett Community College                                         1995 to 1997
History          Everett, WA
                 Associates | Marketing


                 Naches Valley High School                                          1991 to 1995
                 Naches, WA                                                                             Professional                 Juliet Romero: Previous supervisor at Good Feet Store
                 General Studies                                                                        References                   Cassandra Edwards: Previous supervisor at Phyl's Chet Rose's Tavern



Skills           Communication
                 Prioritizing tasks
                 Highly detail oriented




         Notes: This figure presents two examples of randomly generated resumes used in the experiment.
         Resumes are formatted using a combination of pre-set options specifying length, fonts, text sizes,
         section header names, and layouts, with controls to ensure resumes that overflow one page are
         not generated. The resume on the right features gender-neutral pronouns displayed below the
         name.




                                                                                                   68
                                    Figure A2: Kaplan-Meier estimates of contact probability and smoothed hazard
                              a) Contact probability                                            b) Smoothed contact hazard




                                                                                               .02
              .3
              .25




                                                                                                    .015
                    .2
      Pr(any contact)




                                                                                     Contact hazard
            .15




                                                                                          .01
69


     .1




                                                                                               .005
              .05
              0




                                                                                               0
                         0       10                        20             30                               0    10                            20          30
                                      Days since application                                                         Days since application

                                         White              Black                                                       White                 Black


        Notes: This figure plots contact probabilities and hazards as functions of days since application. Contact probabilities correspond to Kaplan-Meier
        failure function estimates. Hazards are Kaplan-Meier hazard estimate smoothed using the Epanechnikov kernel. Shaded areas represent pointwise
        95% confidence bands.
                                                                      Figure A3: Callbacks by applicant first name
           Mean 30-day callback rate




                                       0.2

                                                                                                                                 Race and gender
                                                                                                                                     Black, female
                                                                                                                                     Black, male
                                             F: 1.22 (p 0.24)   F: 0.73 (p 0.78)        F: 1.18 (p 0.27)      F: 0.86 (p 0.62)       White, female
70




                                                                                                                                     White, male
                                       0.1




                                       0.0
                                              Roderick
                                              Terrance
                                                  Terrell
                                             Tremayne
                                                 Tyrone
                                                 Allison
                                               Amanda
                                                    Amy
                                                   Anne
                                                  Carrie
                                                   Emily
                                                     Erin
                                               Heather
                                               Jennifer
                                                      Jill
                                                    Julie
                                                Kristen
                                                 Laurie
                                                     Lori
                                              Meredith
                                                   Misty
                                              Rebecca
                                                  Sarah
                                                 Susan
                                                  Adam
                                                    Brad
                                                Bradley
                                              Brendan
                                                   Brett
                                                   Chad
                                                  Aisha
                                                 Ebony
                                                 Kenya
                                              Lakeisha
                                              Lakesha




                                               Kareem
                                                 Lamar
                                                Lamont
                                                  Leroy
                                               Maurice
                                              Rasheed
                                              Reginald




                                              Geoffrey
                                                   Greg
                                                 Keisha

                                               Lakisha
                                             Lashonda



                                               Tameka

                                               Tomeka
                                                Antwan
                                                Darnell
                                               Donnell
                                                 Hakim
                                                  Jamal
                                             Jermaine


                                               Marquis




                                                  Jacob
                                                  Jason
                                                     Jay
                                                Jeremy
                                                Joshua
                                                  Justin
                                                Nathan
                                                     Neil
                                               Latasha
                                                Latisha
                                               Latonya
                                                 Latoya
                                              Lawanda
                                                Patrice
                                                Tamika
                                               Tanisha
                                              Tawanda




                                              Matthew
                                                   Scott
                                                   Todd
                                                                          Applicant first name
     Notes: This figure shows mean contact rates by applicant first name, organized by race and gender group. The horizontal bars show race group
     mean contact rates. F -tests and p-values come from joint tests of the hypothesis that contact rates are equal across names separately by race and
     gender group.
                                                              Figure A4: Callbacks by applicant last name
           Mean 30-day callback rate




                                       0.2



                                                                                                                                Race
                                                                                                                                      Black
                                               F: 1.32 (p 0.13)                                F: 0.75 (p 0.81)
                                                                                                                                      White
                                       0.1
71




                                       0.0
                                                  Bolden
                                                    Alston
                                                    Battle
                                                  Bethea
                                                  Booker
                                                  Braxton
                                                Chatman
                                                    Diggs
                                                   Felder
                                                 Francois
                                                 Hairston

                                                Jefferson
                                                  Lockett
                                                  McCray
                                                    Myles

                                                    Ruffin

                                                 Winston
                                             Witherspoon
                                                   Becker
                                                   Hollins
                                                     Jean

                                                     Louis
                                             Muhammad
                                                    Pierre
                                                  Randle
                                                   Smalls
                                             Washington

                                                    Bauer
                                              Burkholder
                                                     Byler
                                                  Carlson
                                                 Erickson
                                               Gallagher
                                                  Graber
                                                Hostetler
                                                     Klein




                                                    Olson
                                                 Schmidt
                                               Schneider
                                              Schroeder
                                             Hershberger

                                                  Kramer
                                                   Larson
                                                     Mast
                                                    Meyer
                                                  Mueller
                                                   Roush


                                                  Schultz
                                                Schwartz
                                                 Stoltzfus
                                                    Troyer
                                                    Yoder
                                                                     Applicant last name
     Notes: This figure shows mean contact rates by applicant last name, organized by race. The horizontal bars show race group mean contact rates.
     F -tests and p-values come from joint tests of the hypothesis that contact rates are equal across names separately by race.
                            Figure A5: Contact rates by age category
         .26




                                                     Test for equality: F = 2.3, p = 0.052
         .25
   Contact rate
       .24
         .23
         .22




                  25   30           35         40        45              50           55
                                             Average age


Notes: This figure plots average 30-day contact rates by quintile of applicant age at the time
of application. Estimates come from regressions of a contact indicator on indicators for age
quintile, controlling for wave indicators. The horizontal axis plots average age in each quintile.
The vertical axis plots the mean contact rate, calculated as the sum of the quintile coefficient
and mean wave effect. Dashed lines indicate 90% confidence intervals. F -statistic and p-value
come from a Wald test that contact rates are equal across quintiles, clustering standard errors
by job.




                                               72
          Figure A6: Within and between industry relationship between contact gaps and task
          content
                     a) Race                                           b) Gender

           Analytical skills (11026)                                                                      Analytical skills (10720)



             Routine skills (11026)                                                                         Routine skills (10720)



   Social interaction skills (11026)                                                              Social interaction skills (10720)



Customer interaction skills (11026)                                                            Customer interaction skills (10720)



             Manual skills (11026)                                                                          Manual skills (10720)


                                       -.01         -.005        0        .005      .01                                               -.015       -.01    -.005     0     .005     .01
                                              Effect on job white-Black contact gap                                                           Effect on job male-female contact gap

                                              Within industry     Between industry                                                            Within industry      Between industry



          Notes: This figure plots the relationship between O*Net measures of job-level task content
          and contact gaps for race and gender within and between industry. The within relationship
          is estimated with a linear regression with job-level contact gaps as the outcome and two-digit
          industry fixed effects. The between relationship is estimated by instrumenting job task content
          with industry dummies. All jobs with defined contact gaps for each attribute are included.
          The number of jobs in each regression is in parentheses. Task measures are normalized to
          have standard deviation one in sample. Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals based on robust
          standard errors. Appendix C provides a complete description of task definitions and sources.




                                                                                          73
 Figure A7: Relationships between age contact gaps and establishment characteristics
                              Local demographics
                             % county Black (10652)
                               % block Black (6735)
                              % block female (6735)

                                   Local sentiment
                            County race IAT (10572)
                          County gender IAT (10626)
                               DMA animus (10572)

                     Establishment characteristics
                     % managers non-white (10025)
                        % managers female (10025)
                                 Log emp (10278)

                                             Region
                                     Midwest (10652)
                                       South (10652)
                                        West (10652)
                                                          -.1               -.05            0            .05
                                                                 Effect on job under-over 40 contact gap

                                                                            Bivariate           Firm FE
                                                           P-value for joint sig w/o firm FE: 0.64, w/ firm fe: 0.67



Notes: This figure plots the relationship between establishment-level covariates and contact gaps
for applicant age under vs. over 40. Each relationship is estimated with a linear regression with
job-level contact gaps as the outcome. All jobs with defined contact gaps for age and matched
to the listed covariate are included. "Bivariate" points plot coefficients from a regression of
contact gaps on the covariate alone. "Firm FE" points include firm fixed effects. Bars indicate
95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors. Appendix C provides a complete
description of covariate definitions and sources.


      Figure A8: Relationships between age contact gaps and firm characteristics
                               Firm performance
                            Log employment (108)
                                Sales / emp (108)
                                 Profit / emp (105)
                                   GD score (108)
                                Legal compliance
                            DOL viols / emp (108)
                      Empl-discr cases / emp (108)
                          Federal contractor (108)
                                    Firm diversity
                              % board Black (107)
                             % board female (107)
                     % managers non-white (106)
                        % managers female (106)
                    Has chief diversity officer (108)
                          GD diversity score (108)
                               Callback patterns
                      Callback centralization (106)
                                                        -.01                0             .01           .02
                                                                Effect on job under-over 40 contact gap

                                                                         Bivariate          Multivariate
                                                        P-value for joint significance: 0.341



Notes: This figure plots relationships between firm-level covariates and contact gaps for ap-
plication age under vs. over 40. Each relationship is estimated with a linear regression with
job-level contact gaps as the outcome. All covariates are standardized to be mean zero, standard
deviation 1 in sample."Bivariate" points plot coefficients from a regression of contact gaps on
the covariate alone. "Multivariate" points plot effects when all covariates are entered simulta-
neously. Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm
level. Appendix C provides a complete description of covariate definitions and sources.


                                                                74
                                                                Figure A9: Distribution of observed, deconvolved, and posterior estimates
                                                             a) Race                                                                b) Gender
                              1.00                                                                                                  1.00




                              0.75                                                                                                  0.75
     Cumulative probability




                                                                                                           Cumulative probability
                              0.50                                                                                                  0.50
75




                              0.25                                                                                                  0.25
                                                                                  Observed gaps                                                                                 Observed gaps
                                                                                  Deconvolved prior                                                                             Deconvolved prior
                                                                                  Posterior mean                                                                                Posterior mean
                                                                                  Linear shrinkage                                                                              Linear shrinkage
                              0.00                                                                                                  0.00
                                     -0.05                 0.00                     0.05                                                   -0.05                 0.00                  0.05
                                                   Firm white-black contact rate gap                                                               Firm male-female contact rate gap

                              Notes: This figure presents estimates of the distribution of firm-specific contact gaps for race and gender. The red solid line presents the empirical
                              CDF of estimated gaps. The blue dashed line plots the CDF of population contact gaps based on the deconvolution estimates in Figure 7. The
                              green dotted line plots the empirical CDF of posterior means, constructed treating the deconvolved density as prior knowledge. The pink dashed
                              line shows the empirical CDF of estimates shrunk linearly towards the grand mean with weights given by the signal-to-noise ratio /   ^ (s2 + ^), where
                                                                                                                                                                       f
                              ^ is the bias-corrected estimate of the variance of contact gaps across firms.
                              
Figure A10: Deconvolution of firm-level racial discrimination without support restriction

                             Implied firm mean
                        30    gap: 0.0163
                             Implied between
                              firm SD: 0.0183
                                                               Deconvolved density



                        20
              Density




                        10
                                   Observed gaps




                         0
                                  -0.05            0.00        0.05                  0.10   0.15
                                          Firm white-black contact rate gap
Notes: This figure presents non-parametric estimates of the distribution of firm-specific white-
Black contact rate differences. The red histogram shows the distribution of estimated firm
contact gaps. Blue line shows estimates of the population contact gap distributions. The
population distributions are estimated by applying the deconvolveR package (Narasimhan and
Efron, 2020) to firm-specific z -score estimates, then numerically integrating over the distribution
of log standard errors using a Gaussian kernel and the Silverman (1986) bandwidth to recover the
distribution of contact gaps. The penalization parameter in the deconvolution step is calibrated
so that the resulting distribution matches the corresponding bias-corrected variance estimate
from Table 4.




                                                          76
                                                           Figure A11: Posterior mean contact gaps vs. q -values
Posterior mean white-Black contact rate gap




                                              0.09




                                              0.06




                                              0.03




                                              0.00

                                                     0.0             0.1                 0.2                0.3
                                                                                    q-value


Notes: This figure plots posterior mean white/Black contact gaps        ¯ f for each firm against
estimated q -values for racial discrimination. Vertical lines depict 95% empirical Bayes credible
intervals (EBCIs).




                                                                                    77
             Table A1: Balanced sample: Firm-level heterogeneity in discrimination
                          Contact gap SD
                   (1)             (2)              (3)                    (4)               (5)
                  Bias-        Cross-Wave       Cross-State             2 test of      p-value for no
                corrected                                             heterogeneity   discrim against:
   Race          0.0184           0.0171             0.0182               229.5           W: 1.00
                (0.0030)         (0.0033)           (0.0031)             [0.000]           B: 0.00
   Gender        0.0207           0.0213             0.0200               124.2           M: 0.06
                (0.0041)         (0.0043)           (0.0043)             [0.000]           F: 0.03
   Over 40       0.0098           0.0096             0.0099                90.2            Y: 0.14
                (0.0045)         (0.0050)           (0.0045)             [0.072]          O: 0.02

   Notes: This table presents estimated standard deviations of firm-level contact rate gaps and
   tests for heterogeneity in gaps using the balanced sample of firms present in all five waves.
   Column 1 reports bias-corrected estimates of standard deviations of average contact gaps across
   firms based on covariances between job-level contact gaps. Columns 2 and 3 report cross-wave
   and cross-state estimates based on covariances between firm-by-wave and firm-by-state contact
   gaps. Details on these estimators appear in the Appendix. Standard errors for all variance
   estimators are produced by job-clustered weighted bootstrap. Column 4 displays 2 values and
   associated p-values from tests of the null hypothesis of no heterogeneity in discrimination. The
   test statistic is f ( ^ f - )
                               ¯ 2 /s2 , where ^ f is the contact cap estimate for firm f , sf is the
                                     f
                                     ¯
   estimate's standard error, and  is the equally-weighted average of contact gaps. Column 5
   presents one-sided tests of no discrimination against white (W), black (B), male (M), female
   (F), aged under 40 (Y), and over 40 (O) applications using the methodology in Bai, Santos and
   Shaikh (2021).



                   Table A2: Variance components for other resume attributes
                                         Contact gap SD
                                (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)               (5)
                               Bias-        Cross-Wave    Cross-State         2 test of      p-value for no
                             corrected                                      heterogeneity   discrim against:
LGBTQ Club Member                -              -                 -             88.0             Y: 1.00
                                                                               [0.885]           N: 0.98
Gender-Neutral Pronouns       0.0198          0.0177            0.0147          126.5            Y: 0.92
                             (0.0111)        (0.0126)          (0.0138)        [0.076]           N: 0.65

   Notes: This table presents estimated standard deviations of firm-level contact rate gaps by
   LGBTQ club member status and the presence of gender-neutral pronouns, along with tests for
   heterogeneity in these gaps. Column 1 reports bias-corrected estimates of standard deviations of
   average contact gaps across firms based on covariances between job-level contact gaps. Columns
   2 and 3 report cross-wave and cross-state estimates based on covariances between firm-by-wave
   and firm-by-state contact gaps. Details on these estimators appear in the Appendix. Standard
   errors for all variance estimators are produced by job-clustered weighted bootstrap. Column 4
   displays 2 values and associated p-values from tests of the null hypothesis of no heterogeneity
   in discrimination. The test statistic is f (   ^ f - )
                                                        ¯ 2 /s2 , where ^ f is the contact cap estimate
                                                              f
   for firm f , sf is the estimate's standard error, and ¯ is the equally-weighted average of contact
   gaps. Column 5 presents one-sided tests of no discrimination against applicants with the relevant
   attribute (Y) and those without the attribute (N) using the methodology in Bai, Santos and
   Shaikh (2021). Estimates include all 108 firms.




                                                     78
              Table A3: Relationship between z -scores and standard errors
                                        Race                             Gender
                                (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)
                           Full sample    Split sample       Full sample    Split sample
      Z -score                 33.98            18.06           11.50            4.52
                              (24.07)          (11.35)         (14.12)          (6.74)
      Squared residual         86.20            17.94           83.17           28.78
                              (48.44)          (17.58)         (53.30)         (16.94)

Notes: This table assesses dependence between firm-specific z -score estimates and standard
errors. Coefficients in the first row come from regressions of z -scores on standard errors, and
coefficients in the second row come from regressions of the squared residuals from the first row
on standard errors. Columns 1 and 2 display results for race, and columns 3 and 4 show results
for gender. Columns 1 and 3 use z -scores and standard errors computed in the full sample
of jobs. Columns 2 and 4 randomly split the jobs at each firm into two equally-sized samples
and regress z -scores computed in one sample on standard errors computed in the other sample,
stacking the two samples and clustering standard errors by firm identifier.




                  Table A4: Job-level discrimination prevalence bounds

                                                  (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                 Race     Gender    Over 40
                   Mean gap                      0.020     0.002     0.004
                                                (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
                   Total job-level variance      0.071     0.093      0.018
                                                (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)
                   Prevalence bound              0.070     0.000      0.027
                                                (0.011)   (0.001)    (0.037)


Notes: This table reports a bound on the job-level prevalence of discrimination assuming that
a fixed fraction of jobs discriminate and the remaining jobs exhibit contact gaps of zero. The
mean gap reported is the job-weighted average contact gap. The total job level variance is
computed as the covariance of contact gaps among the first four and last four applications at
every job. The prevalence bound is estimated as (   ^ 2 - s2 )/(^
                                                                2 +  ^ 2 - s2 ), where ^ 2 is the
square of the estimated mean gap, s is the mean gap's estimated standard error, and    ^ 2 is the
estimated between-job variance. Bootstrap standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                79
Appendix B               Details of Experimental Design
Resume characteristics
Names: We draw racially distinctive first names from two sources. First, we use the
same set of names in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), which are in turn drawn from
Massachusetts birth records covering 1974 to 1979. Second, we supplement with names
drawn from administrative records on speeding infractions and arrests provided by the
North Carolina Administrative Office of the Courts and covering 2006 to 2018. We pick
the most common names among drivers born between 1974 and 1979 with race- and
gender-specific shares of at least 90%. The top names using this criterion substantially
overlaps with Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004)'s list, with 6/9, 4/9, 4/9, and 3/9 names
included in both sources for Black women, Black men, white women, and white men,
respectively. We add 10 new names from the N.C. records for each race and gender
group, leaving 19 total first names per group.

                 Table B1: First names assigned by race and gender
          Black male        White male          Black female       White female
      Name         Source    Name        Source   Name     Source Name               Source
 1    Antwan        NC       Adam         NC      Aisha     Both Allison              BM
 2    Darnell       BM       Brad         Both    Ebony     Both Amanda               NC
 3    Donnell       NC       Bradley      NC      Keisha    BM    Amy                 NC
 4    Hakim         BM       Brendan      Both    Kenya     BM    Anne                BM
 5    Jamal         Both     Brett        BM      Lakeisha  NC    Carrie              BM
 6    Jermaine      Both     Chad         NC      Lakesha   NC    Emily               Both
 7    Kareem        Both     Geoffrey     BM      Lakisha   Both Erin                 NC
 8    Lamar         NC       Greg         BM      Lashonda  NC    Heather             NC
 9    Lamont        NC       Jacob        NC      Latasha   NC    Jennifer            NC
 10   Leroy         BM       Jason        NC      Latisha   NC    Jill                Both
 11   Marquis       NC       Jay          BM      Latonya   Both Julie                NC
 12   Maurice       NC       Jeremy       NC      Latoya    Both Kristen              Both
 13   Rasheed       BM       Joshua       NC      Lawanda   NC    Laurie              BM
 14   Reginald      NC       Justin       NC      Patrice   NC    Lori                NC
 15   Roderick      NC       Matthew      Both    Tameka    NC    Meredith            BM
 16   Terrance      NC       Nathan       NC      Tamika    Both Misty                NC
 17   Terrell       NC       Neil         BM      Tanisha   BM    Rebecca             NC
 18   Tremayne      BM       Scott        NC      Tawanda   NC    Sarah               Both
 19   Tyrone        Both     Todd         BM      Tomeka    NC    Susan               NC
Notes: This table lists the first names assigned by race and gender and their sources. "BM"
indicates that the name appeared in original set of nine names used for each group in Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2004). "NC" indicates the name was drawn from data on North Carolina
speeding infractions and arrests. "Both" indicates the name appeared in both sources. Names
from N.C. speeding tickets were selected from the most common names where at least 90% of
individuals are reported to belong to the relevant race and gender group.


                                             80
    Last names are drawn from 2010 Decennial Census data. We use the names with
highest race-specific shares that occur at least 10,000 times, picking 26 total for each
race group. Each resume is assigned a first and last name from the appropriate race and
gender group, sampling without replacement within firm. Each pair of applicants was
assigned a white and Black first and last name, with the gender of the first name chosen
randomly.

                         Table B2: Last names assigned by race
                        Black                                  White
       Name            Frequency   Race share    Name           Frequency    Race share
  1    Alston            30,693       79.8       Bauer            65,004        95.1
  2    Battle            26,432       77.3       Becker           87,859       94.89
  3    Bethea            12,061       74.8       Burkholder       11,532       97.55
  4    Bolden            21,819       72.3       Byler            13,230       98.19
  5    Booker            36,840       65.2       Carlson         120,552       94.83
  6    Braxton           12,268       72.4       Erickson         82,085       95.05
  7    Chatman           15,473       79.2       Gallagher        69,834       94.62
  8    Diggs             14,467       68.1       Graber           12,204       97.16
  9    Felder            13,257       66.9       Hershberger      14,357       98.08
  10   Francois          14,593        78        Hostetler        14,505       97.46
  11   Hairston          16,090       80.9       Klein            81,471       95.41
  12   Hollins           10,213       73.8       Kramer           63,936       95.35
  13   Jean              21,140       70.3       Larson          122,587       94.79
  14   Jefferson         55,179       74.2       Mast             15,932       96.99
  15   Lockett           14,140       71.4       Meyer           150,895       94.84
  16   Louis             23,738       65.5       Mueller          64,191       95.66
  17   McCray            28,024       67.4       Olson           164,035       94.76
  18   Muhammad          19,076       82.9       Roush            11,386       96.44
  19   Myles             13,898       72.1       Schmidt         147,034       95.15
  20   Pierre            33,913       86.7       Schneider       101,290       95.35
  21   Randle            14,437       68.8       Schroeder        67,977       95.36
  22   Ruffin            16,324       80.4       Schultz         104,888       94.81
  23   Smalls            12,435       90.5       Schwartz         90,071       95.93
  24   Washington       177,386       87.5       Stoltzfus        15,786         99
  25   Winston           21,667       62.7       Troyer           16,981       97.96
  26   Witherspoon       13,171       62.1       Yoder            56,410       97.77
Notes: This table reports the last names used in the experiment. Names are drawn from
Decennial Census data. We pick names with the highest race-specific shares among those that
occur more than 10,000 times. The table reports each name's frequency and the share of
individuals with that surname who belong to each race group.

    Dates of birth: Applicants were initially randomly assigned a date of birth between
1960 and 2000. Because these dates were fixed, as the experiment continued the average
age of applicants increased. In wave 5 we began to assign dates of birth implying a uniform
distribution of applicant ages between 20 and 60 at the time of application creation.

                                            81
    Social security numbers: Some applications required us to provide a social security
number. We assigned all applicants a social security number from a publicly available
database of numbers belonging to the deceased.
    Emails: We manually created Gmail, Outlook, and Yahoo email accounts for roughly
half of our applicants. To facilitate account creation and avoid account limits on these
service, we also registered new domains designed to imitate common internet service
providers' names: icloudlive.me, spectrumemail.org, fiosmail.net, and xfinity19.com. Each
domain redirected to the relevant provider (e.g., icloudlive.me redirected to the icloud
home page). Email addresses were creating using combinations of assigned first and last
names and random integers. Each email was associated with a single first and last name
combination. All emails were set up to automatically forward to a single inbox that was
monitored for contacts.
    Phone numbers: We provisioned phone numbers from Twilio. During each wave of
the experiment, we rented roughly 200 numbers with SMS capabilities from area codes
across the country. Each number was assigned to a single first and last name combination,
ensuring that the same number was used only once at each company. We rented new
numbers each wave so that each unique number was used at each firm at most once.
    Phone calls to each number were automatically directed to a voicemail with a stan-
dard, non-personalized message. All calls were logged. Any voicemails were recorded and
transcribed. We then used a combination of manual and automatic methods to tag voice-
mails as callbacks from particular employers using text searches on transcribed voicemails
and by listening to voicemails. Text message callbacks were processed in the same way.
    Addresses: We assigned each application a home address close to the job to which
the application was submitted. Addresses were sourced from openaddresses.io and the
U.S. Department of Transportation's National Address Database. We download the full
set of addresses from both sources and manually eliminated unusual and non-residential
addresses. Addresses were randomly assigned to applications without replacement for
each job from the set of addresses in zip codes within 20 miles of the target job. If
insufficient addresses were available with a 20 mile radius, a 40 mile radius was used
instead.
    Educational history: All applicants were assigned a high school in same state as
the target job. We use the National Center for Educational Statistics to identify all non-
specialized public schools with instruction in grades 9-12 and randomly select a school
from zip codes with an absolute difference of less than 1,000 from the target job's zip
code. If insufficient schools are available, we randomly assign a school from anywhere in
the state. All applicants graduated from high school the same year they turned 18 years
old.
    We attempted to randomly assign half of our applicants an associate degree from
a community college in the same state as the target job. We use the Department of

                                           82
Education's College Scorecard data to identify all relevant degree-granting institutions,
manually eliminating some specialty schools. Colleges were assigned in the same manner
as high schools. Each applicant with a degree was also assigned a major from a list of
common, non-specialized degrees, including Business Technology, Marketing, Information
Technology, Communication Studies, and Sales Management. All applicants received
their degree two years after finishing high school. Because appropriate colleges were not
available in all geographies, slightly less than half of applicants were assigned a degree.
    Club membership: Beginning in Wave 2, 20% of applicants were assigned a club to
be listed on their resume as part of their educational experience. Half of applicants as-
signed a club listed clubs intended to signal LGBTQ affiliation: the Gay-Straight Alliance,
the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Association, and the Queer-Straight
Alliance. The remaining half were assigned either a generic club (History Club, Speech
and Debate Club, Foreign Language Club, Outdoors Club, Model United Nations, Per-
forming Arts Club, Student Government, or Music Club) or political club (Young Republi-
can Club, Student Republican Association, Young Republican Club, Student Republican
Association, Young Democrat Club, Student Democrat Association, Young Democrat
Club, or Student Democrat Association). Applicants were randomly listed as the presi-
dent, founder, secretary, vice-president or member of the assigned club.
    Pronouns: Beginning in Wave 2, 10% of applicants were assigned preferred pronouns.
Half of applicants with pronouns received gender-neutral pronouns (they/them/their),
and half received pronouns reflecting the typical gender identity of their first name
(he/him/his or she/her/hers). Pronouns were listed on the PDF resumes near name
and contact information.
    Employment history: Each applicant was assigned two to three previous employers.
Employers were drawn from the universe of establishment names and addresses listed in
the Reference USA dataset. As with addresses, we sample previous employers from zip
codes within 20 miles of the target job's zip code, or 40 miles if insufficient employers are
available within 20. We exclude any establishments from the same firm as the target job.
    Each target job was assigned one of four employment categories: general, retail, cler-
ical, and manual labor. Applicants to general category jobs were assigned previous em-
ployers from SIC codes 15, 24, 25, 34, 36, 42, 53, 54, 56, 58, 64, 65, 70, 73, and 80.
Applicants to retail category jobs were assigned previous employers from codes 53, 54,
56, 58 and 70. Applicants to clerical jobs were assigned previous employers from codes
15, 24, 25, 34, 36, 64, 65, 73, and 80. Applicants to manual labor jobs were assigned
previous employers from codes 34, 36, 25, 24, 15, and 42. Prior employers were assigned
without replacement for all applications to the same target job.
    Entry-level job titles were assigned for each previous employer appropriate to the in-
dustry and experience. Jobs at retail establishments were assigned job titles from Team
Member, Retail Associate, Cashier, Stocker, and Customer Service Associate. Jobs at

                                             83
fast-food / quick-service restaurants were assigned titles from Crew Member, Cashier,
Food prep / service, and Cook. Jobs at restaurants were assigned titles from Server, Dish-
washer, Cashier, Host, and Cook. Jobs at manufacturers and wholesalers were assigned
titles from Package Handler, Handler, Laborer, Delivery Driver / Courier, Dockworker,
and Warehouse Associate. Office and clerical positions were assigned titles from Office
Manager, Receptionist, and Assistant. Jobs at hotels were assigned titles of Housekeeper
or Receptionist.
    Each job was assigned a fictional supervisor with a first and last name drawn from
the most common in the United States and a fictional phone number. Since some appli-
cations required us to list a reason for leaving each previous job, we populated a large
list of sample reasons (e.g., insufficient hours, seeking promotion opportunity, etc.) and
randomly assigned them to each previous job.
    Tenure in previous jobs was selected uniformly from 9 to 24 months. No interruptions
in employment history were assigned and all applicants reported being currently employed
by their most recent prior employer.
    We assigned a sample of two to three job duties scraped from online databases of
resumes such as jobhero.com. We manually cleaned and formatted these duties to elim-
inate references to specific employer names or technologies. Duties were entered into
"responsibilities / duties" sections of target job applications.
    References: When required, applicants listed references using the fictional supervi-
sors at their previous employers.
    Personality and skills assessments: Some jobs required applicants to complete
personality or skills assessments before they could be considered for an interview. We
developed guides for each of these assessments that randomly specified acceptable an-
swers within a range appropriate for the question. Our answers avoided providing an
obviously negative signal about applicant quality (e.g., answering "Yes" to "Is it ever
acceptable to steal from an employer?"). When questions had no obvious connection to
applicant quality, we answered randomly but ensured that answers remained consistent
across questions. We answered analytical-reasoning and skill-based questions to mimic
the performance of our undergraduate volunteers.
    Miscellaneous resume characteristics: Many applications required answering a
large number of idiosyncratic questions, ranging from open-ended questions about why
the applicant wants to work at the target employer to questions about willingness to
comply with employer rules about dress, drug use, and conduct. We developed guides to
answer each of these questions that either provided the most obviously "positive" answer
or answered randomly from a bank of responses. Our applicants always answered "No"
to any questions about possessing a prior criminal record.




                                           84
Job sampling
We developed code that scraped all vacancies posted on each firm's proprietary hiring
portal each day. We then manually identified the set of job titles that did not require
a) a bachelor's or advanced degree, b) substantial prior experience, or c) a specialized
license (at the time of application). When adding a new job for each firm, we selected
randomly from among the most recently posted vacancies in counties from which we had
not previously sampled a job for that firm. In rare cases no jobs were available in counties
we had not previously sampled. In these cases we added new jobs in the same county
but at different establishments to those sampled previously.
    The RandRes platform automatically monitored scraped vacancies and added new
jobs to the system. In each wave, we randomly sorted firms and worked through the
sample by adding 5-10 jobs for each firm at a time to match maximum total application
submission capacity.


Resume creation
RandRes features a PDF generator program that randomizes layout and design features
to produce realistic resumes submitted as part of our application packages. The program
parses an applicant's information generated by RandRes, include demographic details,
employment history, and education history, and then randomly assigns a resume format
including margins, font, text size, alignment, bullet shape, and other typical features.
The process may redraw some features to ensure that resumes do not exceed one page in
length or contain excessive white space.
    The order and method in which information is presented is also random, meaning
some applicants may list their education first while others list work experience first.
Some resumes may include a separate section for references while others may include it
as part of their employment history. Variations in language, such as whether or not to
abbreviate U.S. state names, are also randomized.
    The program tracks indicators of which special design attributes which have already
been used in resumes for previous applicants at a particular job. This includes attributes
such as off-white background coloring or a border around the contact information. Some
resumes included monograms and watermarks as special attributes. A given resume may
incorporate several of these design attributes together, but each special attribute is not
used more than once at each job to ensure resumes are sufficiently differentiated. We find
no evidence that special resume features increase contact rates.
    We used the PDF resumes to signal characteristics not always collected in the online
job application, such as year of high school graduation. When an applicant was assigned
an LGBTQ or other student-club, the resume listed the club as part of educational
experience. When an applicant was assigned preferred pronouns, they were listed in the

                                            85
resume below the applicant's name.


Application submission
The RandRes application platform automatically generated applications for all jobs active
in the system. Applications were generated in pairs and new applications were generated
whenever a job had fewer than two unsubmitted applications and no applications sub-
mitted within 24 hours. During Wave 1 of the experiment, applications were manually
submitted by our team of undergraduate volunteers. RandRes instructed each volun-
teer which application to submit, provided the relevant details, and recorded submission
status.
    In subsequent waves, we developed software to automatically submit our applications
to firms' job portals. By controlling a web browser, the software was able to visit the
portal, fill out all application details, submit the application, and complete any assess-
ments while operating at speeds designed to mimic human behavior. We used cloud
computing providers to cycle through hundreds of IP addresses, user-agent strings, and
other browser signatures to minimize our chances of detection.
    We submitted up to 8 total applications to each job. Occasionally, vacancies would be
closed or removed from hiring portals partway through our application process. Ninety-
four percent of applicants were sent in complete groups of 8 and 88% of jobs received all
8 applications.




                                           86
Appendix C              Covariates
This Appendix provides details on sources and construction for the covariates used in
Section 8.
   Establishment-level covariates

   · % county Black: Sourced from the U.S. Census's Longitudinal Employer-Household
     Dynamics Workplace Area Characteristics series. Measures the Black share of work-
     ers in 2015-2017 in the target job's county.

   · % block Black / female: Same as above but defined at the census block level. Exact
     address data are not available for all jobs, making it impossible to match all jobs
     to census blocks. Only matched jobs are included.

   · County IAT: Constructed using raw data from Harvard's Project Implicit. Defined
     as the average of all valid 2015 - 2020 IAT scores in each county, normalized to have
     a standard deviation of one within year. A higher value indicates more implicit bias
     against Black or female faces in the test. The female IAT used contrasts male vs.
     female faces with Science vs. Liberal Arts.

   · DMA animus: Relative Google search rates for racially charged epithets as studied
     in Stephens-Davidowitz (2014). DMA refers to the target job's Designated Market
     Area. Higher values indicate more racially charged searchers. Normalized to have
     a standardized deviation of 1 within year and averaged over 2015-2019.

   · State animus: Same as above but defined at state-level.

   · White manager: Sourced from Reference USA establishment-level data. White
     manager indicates that Reference USA listed at least one "Manager", "Site Man-
     ager", or "Office Manager" as ethnically "Western European", "Eastern European",
     "Scandinavian", or "Mediterranean." Not all establishments were able to be linked
     to the Reference USA data, and not all establishments in Reference USA had man-
     ager ethnicity information. Only jobs with valid data are included. Constructed
     with the most recently available Reference USA data set.

   · Male manager: Same as above but defined as at least one manager with gender
     listed as "Male."

   · Log employment: Sourced from Reference USA establishment-level data. Normal-
     ized to have standard deviation of one in sample.

   Firm-level covariates. All firm-level covariates are normalized to have a standard
deviation of one in sample.


                                           87
· Log employment: Total US employment scraped from most recent publicly available
  data online, including annual reports and firm websites.

· DOL viols/emp: Includes all wage and hour compliance violations since FY 2005
  reported by the Department of Labor. Normalized by total employment.

· Empl-discr cases/emp: Data scraped from https://www.goodjobsfirst.org/
  violation-tracker. Defined as the total count of reported penalties since 2000
  where the primary offense category is "Employment Discrimination" divided by
  employment. Firms with no penalties reported are coded as zeros.

· Sales / emp: Data from Dun and Bradstreet. Defined as total sales divided by
  DB-reported employment averaged over 2010-2018.

· Profit / emp: Data from Compustat. Defined as average gross profit divided by
  Compustat-reported employment averaged over 2010-2018. Three firms do not have
  Compustat data and are omitted.

· % board Black: Measures the average Black share of the corporate board over 2014-
  2019. Board member race sourced from blackenterprise.com and manual searches.

· Chief diversity officer: Binary indicator manually scraped from company websites.
  Includes C-Suite executives only.

· GD score: Overall company rating scraped from GlassDoor.com.

· GD diversity score: Diversity score ratings scraped from GlassDoor.com.

· Callback centralization: Defined as total number of unique phone numbers that
  contacted applicants the firm divided by the total number of jobs where applicants
  received at least one contact times minus 1. To avoid any mechanical correlation
  with outcomes, constructed as a leave-out mean omitting any contacts to own job.

· % managers white: Sourced from Reference USA. Measures share of managers at all
  establishments belonging to this firm with race reported as defined in establishment-
  level covariates. Two firms do not appear in the Reference USA data.

· % managers male: Same as above but defined as share of managers reported to be
  male.

Industry-level covariates.

· White - Black adj wage, male - female adj wage: Constructed using the CPS
  Monthly Outgoing Rotation Groups from 2009 to 2019, extracted from IPUMS
  at https://cps.ipums.org/cps/. Sample includes individuals aged 20-60 who

                                        88
                 Table C3: Summary statistics for firm-level covariates
                                                    Mean SD Median
              Firm performance
                Log employment                    11.067 1.01 10.922
                Sales / emp ($M)                    0.331 0.36 0.238
                Profit / emp ($M)                    0.101 0.08 0.078
                GD score                            3.566 0.32 3.600
              Legal compliance
                DOL viols / emp                      0.136 0.37 0.002
                Empl-discr cases / thousand emp 0.048 0.13 0.020
                Federal contractor                   0.667 0.47 1.000
              Firm diversity
                % board Black                       0.088 0.07 0.091
                % board female                      0.257 0.10 0.255
                % managers non-white                0.257 0.09 0.250
                % managers female                   0.493 0.39 0.449
                Has chief diversity officer         0.167 0.37 0.000
                GD diversity score                  3.816 0.33 3.800
              Callback patterns
                Callback centralization             -1.117 0.38 -1.073
              Observations                            108
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for firm-level covariates. See Appendix C for full
details on the sources and construction of each variable.

      work full-time (35+ hours a week) in the private sector that do not have imputed
      earnings or hours worked. To obtain 2-digit SIC industry codes, we link IPUMS
      variable IND1990 with 1987 SIC industry codes using a crosswalk from Autor, Dorn,
      and Hanson (2019). Wage gaps are obtained from a regression of log hourly wages
      (equal to weekly earnings divided by usual hours worked per week) on indicators
      for each industry, for being black (female), their interaction, and a set of year in-
      dicators. Adjusted wage gaps are the coefficients on the interaction between black
      (female) and industry. All calculations use CPS household or earnings weights.

   · % ind Black, % ind female: Constructed using the Equal Employment Opportunity
     Commission's 2018 public use file of EEO-1 data. Defined as the Black (female)
     share of workers in the NAICS 3-digit industry.

   · % mgmt - % ind Black, % mgmt - % ind female: Constructed using same data as
     above. Defined as the Black (female) share of mid-level officers and managers less
     the total Black (female) share of workers in the NAICS 3-digit industry.

   · White - Black col share, male - female col share: Constructed using the same CPS
     sample and data as adjusted wage gaps. College share gaps are equal to the Black-
     white difference in the share of workers with a college degree in each industry.

                                              89
                      Table C4: Firm-level predictors of centralization

                           Firm performance
                             Log employment                   -0.144
                                                             (0.116)
                              Sales / emp                    -0.0682
                                                            (0.0813)
                              Profit / emp                  -0.00380
                                                            (0.0797)
                              GD score                        -0.211
                                                             (0.173)
                           Legal compliance
                             DOL viols / emp                  -0.0836
                                                              (0.121)
                              Empl-discr cases / emp           0.0576
                                                             (0.0427)
                              Federal contractor              0.559
                                                              (0.265)
                           Firm diversity
                             % board Black                     0.178
                                                              (0.116)
                              % board female                  -0.0153
                                                             (0.0982)
                              % managers non-white           0.00869
                                                              (0.123)
                              % managers female               0.0553
                                                             (0.0986)
                              Has chief diversity officer      0.148
                                                              (0.211)
                              GD diversity score               0.223
                                                              (0.157)
                           Observations                        10500
Notes: This table reports the multivariate relationship between centralization and other firm-
level predictors. All predictors except the binary indicators for federal contractor status and
having a chief diversity officer are normalized to have standard deviation of 1. As with firm-
level relationships reported in Figure 6, the regression is estimated on job-level data with firm-
clustered standard errors. See Appendix C for full details on the sources and construction of
each variable.




                                               90
      · Top 4 sales share: Defined as the share of total sales accounted for by the four
        largest firms at the NAICS 3-digit level. Sourced from 2017 Economic Census data.

Occupation-level covariates.

      · O*NET occupation task measures: We follow Deming (2017) and use the Occu-
        pational Information Network (O*NET), available at https://www.onetcenter
        .org/db releases.html, to measure characteristics of occupations in the U.S.29
        The O*NET database provides information on various components of an occupa-
        tion, including the skills, knowledge, and abilities required to perform the work,
        the activities typically performed on the job, and the context, or characteristics
        and conditions, of the job. We use this information to create the following five
        composite variables:

           - Analytical: Our analytic measure combines the following three components:
             1) mathematical reasoning ability (defined as "the ability to understand and
             organize a problem and then to select a mathematical method or formula
             to solve the problem"), 2) mathematics knowledge ("knowledge of numbers,
             their operations, and interrelationships including arithmetic, algebra, geom-
             etry, calculus, statistics, and their applications"), and 3) mathematics skill
             ("using mathematics to solve problems").
           - Social: Our social measure combines the following three skills: 1) social percep-
             tiveness (defined as "being aware of others' reactions and understanding why
             they react the way they do"), 2) coordination ("adjusting actions in relation to
             others' actions"), 3) persuasion ("persuading others to approach things differ-
             ently"), and 4) negotiation ("bringing others together and trying to reconcile
             differences").
           - Routine: Our routine measure combines two context variables, in particular
             1) degree of automation (defined as "the level of automation of this job")
             and 2) importance of repeating same tasks ("how important is repeating the
             same physical activities or mental activities over and over, without stopping,
             to performing this job?").
           - Service: Our service measure measure combines the activity variable assisting
             and caring for others (defined as "providing assistance or personal care to
             others") and the skill variable service orientation ("actively looking for ways
             to help people").
           - Manual: Our manual measure combines two skill variables, specifically 1) per-
             forming general physical activities (defined as "performing physical activities
 29
      Unlike Deming (2017), we use production release 25.3 of O*NET.


                                                 91
     that require considerable use of your arms and legs and moving your whole
     body, such as climbing, lifting, balancing, walking, stooping, and handling
     of materials") and 2) handling and moving objects ("using hands and arms
     in handling, installing, positioning, and moving materials, and manipulating
     things").
   - Customer interaction: Our customer interaction measure averages two activ-
     ities variables, one knowledge variable, and one context variable. The work
     activities variables include 1) performing for or working directly with the public
     (defined as "performing for people or dealing directly with the public") and
     2) establishing and maintaining interpersonal relationships ("developing con-
     structive and cooperative working relationships with others, and maintaining
     them over time"). We use the work knowledge variable customer and personal
     service ("knowledge of principles and processes for providing customer and
     personal services) and the work context variable contact with others, which
     answers the question "how much does this job require the worker to be in con-
     tact with others (face-to-face, by telephone, or otherwise) in order to perform
     it?"

Each composite variable is calculated as the average of its component variables.
Since some of these component variables are measured on different scales, we first
rescale all the component variables to fall between 0 and 10.




                                       92
Appendix D               Technical Appendix
Denote the realized contact gap at job j  {1, ..., Jf } of firm f  {1, ..., F } by        ^ fj.
For most of our analysis     ^ f j is measured as the difference between white and Black
contact rates at job j , but the same construction is used to study other binary protected
characteristics such as gender. Let Df j   give the design (i.e., assigned characteristics)
of the portfolio of resumes sent to job j . This design includes, for example, the mix
of employment histories on each resume, the time of day each resume was sent, each
applicant's year of high school graduation, and the formatting of the resumes. Define
^ f j (d) as the contact gap that would arise at job j if it had been assigned application

design d. Realized contact gaps can be written      ^ fj =   ^ f j (Df j ). Population contact
gaps are defined as

                  f j  E ^ f j (Df j ) | ^ f j (d)       =       f jd ^ f j (d) ,
                                                     d
                                                             d


where f jd  (0, 1) is the probability that design d is assigned to job j of firm f . Note that
the expression after the equals sign presumes that the assignment probabilities {f jd }
are independent of the potential contact gaps {   ^ f j (d)}, a property ensured by random
assignment. Assignment probabilities may differ by f as, for example, applicant job
histories were tailored to the firms being studied. The {f jd } may also differ across jobs,
as local educational institutions and references were listed on applicant resumes.
    We now make two key assumptions:
                                                                         F,Jf
Assumption 1 (Design uncertainty) The errors ^ f j - f j                             are mutually in-
                                                                         f =1,j =1
dependent and have mean zero.

                                                                        f                 J
Assumption 2 (Sampling uncertainty) Each firm's population gaps {f j }j =1 are iid
draws from a firm specific distribution Gf with mean f .

    Assumption 1 follows from random assignment of application characteristics. This
condition also implicitly requires the behavioral assumption of no interference between
jobs, an assumption made more plausible by the requirement that sampled jobs be located
in different U.S. counties. Assumption 2 follows from i.i.d. sampling of jobs from the set
of available vacancies posted on company job boards. The mean f , which is our measure
of discrimination at firm f , gives the expected contact gap at an average job posting by
firm f over the course of our study.
    Together, these assumptions yield a hierarchical model with two sources of uncertainty.
The first source ("design uncertainty") arises from randomness in the application design
assigned to each job. The second ("sampling uncertainty") arises from randomness in
the set of jobs sampled. We use the operator E [·] to denote expectations with respect


                                              93
to both sorts of uncertainty; that is, to denote integration against Gf and the design
probabilities {f jd }d . Our assumptions thus far imply that

                             E ^ f j |f j = f j ,                        E ^ f j = f .


Target parameter
The variance of the firm component of discrimination can be defined as

                             F                         F             2
                  1                            1
                =                2
                                 f -                           f
                  F       f =1
                                               F    f =1
                                                F                                       F       f -1
                         F -1            1                            2
                   =                                   2
                                                       f        -                                      f k           .
                           F             F     f =1
                                                                  F (F - 1)         f =2 k=1


Bias corrected estimator
The fundamental difficulty in estimating  involves the first term in the curly brackets.
    ^f = 1   Jf ^
Let      Jf  j =1 f j denote the mean contact gap at firm f . Both design and sampling
                                                                                                                2
uncertainty generate an upward bias in the "plug-in" estimator ^f                                                    of 2
                                                                                                                        f because


                   2                                       2
         E    ^f         = E      ^ f - f                        + 2
                                                                   f
                                                                                                              2 
                                                           Jf                     Jf                                
                            ^
                                1                                     1                                             
                                                                                                                     + 2
                         = Ef - Jf                              f j +
                                                                      Jf
                                                                                        f j       - f                  f
                                                           j =1                  j =1                               
                                               design error                      sampling error

                         >       2
                                 f.


                                                                                                                                   2
   The bias corrected estimator of  is motivated by the approximation E                                                  ^ f - f
                                                                                                                                       
s2
 f , where sf is an estimated standard error. When this approximation holds exactly, we

have E   ^ 2 = 2 + s2 . The bias corrected estimator can be written
           f       f    f

                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     
                                                   F                        F               2             F
                                                                                                                     
           ^ =         F -1         1                          ^f - 1            ^k                  1               
                                                                                                -               s2
                                                                                                                 f
                         F        F -1         f =1
                                                                    F      k=1
                                                                                                     F   f =1        
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     
                                                               plug-in                               correction
                                         F                                                       F     f -1
                       F -1         1              ^2    2                     2                              ^ f^k
              =                                     f - sf -                                                              .
                         F          F   f =1
                                                                           F (F - 1)            f =2 k=1




                                                               94
Variants of this estimator have been applied in several literatures (e.g., Krueger and
Summers, 1998; Aaronson et al., 2007), though typically without the adjustment factor
     -1
of FF   .
    In our analysis, we employ the following standard error estimator

                                                             Jf
                                            1                       ^ fj - ^f
                                                                                   2
                                sf =                                                   .
                                       Jf (Jf - 1)           j =1


With this choice of sf , ^ becomes an unbiased leave out variance component estimator of
the sort proposed by Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2020). In particular, it can be shown
that
                                               Jf     j -1                        Jf
                   ^ 2 - s2 =         2                  ^ fj^f = 1                        ^ f (j ) ^ fj,
                     f    f                                                                
                                 Jf (Jf - 1)   j =2   =1
                                                                  Jf              j =1


where ^ f (j ) =     1         ^ f is the leave-job out mean contact gap at firm f .
                               
                   Jf -1   =j
     Independence of the errors across jobs guarantees that E[      ^ fj^ f ] = E[f j ]E[f ] =
2 f , with the second equality following from random sampling of jobs (Assumption 2).
Likewise, independence of both design and sampling errors across firms ensures that
E[ ^ f ^ k ] = E[^ f ]E[^ k ] = f k . Consequently, E[   ^] = . Lemma 3 of Kline, Saggio and
Sølvsten (2020) establishes consistency of        ^ for  as the total number of jobs F Jf
                                                                                         f =1
                                              ^
grows large. Asymptotic normality of  follows from Theorem 2 of Kline, Saggio and
Sølvsten (2020).


Cross-wave estimator
The cross wave estimator of  is analogous to    ^ but uses cross-products of wave level,
as opposed to job-level, average gaps to estimate 2 f . Suppose that for any two waves
                        2
(1 , 2 )  {1, ..., Tf }
                             E  ^
                                ¯ f 1 ^
                                      ¯ f 2 = 2 if 1 = 2 ,
                                              f


where   ^
        ¯ f  is the mean gap in wave  . This moment condition would follow from Assump-
tions # 1 and # 2 if each firm's distribution of population job gaps were restricted to be
time invariant. An unbiased estimator of 2    f is the (job-weighted) cross-wave analogue
of this moment condition:
                                        Tf          1 -1             ^ f 1 ^ f 2
                                        1 =2        2 =1   nf 1 nf 2 
                                2
                                f              Tf            1 -1
                                                                                       ,
                                               1 =2          2 =1   nf  1 nf  2




                                                      95
where nf  gives the number of jobs sampled from firm f in wave  . Our corresponding
unbiased cross-wave estimator of  is
                                                                      F   f -1
                      F -1          1                        2                   ^ f^k
                                                  2
                                                  f -                                    .
                        F           F     f
                                                         F (F - 1)   f =2 k=1


Cross-state estimator
The cross state estimator is identical to the cross-wave estimator except that cross-
products between state averages of job contact gaps at each firm replace wave averages
of job contact gaps at each firm. As with the cross-wave estimator, the cross-products of
averages are job weighted.


Industry and portal intermediary variance components
Firm identifiers are "nested" within industry and job portal intermediary categories.
Variance components for these alternate groupings of jobs can be defined as weighted
analogues of the firm level component .
    Working with industry as our focal example, let    ¨ i denote the population contact
gap in industry i  {1, ..., I }, which we define as the equally weighted average of the
population contact gaps among firms in that industry. Letting Fi be the number of firms
in industry i and F = I  i=1 Fi the total number of firms in the experiment, the industry
component can be written:

               I                     I               2
          1            ¨2       1            ¨i
    I   =           Fi  i   -             Fi 
          F   i=1
                                F   i=1
                                              I                                      I   i-1
              F -1              1                             ¨2 -       2                           ¨ i¨k
        =                                         Fi (F - Fi ) i                               Fi Fk 
                F           F (F - 1)     i=1
                                                                     F (F - 1)      i=2 k=1


The firm weighting used in this definition ensures that the ratio I /  [0, 1] possesses
an R2 interpretation. When I =  industry explains all of the variation across firms.
    Mirroring the firm-level analysis, an unbiased estimate of the squared mean    ¨ 2 can
                                                                                     i
be constructed as a weighted average of cross-products of job-level gaps in industry i. To
preserve the interpretation of ¨ i as an equally weighted average of contact gaps across
firms in an industry, we weight jobs inversely by "firm size" when computing these cross-
products. Indexing jobs in industry i by n  {1, ..., Ni }, let    ^ in give the estimated
contact gap at that job. Using f (i, n) to denote the parent company of job n our job
weights can be written win = 1/Jf (i,n) . Note that win gives the inverse of the total
number of jobs at the parent firm containing job n. Hence, an unbiased estimator of     ¨i




                                                         96
                      -1
         Ni                 Ni        ^ in . Our corresponding estimator for ¨ 2 can be written:
is       n=1   win          n=1   win                                          i


                                                   Ni        n-1
                                     ¨2            n=2       k=1   win wik in ik
                                      i                  Ni        n-1
                                                                                 .
                                                         n=2       k=1 win w ik


Plugging these unbiased estimators of ¨ i and ¨ 2 into the expression for I yields the
                                                i
                                                ^
unbiased industry variance component estimator I .


State and job title variance components
Defining state and job title variance components requires some additional notation, as
these groupings of jobs do not nest firms. Working with state as our focal example, we
index states by s  {1, ..., S } and jobs in states by b  {1, ..., Bs }. Accordingly, we denote
the population gap at job b of state s by sb . Letting wf (s,b) = 1/Jf denote the inverse
size of the firm containing job b, and Ws = B        s
                                                    b=1 wf (s,b) , the sum of these weights, the
overall population gap in state s is defined as

                                                             Bs
                                             ... 1
                                             s =                   wf (s,b) sb .
                                                 Ws          b=1


   Letting W = S   s=1 Ws be the total number of firms in the experiment, our variance
component of interest is:

                 S                     S                 2
       1                 ...       1            ...
S    =                Ws 2  s -              Ws s
       W        s=1
                                   W   s=1
                                             S                                            S   s-1
               W -1             1                              ...                2                       ... ...
     =                                             Ws (W - Ws )2  s -                               Ws Wk s k       .
                W           W (W - 1)        s=1
                                                                              W (W - 1)   s=2 k=1

                                    ...      1     Bs           ^      ...
   To estimate S we substitute s = W               b=1 wf (s,b) sb for s in the second term in
                      ...                     s

braces. The quantity 2   s entering the first term in braces is replaced with the weighted
average cross-product:
                                Bs      b-1
                                b=2     k=1 wf (s,b) wf (s,k) sb sk
                                     Bs     b-1
                                                                    .
                                     b=2    k=1 wf (s,b) wf (s,k)




                                                             97
