                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      TRADE POLICY

                                      Lorenzo Caliendo
                                       Fernando Parro

                                     Working Paper 29051
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29051


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




This paper has been prepared for the Handbook of International Economics, Volume V, edited by
Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff. All errors are our own. We thank Pol
Antras, Costas Arkolakis, David Atkin, Mostafa Beshkar, Paola Conconi, Arnaud Costinot, Swati
Dhingra, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Robert Feenstra, Cecilia Fieler, Elhanan Helpman, Samuel Kortum,
Brian Kovak, Mario Larch, Giovanni Maggi, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Peter Schott, and Robert
Staiger for useful comments. We thank Charles Cai and Yuta Suzuki for research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Lorenzo Caliendo and Fernando Parro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Policy
Lorenzo Caliendo and Fernando Parro
NBER Working Paper No. 29051
July 2021
JEL No. F1,F10,F11,F12,F13,F14,F15,F16,F19

                                           ABSTRACT

We review recent theoretical and empirical research on trade policy. We start by presenting
reduced-form evidence of the effects of trade policy in the presence of supply-chain linkages, on
the short-run and persistent effects of trade policy across local labor markets, and on the effects of
trade policy uncertainty on employment and firms. We describe the shift-share method for trade
policy analysis, discuss the interpretation of the estimated effects, and provide a theoretical
foundation. We then describe new quantitative frameworks, methods, and data used to study the
aggregate and distributional effects of trade policy in general equilibrium. We discuss how to take
into account supply-chain linkages, local labor markets, and different sources of dynamics. As an
illustration, we quantify the aggregate and distributional effects of the 2018 trade war between the
United States and its trading partners. Finally, we present recent theoretical insights on optimal
unilateral trade policy with firm and product heterogeneity in the context of large and small open
economies with perfectly and imperfectly competitive product markets. We also discuss how
optimal trade policy is shaped by the presence of multiple sectors, intermediate goods, and
supply-chain linkages. We close the chapter by discussing the scope of future research.


Lorenzo Caliendo
Yale University
School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
lorenzo.caliendo@yale.edu

Fernando Parro
Pennsylvania State University
Department of Economics
University Park, PA 16801
and NBER
fxp5102@psu.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29051
                                                 Trade Policy
                Lorenzo Caliendo                                           Fernando Parro
          Yale University and NBER                              Pennsylvania State University and NBER

                                                    July 13, 2021



                                                       Abstract

          This chapter reviews a recent body of theoretical and empirical work that studies the normative and
      positive aspects of trade policy. We start by presenting reduced-form evidence of the effects of trade
      policy in the presence of supply-chain linkages, on the short-run and persistent effects of trade policy
      across local labor markets, and on the effects of trade policy uncertainty on employment and firms. We
      describe the shift-share method for trade policy analysis, discuss the interpretation of the estimated
      effects, and provide a theoretical foundation. We then describe new quantitative frameworks, methods,
      and data used to study the aggregate and distributional effects of trade policy in general equilibrium.
      We discuss how to take into account supply-chain linkages, local labor markets, and different sources
      of dynamics. As an illustration, we quantify the aggregate and distributional effects of the 2018 trade
      war between the United States and its trading partners. Finally, we present recent theoretical insights
      on optimal unilateral trade policy with firm and product heterogeneity in the context of large and small
      open economies with perfectly and imperfectly competitive product markets. We also discuss how optimal
      trade policy is shaped by the presence of multiple sectors, intermediate goods, and supply-chain linkages.
      We close the chapter by discussing the scope of future research.



1     Introduction

Trade policy analysis has been a central focus of research since at least the pioneering optimal tariff analysis

in Bickerdike (1907).1 Recent research in the international trade field has led to an explosion of new empirical

methods that can be used to study the aggregate and distributional consequences of many types of changes to

the economic environment (e.g., non-tariff trade costs, local productivity changes, changes in infrastructure).

The recent backlash against international trade has shifted the focus back towards the analysis of trade policy,

making the study of the effects of trade policy one of the most relevant subject areas.
    This paper has been prepared for the Handbook of International Economics, Volume V, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan

Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff. All errors are our own. We thank Pol Antras, Costas Arkolakis, David Atkin, Mostafa Beshkar,
Paola Conconi, Arnaud Costinot, Swati Dhingra, Pablo Fajgelbaum, Robert Feenstra, Cecilia Fieler, Elhanan Helpman, Samuel
Kortum, Brian Kovak, Mario Larch, Giovanni Maggi, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Peter Schott, and Robert Staiger for useful com-
ments. We thank Charles Cai and Yuta Suzuki for research assistance. Correspondence by e-mail: lorenzo.caliendo@yale.edu,
fxp5102@psu.edu.
   1 One could even argue that the topic has been important since the Wealth of Nations where Adam Smith discussed the use

of trade duties.




                                                            1
   This chapter introduces researchers to recent developments and findings in the literature on trade policy.

We structure this chapter in three main sections describing the new empirical, quantitative, and theoretical

findings in the literature.

   In Section 2, we review and discuss recent reduced-form evidence on the impact of trade policy. We

first focus on research that studies the consequences of the changes in tariffs as a consequence of the recent

trade war between the United States and its trading partners. This trade policy shock, together with the

availability of detailed cross-country trade and tariff data, has allowed researchers to estimate the effects

of increased trade protectionism on the U.S. economy. We then review studies that are motivated by the

increasing importance of global value chains in the world's trade structure. The rapid progress in data and

methods for measuring sectoral and country linkages has made the study of the effects of trade policy on

global value chains a growing line of research. We review recent research that provides new evidence on how

trade policy changes shape the global value chains and how the global value chains shape trade policy across

countries.

   Another fast-growing line of research is the study of the local labor market effects of trade policy. Moti-

vated by the fact that economic activity is unevenly distributed across space, researchers have exploited the

differential exposure to trade policy across local labor markets to study the distributional effects of trade

policy. The reduced-form research in this area has revived the use of shift-share analysis for investigating

the effects of trade policy on outcomes such as wages, employment, and poverty across space. We review

reduced-form studies that find evidence of the distributional effects of trade policy across local labor mar-

kets. We describe the shift-share specifications used in recent trade policy analyses, as well as the findings

regarding the distributional effects across regions, and the persistent effects, of trade policy. We also review

the methodology and present a theoretical foundation that justifies the shift-share specifications, discuss the

interpretation of the results, and present extensions to show how the shift-share design could be adapted to

take into account other margins of adjustments like non-tradable goods, sectoral linkages, and more general

production functions.

   Trade policy has also become a major source of uncertainty. For instance, the United States threatened

its trading partners and eventually increased its tariffs on China, the same country to which the United

States had given normal trade partner status several years before. We conclude this section by reviewing

new empirical evidence on the significant effects of trade policy uncertainty on relevant outcomes such as

employment and investment.

   In Section 3, we discuss quantitative frameworks developed to study the general equilibrium effects of

actual and counterfactual trade policy changes. Guided by the reduced-form evidence we reviewed in Section

2, we focus on the progress made in recent quantitative trade literature to incorporate the roles of supply-


                                                       2
chain linkages, local labor markets, uncertainty, and different sources of dynamics into general equilibrium.

We describe a list of building blocks and model assumptions that have been used in recent quantitative trade

literature, and we discuss the mechanisms we consider especially relevant to trade policy analysis.

   Our starting point is a static multi-sector trade model with intermediate goods and input-output linkages.

From there, we expand the framework to incorporate the uneven distribution of local economic activity across

space, which can be used to study the spatial effects of trade policy. We then argue that static frameworks

in which workers are assumed to be either freely mobile or perfectly immobile say little about important,

inherently dynamic issues identified in the empirical literature, such as: How long do labor markets take

to adjust to a change in trade policy? Does the spatial distribution of economic activity cause a lasting

differential impact on workers in different sectors and regions? In response to these questions, we expand

the framework to incorporate labor market dynamics and show how the framework can be used to study the

effects of trade policy on employment location across sectors, regions, and time.

   The connection between the theory and the quantitative analysis requires progress on two additional

fronts: computation methods and data availability. We review existing methods used to conduct trade

policy counterfactuals in multi-country static quantitative trade frameworks; we then review recent research

that has extended these methods to frameworks with local labor markets, and more importantly, to dynamic

quantitative frameworks. We also discuss new databases that have facilitated the connection of these models

to the data, allowing researchers to perform quantitative trade policy evaluations. At the same time, we

show how to apply these new tools to study the economic effects of the recent trade war between the United

States and its trading partners in frameworks that take into account value chains, local labor markets, and

dynamics.

   We then turn to the normative analysis of trade policy, and in Section 4, we discuss recent theoretical

tools and results related to optimal unilateral trade policy. The main advances in this area are twofold. First,

there has been substantial progress in understanding optimal trade policy in a variety of neoclassical and

monopolistic competition environments that involve product or firm heterogeneity, in large or small open

economies, with trade in final and intermediate goods. Second, there has been progress in understanding

the implications of global value chains for optimal trade policy structure. In attending to these advances,

we describe new methods for the analysis of optimal trade policy and identify some benchmark results in

recent literature. At the end of the section, we discuss the scope for further progress in this area, especially

in terms of the connection between the new results on optimal trade policy and the quantitative analysis

described in Section 2 and Section 3. Further research in this direction could help understand better the

economic motives behind the actual trade policy changes in episodes such as the recent trade war between

the United States and its trading partners.


                                                       3
2     Empirical Effects: Reduced-form Approach

We start the section by reviewing recent empirical findings on the effects of the recent tariff increases as a

consequence of the trade war between the United States and its trading partners. We then review recent

empirical work on the incidence of trade policy on global value chains. After doing so, we discuss the recent

revival of shift-share analysis to study the distributional effects of trade policy on local labor markets. We

finish the section by describing recent work on the effects of trade policy uncertainty on different outcomes.

We see this section as building on and complementing the reviews performed by Goldberg and Pavcnik

(2016) and Pavcnik (2017) that focus on the distributional effects of globalization in developing countries.2




2.1     Reduced-form Evidence of the 2018 Trade War

Although protectionist measures have been imposed throughout U.S. history, the recent trade war between

the United States and its main trading partners is somewhat unprecedented in terms of the scope and

magnitude of the tariff changes.3 Tariffs with rates ranging from 10 to 50 percent on more than 12,000

products covering around $300 billion of U.S. imports were imposed in 2018 (the average statutory tariff

rate in affected imports increased from 2.6 percent to 16.6 percent). In response to these U.S. tariffs, several

U.S. trading partners, including China, the European Union, Canada, Mexico, and Turkey, among others,

retaliated and imposed tariffs averaging 16 percent on approximately $121 billion of U.S. exports (see Amiti,

Redding, and Weinstein 2019, and Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal 2019 for additional

empirical facts).

    This trade war, together with the recent emergence of detailed cross-country trade and tariff data, has

created a unique opportunity to study the effects of trade protectionism. Indeed, recent literature has

provided new insight into the effects of trade protectionism through the lens of the 2018 trade war. In this

subsection we review reduce-form evidence and in the next section we provide a general equilibrium analysis

of this recent increase in trade protectionism.

    Amiti, Redding, and Weinstein (2019) use monthly U.S. census data collected from 2017-2018 on import

quantities and values at the HTS10-country level to estimate the effects of the trade war on U.S. prices and

quantities that in turn are used to compute deadweight losses. The authors regress changes in import unit

value (that do not include the tariff change) over changes in applied tariffs on imports, controlling by product
    2 Recent studies have also provided evidence on the effects of distortions related to trade policy in developing countries.

In particular, research has documented substantial tariff evasion in developing countries that impacts tariff revenues and the
welfare effects of trade policy (e.g., Rijkers, Baghdadi, and Raballand 2015; Sequeira and Djankov 2014; Sequeira 2016). Also,
Atkin and Khandelwal (2020) review other important distortions, institutional weaknesses, and market failures that shape the
effects of trade policy in developing countries.
    3 Irwin (2017) presents a comprehensive review of the history of U.S. trade policy.




                                                              4
and country-year fixed effects. They find no impact of tariffs on the prices received by foreign exporters; in

other words, they find that the tariff changes have been almost entirely passed through to domestic prices,

leaving relative exporter prices unchanged.4 Although this result might be surprising for a large economy

like that of the United States, it is in line with similar estimates made using different methodologies in

Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019) and Cavallo, Gopinath, Neiman, and Tang (2021).

       Using micro-data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) collected at the border and at retailers,

Cavallo, Gopinath, Neiman, and Tang (2021) document that the increase in U.S. import tariffs were almost

fully passed through to total prices paid by importers, suggesting that the incidence of the tariffs has fallen

on U.S. consumers. Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019) use census data as in Amiti,

Redding, and Weinstein (2019) but follow a different methodology to find evidence of the effects of the

trade war on U.S. prices. The authors estimate a U.S. demand system that accommodates substitution

across imported varieties (defined as country-product pairs), across imported products (defined as 10-digit

Harmonized System product codes), and between imported and domestic products within a sector (defined

as 4-digit NAICS industry codes), and they combine this demand system with foreign export supply curves

for each variety. Similar to Amiti, Redding, and Weinstein (2019), their results are suggestive of a perfectly

elastic export supply curve. In the following sections, we describe in more detail the estimation methodology

and results in Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019). In line with these results, Flaaen,

Hortacsu, and Tintelnot (2020) also estimate a high tariff pass-through to retail prices for washing machines.

       As discussed in these studies, the finding of the complete pass-through of tariffs to duty-inclusive import

prices does not imply that the United States is a small open economy that is not able to affect its terms of

trade. One possible interpretation is that a complete pass-through is a short-run effect, as relative prices

may change over longer horizons. In addition, the fact that the relative price of imports does not change,

it does not imply that the relative price of imports to exports are unchanged. For instance, changes in the

level of exports to the United States may still be associated with a change in the U.S. wage relative to the

wage in all countries; a terms of trade effect that would differentiate out in the reduced-form regressions.

       Recent empirical studies have estimated the effects of the 2018 trade war on outcomes other than U.S.

prices. Amiti, Kong, and Weinstein (2020a) estimate the effects of the trade war on investment. Notably,

the authors propose a methodology that builds on a variant of a stock-market event study. Using this

methodology, they estimate the effects on both treated and untreated firms. The authors find that the trade
   4   More recently, Amiti, Redding, and Weinstein (2020b) explore further the trade war effects of tariffs in a longer period
and find complete passthrough to domestic prices except for steel inputs. In particular, they find complete passthrough in the
short-run for tariffs on steel inputs and that the passthrough falls to 50 percent after a year.




                                                                5
war lowered the investment growth rate of listed U.S. companies by around 1.9 percentage points.




2.2     Trade in Intermediate Goods: Global Value Chains

The large increase in trade in intermediate goods has led to the globalization of value chains (see Johnson

and Noguera 2012, and Antr`
                          as and Chor 2021). When it comes to supply chains, the incidence of a tariff

may be larger because tariffs affect the input of goods that are used for the production of goods that are later

exported.5 There is a fast-growing body of empirical literature studying the effects of changes on import

tariffs that takes into account supply chains.

    Two recent studies, Handley, Kamal, and Monarch (2020) and Flaaen and Pierce (2019), use the 2018-

2019 U.S. import tariff increase to learn about the effects of the change in trade policy taking into account

supply chain linkages. Handley, Kamal, and Monarch (2020) find that firms that were impacted by the change

in tariffs accounted for 84 percent of U.S. exports and represent 65 percent of manufacturing employment.

In addition, the effect of the change in policy cost an average of $900 per worker in new duties. Flaaen and

Pierce (2019) find evidence that the import protection received by U.S. manufacturing industries that were

more exposed to tariff increases was offset by larger negative effects from rising input costs and retaliatory

tariffs. These results speak to the importance of taking into account sectoral linkages when studying the

effects of import tariffs.6

    Import tariffs are not the only trade policy instrument that can disrupt supply chains. Recent papers

study the effects of other trade policies, including rules of origin (Conconi, Garcia-Santana, Puccio, and

Venturini 2018) and anti-dumping duties (e.g., Bown, Conconi, Erbahar, and Trimarchi 2021; Erbahar and

Zi 2017).7 In particular, Conconi, Garcia-Santana, Puccio, and Venturini (2018) show that rules of origin

in free trade agreements lead to a sizeable reduction in imports of intermediate goods from third countries

relative to member countries. Bown, Conconi, Erbahar, and Trimarchi (2021) propose an instrument for

anti-dumping duties to study the effects of trade policy along supply chains. The instrument builds on the

idea that U.S. politicians have incentives to use trade policy to favor important industries in swing states

(e.g., Conconi, DeRemer, Kirchsteiger, Trimarchi, and Zanardi 2017; Ma and McLaren 2018; Muuls and

Petropoulou 2013).
   5A  clear example is the result in Bond, Crucini, Potter, and Rodrigue (2013). The researchers find that once sectoral linkages
are taken into account, the average Smoot­Hawley tariff rate of 46 percent in 1933 is equivalent to a uniform tariff rate of 70
percent.
   6 In related research, Barattieri and Cacciatore (2020) find empirical evidence that temporary trade barriers (antidumping,

countervailing duties, and safeguards) implemented in the United States during the last two decades had small beneficial effects
in protected industries, while the effects in downstream industries were negative and significant.
   7 Other recent related research considers the effects of trade preferences given to developing countries on trade flows

(Cherkashin, Demidova, Kee, and Krishna 2015), firms' incentives to comply with the rules of origin (Ju and Krishna 2005),
and the impact of China's falling tariffs on the organization of its exports between ordinary and processing trade (Brandt and
Morrow 2017).


                                                                6
   Looking beyond the effects of trade policy on global value chains, recent work by Blanchard, Bown, and

Johnson (2017) provides empirical evidence of how global value chains shape trade policy. Combining data

on bilateral import protection and value-added content, the authors estimate the influence of value-added

content on tariff setting across countries. The authors find that higher domestic value added in foreign final

goods results in lower applied bilateral tariffs and that higher foreign value added in domestic final goods

results in lower applied bilateral tariffs. Bown, Erbahar, and Zanardi (2020) provide additional supportive

evidence and find that anti-dumping duties are more likely to be removed when domestic value added in

foreign production grows faster.

   We now turn to review another set of important empirical findings in the empirical trade policy literature.




2.3     The Effects of Trade Policy Across Local Labor Markets

Different regions in a given country have different exposure to sectoral changes in import tariffs. With

frictions to the mobility of goods and factors across space, changes in trade policy may have heteroge-

neous outcomes according to one region's level of exposure relative to another region's. The distributional

consequences of trade policy across local labor markets is a theme in the recent empirical literature. We

now discuss the econometric approach applied to study the spatial effects of trade policy, the approach's

advantages and challenges, and how to interpret the findings.



2.3.1   Shift-share Analysis

One of the most popular econometric frameworks over the last decade for studying the effects of trade policy

across space builds on the literature on shift-share analysis. This branch of research started in the 1940s

(Creamer 1943), mostly as an accounting exercise to predict regional growth and the regional effects of tax

and regulation policies. The method is simple and has gained traction as a framework for analyzing the

effects of trade policy on outcomes such wages, employment, and poverty. The method exploits the fact that

trade policy changes are usually heterogeneous across sectors and that sectoral economic activity is unevenly

distributed across space.

   The basic idea of shift-share analysis is to model the impact of shocks, or "shifters," on given outcomes

in regions that have differential exposure, or "shares," to the shock. Shift-share regressions commonly take

the following specification:




                                                      7
                                              yn = 0 Xn + 1               nj Zj + en
                                                                      j

    In this specification, yn is an outcome of interest, Xn is a set of controls, and en is an error term. The

variable Zj is a set of shocks, or "shifters," that are heterogeneous across sectors j , and nj is the employment

share of sector j in region n. In the context of trade policy, tariffs are used as shifters.

    To explain the method further, we follow Topalova (2010) who applies the shift-share method to study

the effects of trade liberalization on poverty in rural districts in India. To carry out the analysis, the author

exploits both the sectoral composition of economic activity across 450 districts in India and the sectoral

variation in trade liberalization (the average import tariffs dropped from 80 to 37 percent from 1990 to 1996,

while the standard deviation of tariffs fell by 50 percent). The study runs the following specification:



                                       ydt = 0 + 1 T arif f dt + P ostt + d + edt .


    In this specification, ydt is the outcome of interest at the district level d and time t, 0 is a constant, P ostt

controls for aggregate shocks or trends that affect the economy, and d are district fixed effects. The term

T arif fdt captures the level of protection at the district level. This term takes a shift-share form, namely


                                             T arif fdt =        dj,1991 (j,t - 1) ,
                                                             j



where j,t are one plus the sectoral ad-valorem tariffs and the "shares" (weights) dj,1991 are defined as the

employment share of industry j in district d in the pre-shift period of 1991.8 Concretely,

                                                                     Ldj,1991
                                                    dj,1991 =                   .
                                                                     j Ldj,1991



    The coefficient of interest is 1 . This coefficient captures the average effect of trade liberalization on the

district-level outcome. As correctly emphasized in Topalova (2010), the estimation strategy does not identify

the overall impact of trade liberalization on the outcome, but it instead measures whether some districts are

affected more than others. Using this econometric specification, Topalova (2010) finds that rural districts

in which the sectors were more exposed to tariff changes experienced a slower decline in poverty and lower

consumption growth relative to the other regions.
    8 In the specification, Topalova (2010) ignores workers in non-traded production sectors. Her argument is that since T arif f dt

is scaled by tariffs, the measure is sensitive to the share of people involved in the non-traded sectors in which tariffs are zero.
Thus, T arif f dt might be related to initial poverty levels and could confound the empirical strategy for many reasons (e.g., if
there was convergence in district outcomes for reasons unrelated to trade policy).




                                                                 8
   More recently, Kovak (2013) uses a similar shift-share analysis to study the effects of trade liberalization

on wages across Brazilian regions. In particular, the specification in Kovak (2013) is


                                         dln(wr ) = 0 + 1 RT Cr + er                                          (1)



where dln(wr ) is the log wage in region r, RT Cr stands for region-level tariff changes, 0 is a constant,

and er is an error term orthogonal to tariffs. The coefficient of interest is 1 , which measures the effects of

changes to regional tariffs on earnings across regions. As in Topalova (2010), RT Cr takes a shift-share form,

in particular

                                            RT Cr =            rj dln(j ),
                                                       j

where the shifter dln(j ) is the change in one plus tariffs across sectors j . The share rj is the weight of

each industry in each region, given by


                                                       Lrj  1
                                                       Lr 1-rj
                                             rj =       Lrj
                                                                        ,
                                                              1
                                                      j Lr 1-rj


where rj is the share of labor payment in gross output in industry j . Notice that these shares map onto

the ones used by Topalova (2010) if rj =  ; namely, if there is no heterogeneity in the labor payment in

gross output across industries.

   Kovak (2013) finds that regions exposed to the largest tariff declines experienced smaller wage growth

relative to regions that experienced smaller tariff cuts. In addition to this empirical finding, Kovak (2013)

makes an important methodological contribution. The paper presents an economic theory that can justify the

empirical specification of the shift share. In the next section, we build on Kovak (2013) and present a theory

behind the shift-share analysis. We also extend the theory to richer settings and derive the correspondent

shift-share specifications.

   Shift-share analysis poses two main issues for the interpretation of the results from the shift-share regres-

sions. First, as discussed in Topalova (2010), the coefficient in shift-share regressions, as in any differences-

in-differences estimates, captures differential effects; namely, the impact of tariff changes in regions that have

greater exposure to changes in trade policy relative to regions that have less exposure. Therefore, on their

own, shift-share regressions do not provide information about aggregate effects. In Section 3, we discuss

general equilibrium frameworks that allow to recover level or aggregate effects of trade policy changes. Sec-

ond, shift-share analysis raises the question of the underlying economic model that justifies the shift-share

specification. In the next subsection, we study the connection between shift-share regressions and economic


                                                           9
models, and we provide further details about the interpretation of shift-share estimates.



2.3.2   Theory Behind Shift-share Analysis

In this section, we derive an economic model that gives rise to the shift-share formulation. The economic

model we present is based on the small-open economy, specific-factor model described in Kovak (2013),

which in turn builds on Jones (1975). We extend this baseline model to allow for imperfect regional labor

mobility. We also discuss how to extend this model to show how the shift-share specification depends on the

underlying structure of the model.

   Consider an economy with R regions indexed by n and J sectors indexed by j . Assume that labor is

freely mobile across sectors within a region and imperfectly mobile across regions. Firms produce with a

constant return-to-scale technology that uses local factors of production: labor (L) and a fixed factor (H ).

We assume that labor and the fixed factor are aggregated with Cobb-Douglas technology. Denote by Ynj

the output in sector j and region n, given by


                                                      nj       1-nj
                                          Ynj = Anj Lnj  Hnj          ,



where Anj is the Total Factor Productivity (TFP) in sector j and region n, nj is the share of labor in

output, and 1 - nj is the share of the fixed factor in output. The demand for labor and the fixed factor in

sector j and region n are given by Lnj and Hnj , respectively. From the firm's cost-minimization problem,

we obtain that the optimal labor demand in nj is given by


                                                       nj Pnj
                                              Lnj =           Ynj ,
                                                        wn

where Pnj is the price of output in sector j and region n.

   Using the optimal labor demand, we obtain that the regional labor market clearing condition can be

written as


                                                    nj Pnj
                                       Ln =                Ynj for all n.
                                                j
                                                     wn

   Totally differentiating the labor market clearing condition, using the first-order condition of the firm's

cost-minimization problem, and solving for the change in wages, we obtain (see Section A of the online




                                                        10
appendix for further details)


                                  dlnwn = -n dlnLn +             nj dlnPnj +           nj dlnAnj ,                                  (2)
                                                             j                     j



                                   -1
                     Lnj  1                          Lnj  1
where n            j Ln 1-nj            and nj n     Ln 1-nj .


    We now discuss the regional supply of labor. In particular, we introduce imperfect labor mobility by

assuming that moving to location n entails a multiplicative cost n that is an i.i.d. draw from an extreme-

value Frechet distribution with shape parameter  (the cost draw in measured in utils and can also be

interpreted as an amenity shock).9 Using the properties of the Frechet distribution, we see that the labor

supply in location n is given by

                                                                           
                                                                 (wn )
                                                      Ln =                 L,
                                                                  i (wi )

where L is the country's total endowment of labor. Totally differentiating this expression, we obtain


                                                  dlnLn = dlnwn - dln,                                                              (3)


                                     
where we denote              i   (wi ) . We now substitute this new equilibrium relation into (2), and then solving

for wages once more, we obtain


                                     n               1                                              nj
                    dlnwn =                dln +                           nj dlnPnj +                     dlnAnj .
                                 (1 + n  )       (1 + n  )         j                         j
                                                                                                 (1 + n  )

    The last important assumption is that each region is a small, open economy. As a result of this assumption,

price changes are a function of tariff changes only; namely, dlnPnj = dlnj . It follows, then, that

                                      n               1                                             nj
                     dlnwn =                dln +                          nj dlnj +                       dlnAnj .                 (4)
                                  (1 + n  )       (1 + n  )            j                 j
                                                                                                 (1 + n  )


    Notice that this relationship has the same structure as the shift-share regression. The identifying assump-

tion in the econometric specification assumes that local exposure to tariffs is uncorrelated to changes in local
                                                                                                                          nj
labor supply and technology. In addition, researchers impose structure on the TFP shifters                            j (1+n  ) dlnAnj ,

which are usually controlled with fixed effects or modeled inside the error term.
   9 In a related setup, Gertler (2021) embeds a Roy model with imperfect sectoral mobility due to idiosyncratic Frechet draws

into a specific-factors model. The author derives shift-share regressions to study the effects of the 1997 Asian crisis on the U.S.
local labor markets.




                                                                 11
    From now on, we focus on the shift-share variable of interest, which we denote as



                                              Shif t-sharen =          nj dlnj .                                           (5)
                                                                   j

    Note that if nj =  ; the shift-share variable in the model we have specified is the same as the shift-share

variable in Kovak (2013). In addition, for small changes in tariff such that d (j - 1)  dlnj the shift-share

variable is the same as in Topalova (2010).



2.3.3    Discussion and Interpretation of the Shift-share Trade Policy Analysis

Shift-share analysis is a simple tool for studying the differential effects of trade policy across space. A main

aspect of the analysis that merits highlighting is the interpretation of the estimated coefficients. The first

takeaway, as mentioned earlier, is that the specification does not estimate level effects. The coefficient can

only be interpreted as the deviation from aggregate effects; that is, the effect of a change in tariffs in a given

market relative to the average effect of the change in tariffs in the economy (n / (1 + n  ) dln in equation

(4)).

    Shift-share analysis can shed light on relevant mechanisms or elasticities and in this way can be used

to guide structural models. For instance, notice that the specific-factor model in which labor is not mobile

across regions but perfectly mobile across sectors predicts a regression coefficient 1 = 1 in the regression

equation (1). To see this, set  = 0. Then Ln is fixed and dlnLn = 0. Alternatively, under this restriction,

from equation (3) we obtain dlnwn = dln, and the coefficient multiplying the shift share in (4) is one. At

the other extreme, with perfect labor mobility, wages are equalized across regions and therefore the regression

should give a value of 1 = 0 (see Section A of the online appendix for details). Empirically, the analysis

in Kovak (2013) finds a coefficient 0 < 1 < 1. Therefore, the empirical estimate is suggestive of imperfect

regional migration as opposed to free mobility or labor immobility.

    Another important lesson from the literature is that the shift-share specification cannot be disconnected

from the theory.10 In particular, how the share variable is constructed can have important consequences for

the estimated effects and interpretation. The share variable in (5) is not invariant to the structure of the

model behind the analysis. Here we illustrate this point using three cases: with non-tradable industries, when

the production function is not unit-elastic, and under the presence of intermediate goods and input-output

linkages in production.
  10 In this context, Adao, Arkolakis, and Esposito (2019a) show how to structurally interpret shift-share regressions within a

structural model and discuss the nature of the fixed effect. Moreover, Kim and Vogel (2021) present a structural model with
labor market frictions to interpret the shift-share specification of Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and to study the effects of
the China shock across different margins.



                                                              12
   In the presence of non-tradable sectors, a practical approach has been to set the change in the price of the

non-tradable goods equal to zero in the regression (e.g., Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013; Edmonds, Pavcnik,

and Topalova 2010; Hakobyan and McLaren 2016; Topalova 2010). However, the assumption that changes

in tariffs have no effects on the price of non-tradable goods might not be innocuous. To see this, suppose we

add a non-tradable sector in the economy, then (2) becomes


                   dlnwn = -n dlnLn +              nj dlnPnj + nN T dlnPnN T +         nj dlnAnj .               (6)
                                          j =N T                                  j


   In order to derive the shift-share specification, we need to solve for the endogenous change in the price

of non-tradable goods. To do so, we need additional structural relationships from the demand side of the

economy. Consider the case in which local consumers have Cobb-Douglas preferences and spend a constant

share of their income on goods from each sector j . Following the same derivations as before (see Section A

of the online appendix for the derivations), we obtain

                                                             nN T nj
                              Shif t-sharen =                           + nj dln j ,
                                                            (1 - nN T )
                                                   j =N T



                                                                                 Ynj Pnj
where nN T = (1 - nN T ) YnNP
                            T PnN T
                             nj Ynj
                                    + nN T nN T and nj = (1 - nN T )                         + nN T nj . Accounting
                               j                                                 j Pnj Ynj

for non-tradable goods changes the structural relationship between the shift share and the outcome of interest.

Clearly, the theory suggests that the tariffs affect the price of non-tradable goods and that this indirect effect

needs to be taken into account in the shift-share specification. Kovak (2013) does allow for non-tradable

goods in his analysis and finds that the magnitude of the effects are quantitatively different if this margin is

taken into account.

   Another aspect that is omitted in the shift-share analysis is the role of intermediate goods and input-

output linkages. We now extend our basic model and derive the shift-share equation with intermediate

goods and input-output linkages. In particular, we assume that firms produce with a constant return-to-

scale technology using labor, a fixed factor, and materials (M ) from all sectors according to the input-output

structure of the economy. Consider a Cobb-Douglas technology to aggregate across factors of production

and materials, and denote by nj the share of intermediate goods in production. Let jk,n denote the share

of sector k in intermediate consumption in sector j and country n, with           k jk,n     = 1. After deriving the

shift-share specification, we end up with two shifters (see Section A of the online appendix for details): a

shifter that reflects the direct impact of the change in tariffs in its own sector and another shifter that reflects

how shifts in tariffs from other sectors impact the outcome. In particular, the shift-share equation is given



                                                            13
by


                                                        IO                    IO
                               Shif t-sharen =          nj dln j -          ~ nj         jk,n dln k ,
                                                    j                   j          k=j

where


                                                 IO          (1 - nj jj,n )
                                                 nj = nj                    .
                                                               (1 - nj )


                                                IO            nj
                                              ~ nj = nj                       jk,n .
                                                           (1 - nj )
                                                                        k=j

                                                              IO            IO
      It is easy to see that when jk,n = 0 and jj,n = 1, then nj = nj and ~ nj = 0. There are two extreme

cases in which the shift-share equation in a model with intermediate goods and linkages is isomorphic to

the previously derived one. The first of these cases is when the changes in tariffs are the same across all

sectors; namely, dlnj = dln. Another case in which the shift-share equation resembles the model with
                                                                                                                     1
no input-output linkages is when the economy is perfectly symmetric across sectors; namely, jk,n =                   J,

nj = n , nj = n . In Section A of the online appendix, we provide these results. Importantly, note that

with input-output linkages, the shift-share equation is in general very different. In fact, input-output linkages

open up the possibility of opposing effects since changes in tariffs have a direct impact on final goods, and

also impact the price of the goods used as materials in production.

      Finally, suppose we consider a more general production function with an elasticity of substitution between

labor and the fixed factor given by j . Then, it follows that the shift-share equation is


                                                                       CES
                                             Shif t-sharen =           nj  dlnj ,
                                                                   j



with the share term given by
                                                               Lnj   j
                                                  CES          Ln 1-nj
                                                  nj  =          Lnk   j       .
                                                               k Ln 1-nk


                                 CES
      Note that when j = 1, then nj  = nj . In addition, if there is no sectoral variation in nj and j = 1,

the expression collapses to the baseline case (Section A of the online appendix provides further details.)11

      In addition to considering these examples, one might think about other relevant economic mechanisms

such as internal trade, firms' entry and exit decisions, and dynamic factor accumulation, any of which could
 11   The derivation of the shift share with CES technology is similar to the one in the appendix in Kovak (2013).




                                                              14
make the shift-share specification even more difficult to interpret.

   Moving beyond the interpretation of the shift-share analysis, there is another important set of issues that

relates to the assumption of the exogenous variation in shifters and shares. Recent studies by Adao, Kolesar,

and Morales (2019b), Borusyak, Hull, and Jaravel (2018), and Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020)

take up these issues and provide insight into the statistical properties of the shift-share designs. These studies

are mainly concerned with shift-share specifications in which the exogenous variation of the shifters are not

tariffs, as in the case of Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013). Redding (2020) reviews recent shift-share designs

that study the effects of trade shocks beyond trade policy. Of course, if the variation in tariff changes is

correlated with changes in the local labor supply and technology, then most of the econometric and inference

issues presented in these studies will also apply when using tariffs as shifters.



2.3.4    Persistent Effects of Trade Policy

A central line of research in current trade policy literature is the study of the distributional employment,

wage, and welfare effects of changes to trade policy over time. We now review new empirical evidence on

the subject.

   Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011) examine the dynamics of local labor market adjustment in response to

the 1990s trade liberalization episode in Brazil. The paper provides evidence that workers who were separated

from their jobs due to import competition tended to take years in order to find jobs in new industries.12

Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Song (2014), using longitudinal data on U.S. manufacturing workers, provide

evidence that the effect of increased import competition from China impacted the incomes of blue-collar

workers for more than a decade. Similarly, Hummels, Jorgensen, Munch, and Xiang (2014) study the effects

on Danish firms exposed to offshoring. They find a negative effect on blue-collar wages that persisted for

almost four years. More related to a change in trade policy is the study of Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017),

which we now describe in greater detail.

   Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017) also use the 1990s trade liberalization episode in Brazil to study dynamic

labor market outcomes. Relative to Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011), they use a longer panel and more

years. The authors perform a dynamic shift-share analysis. In particular, the paper exploits variation in

unilateral tariff reductions across industries and variation in the industry mix of local employment across

Brazilian regions to measure changes in local labor demand induced by liberalization. Concretely, Dix-
  12 In related research, Devlin, Kovak, and Morrow (2021) use matched employer-employee data to assess the long-run effects

of the 1988 Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) on Canadian workers, finding relatively smooth transitions across
employers and industries.




                                                            15
Carneiro and Kovak (2017) run a specification similar to that of Kovak (2013) with time lags; namely,


                          yrt - yr,1991 = t RT Cr + st + t (yr,1990 - yr,1986 ) + ert .


   Here yrt is the outcome of interest, either earnings or employment. The term st is a time-varying-state

fixed effect, and t (yr,1990 - yr,1986 ) controls for pre-trends. Here the shift-share RT Cr is the same as the

one in Kovak (2013), but by allowing t to change over time, they are able to capture the effects across time.

Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017) find that changes in trade policy have varying regional effects in the short

run but that the effects of trade liberalization on employment and earnings are persistent over time; namely,

the coefficient t increases over the years. Decades after Brazil's trade liberalization, the effects continued to

be unevenly distributed across space. Some of these findings might reflect barriers to interregional mobility,

and some might be a consequence of other frictions for industries to adjust to changes in policy.

   We have thus far reviewed empirical evidence of actual changes in trade policy. We now review another

line of research that focuses on the effects of trade policy uncertainty.




2.4    Trade Policy Uncertainty

A recent and fast-growing stream of literature focuses on the economic effects of trade policy uncertainty.

There are two pioneer papers in this literature: a reduced-form study performed by Pierce and Schott (2016)

and a structural analysis by Handley and Limao (2017). In this section we review Pierce and Schott (2016),

and in the next section we describe structural studies like that of Handley and Limao (2017) and their

extensions.

   Pierce and Schott (2016) find a link between the sharp decline in U.S. manufacturing employment in

the 2000s and the United States' granting of permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) to China. The

authors argue that the conferral of PNTR removed the uncertainty associated with these annual renewals

by permanently setting U.S. duties on Chinese imports at normal trade relations (NTR) levels. To establish

this link, the authors compute the "NTR gap," defined as the difference between the non-NTR rates to

which tariffs would have risen if annual renewal had failed and the NTR tariff rates that were locked in by

PNTR. Importantly, in the econometric analysis, the authors exploit the substantial variation in NTR gaps

across industries. The baseline difference-in-differences (DID) specification is given by


        ln(EM Pit ) = P ostP N T Rt × N T R Gapi + P ostP N T Rt × Xi  + Xit  + t + i +  + eit .




                                                       16
    The first term on the right-hand side is the DID term of interest, an interaction of the NTR gap and an

indicator of the post-PNTR period, and the second term is an interaction of the post-PNTR dummy variable

and time-invariant industry characteristics. The other terms in the regression are various control variables

and fixed effects.

    The authors' results reveal a statistically negative relationship between the change in U.S. policy and

subsequent employment in manufacturing. The baseline specification implies that moving an industry from

an NTR gap at the twenty-fifth percentile of the observed distribution to the seventy-fifth percentile increases

the implied relative loss of employment by 0.08 log points.

    In addition to considering the effects of trade policy uncertainty on manufacturing employment, recent

research has addressed the impact of trade policy uncertainty on firm-level outcomes. For example, Green-

land, Ion, Lopresti, and Schott (2020) use asset price reactions to trade policy events to compute abnormal

returns as a measure of the policy exposure of firms; the authors then estimate the effects of abnormal

returns on firms' outcomes. They find that the conferral of PNTR to China had differential effects on profits

and employment in small and large U.S. firms but that the the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement

had small distributional effects across firms.

    We conclude Section 2 by summarizing the main takeaways from the empirical studies discussed in the

section. First, when there is tariff policy variation across sectors, one needs to take into account supply-chain

linkages in order to evaluate the effects of trade policy. Second, trade policy has heterogeneous effects across

spatially distinct labor markets. Third, the effects of trade policy may be long-lasting. Fourth, trade policy

uncertainty has real economic effects.

    While most of the previous studies identify differential effects of trade policy, and in particular how

more exposed sectors and regions are affected relative to less exposed sectors and regions, researchers are

also interested in understanding aggregate and general equilibrium effects. Recent advances in the trade

literature have led to the development of quantitative tools to study these general equilibrium effects. We

now review literature on quantitative trade policy models and use recent advances to develop a quantitative

trade policy model that takes into account most of the margins that the reduced-form literature has identified

as important.




3     Quantitative Trade Policy Analysis in General Equilibrium

One of the recent advances in the trade literature has been the use of quantitative trade models to quantify

the different mechanisms by which trade policy affects trade and welfare. Of course, quantitative general



                                                       17
equilibrium models have always been an important empirical tool of analysis, starting with the computable

general equilibrium models (e.g., GTAP, Michigan Model, and others that are summarized in Dixon and

Jorgenson 2012). The key innovation in recent decades has been the development of quantitative models

that are more tractable for studying the role of different relevant mechanisms and these models' extensions in

many dimensions. These recent quantitative models are built on the new models of international trade with

perfect competition and heterogeneous productivity, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002), and with imperfect

competition and heterogeneous firms, as in Melitz (2003). As such, the mechanisms emphasized, the data

used, and the new techniques developed to estimate elasticities, calibration methods, and model estimation

techniques make these developments in quantitative trade theory a valuable empirical tool for trade policy

analysis that has gained traction in the literature.

   Quantitative frameworks contain a variety of building blocks in terms of production structure, preferences,

number and type of sectors (tradable and non-tradable), market structure, economic geography, source (or

absence) of dynamics, treatment of trade deficits, and the mobility of goods and people. Several recent

reviews provide a description of the alternative economic environments, or building blocks. For example,

Costinot and Rodr´
                 iguez-Clare (2014) and Ossa (2016) review static, one-sector, and multi-sector models

of commercial policy. Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017) review quantitative spatial models that can

be extended to study the spatial effects of trade policy. McLaren (2017) reviews frameworks with labor

market dynamics that can also be extended to evaluate the effects of trade policy across labor markets, and

Alessandria, Arkolakis, and Ruhl (2020) review frameworks with trade and firm dynamics that can also be

used to study the effects of trade policy.

   We now present a quantitative model that can be applied to study the aggregate, distributional, and

general equilibrium effects of trade policy across sectors, across spatially distinct labor markets, and over

time. We discuss recent advances in data availability, estimation, and solution methods that apply to most

of the quantitative frameworks that we review. In addition, by way of example, we show how to apply the

methods and data to perform trade policy counterfactuals and study the effects of the recent trade war

between the United States and its trading partners across different margins.




3.1    Aggregate and Sectoral Effects of Trade Policy

The most common characteristic of the recent quantitative trade models is the gravity structure. We see

gravity as an empirical and theoretical success of the literature since it has disciplined structural trade

frameworks in terms of how fundamentals and trade barriers relate to trade flows. The micro-foundations

that have given rise to the gravity structure differ in recent quantitative trade models; for example, see Eaton


                                                       18
and Kortum (2002), Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), and

Chaney (2008).

       Building on these advances, recent studies have analyzed trade policy assuming different market structures

with either homogeneous or heterogeneous goods in single-sector and multi-sector economies. For example,

Ossa (2014) builds on the new economic geography literature with homogeneous goods (akin to Krugman

1980). Other frameworks allow for goods and sectoral heterogeneity. These frameworks build on Eaton

and Kortum (2002) (e.g., Caliendo and Parro 2010; Caliendo and Parro 2015; Levchenko and Zhang 2016;

Shikher 2012; for a comprehensive survey of recent extensions of the Ricardian model of trade, refer to Eaton

and Kortum 2012). Other studies have performed trade policy evaluations using models with heterogeneous

firms and multi-sectors, building on Melitz (2003), Chaney (2008), and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008); as in

Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011), Caliendo, Feenstra, Romalis, and Taylor (2015), and Spearot

(2016).

       The majority of studies evaluating trade policy have assumed CES utility functions, either by assuming

a unitary elasticity or different nests between foreign and domestic varieties. Spearot (2016) develops a

quantitative framework that introduces non-homothetic preferences to evaluate the effects of trade policy.13

       A strand of the literature has departed from a single factor of production to study the effects of trade

policy changes on income inequality (e.g., Dix-Carneiro and Kovak 2017; Hakobyan and McLaren 2016),

or more generally, the effects of other trade-related shocks on income inequality (e.g., Burstein, Cravino,

and Vogel 2013; Burstein and Vogel 2017; Galle, Rodr´
                                                    iguez-Clare, and Yi 2017; Lee 2020; Lyon and Waugh

2019; Parro 2013; Waugh 2019). When considering multi-input settings, one must also take a stand on the

substitutability across inputs. Most of the recent quantitative work has followed the assumption of a unitary

elasticity.14

       There are different approaches to treating observed trade imbalances. Static frameworks follow alternative

routes to address (partially) this issue. One approach is to assume that country-aggregate trade imbalances

are constant relative to world GDP and lump-sum transferred to consumers (e.g., Caliendo and Parro 2015).

A second approach is to use the equilibrium conditions to eliminate trade imbalances (e.g., Caliendo and

Parro 2015; Ossa 2011; Ossa 2014). A third approach is to create a system of income transfers across

locations to match observed imbalances (e.g., Caliendo, Parro, Rossi-Hansberg, and Sarte 2017; Fajgelbaum,

Morales, Su´
           arez Serrato, and Zidar 2018; Fajgelbaum and Gaubert 2020). A fourth approach is to consider
  13   More generally, in the context of studying the effects of trade shocks with non-homothetic preferences, see Fieler (2011),
Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016), and Caron, Fally, and Markusen (2020).



  14 See, for example, Costinot and Rodr´     iguez-Clare (2014) for an analysis of the sensibility of the welfare implications of
different elasticities of substitution across inputs in different classes of trade models.


                                                                19
imbalances as international transfers of income and profits due to multinational activity (e.g., Arkolakis,

Ramondo, Rodr´
             iguez-Clare, and Yeaple 2018).

   Recent dynamic trade frameworks have introduced endogenous trade imbalances through savings and

investment decisions (e.g., Dix-Carneiro, Pessoa, Reyes-Heroles, and Traiberman 2021; Eaton, Kortum,

Neiman, and Romalis 2016b; Eaton, Kortum, and Neiman 2016a; Reyes-Heroles 2017; Sposi 2012; Sposi

2021). Other recent quantitative trade frameworks with capital accumulation, but assuming balanced trade

period-by-period, are Anderson, Larch, and Yotov (2019) in the context of a Armington-CES gravity model

and Alvarez (2017), Ravikumar, Santacreu, and Sposi (2019), and Sposi, Yi, and Zhang (2020) in the context

of a multi-country Eaton and Kortum (2002) model.

   The range of assumptions about how mobile labor is across industries and locations in quantitative trade

frameworks essentially covers all the possibilities, ranging from labor immobility across sectors and locations,

perfect mobility across sectors, and regional labor immobility, to labor mobility frictions across industries

and locations. Recent research has also included labor market dynamics to trade and regional/spatial models

with homogeneous agents (e.g., Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro 2019) and with heterogeneous agents (e.g.,

Caliendo, Opromolla, Parro, and Sforza 2021b).

   In order to illustrate the developments in quantitative trade policy frameworks and to show how to

use these frameworks, we choose one of the aforementioned quantitative models that includes trade in

intermediate goods, multiple sectors, and sectoral supply-chain linkages. Our starting point is Caliendo and

Parro (2015), a multi-country, multi-sector trade policy model with input-output linkages that also captures

macro aspects of global value chains.15 From there, we expand the framework to incorporate the uneven

distribution of local economic activity across space that will allow us to speak about the spatial effects of

trade policy. We then add labor market dynamics to study the effects of trade policy on the location of

employment across space and over time.



3.1.1      Intermediate Goods, Multiple Sectors, and Sectoral Supply-Chain Linkages

Consider a world economy with N countries that are indexed by i and n. In each country i, there are J

sectors that are indexed by j and k . Denote by xj
                                                 i the unit cost to produce a good in country i. The unit

cost varies across sectors. Assuming a production function that uses labor and materials from all sectors

according to the input-output structure of the economy, we have

                                                          j      J           jk
                                                          i                  i
                                                xj
                                                 i = [wi ]             Pik        ,                                       (7)
                                                                 k=1
 15 See   Antr`
              as and Chor (2021) for a discussion of recent macro and micro frameworks developed to study global value chains.



                                                              20
         J     jk       j
where    k=1   i  = 1 - i , wi are factor prices and Pik is the price of materials from sector k.
                                                        j
   Trade between countries is costly, and we denote by kin the trade frictions that goods produced in sector

j face when shipped from n to i. These costs may entail non-tariff barriers or geographical frictions and
                                             j
are modeled as "iceberg" trade costs, where kin  1. In addition, we assume that countries face ad-valorem
                      j
import tariffs, where in denotes one plus the ad-valorem tariff that country i applies to n in sector j .

   Denote the share that country i spends on goods produced in sector j in country n, by j
                                                                                         in . The bilateral

trade share in each sector is given by

                                                                                - j
                                                           j j
                                                        Aj        j
                                                         n in in xn
                                           j
                                           in =                                       - j
                                                                                            .                                   (8)
                                                        N
                                                        h=1   Aj j j j
                                                               h ih ih xh



   Here j is the trade elasticity in sector j , and Aj
                                                     n represents sector j country n-specific fundamental TFP

(a country-sector productivity shifter). Equation (8) represents a gravity relationship in trade flows between

countries i and n.

   We denote by Pij the sectoral price index that in an Eaton and Kortum (2002) structure with heteroge-

neous goods takes the functional form

                                                                                        -1/ j
                                                  N                             - j
                                     Pij   =             Aj
                                                          n
                                                               j j
                                                               in in xj
                                                                      n                          .                              (9)
                                                  n=1



   The next equilibrium condition defines the goods market clearing condition. The total expenditure on
                                                      j
goods traded in sector j and country i is denoted by Xi . Households have income Ii , and they spend a share
j
i of their income on goods from sector j. Firms also spend a share of their costs purchasing intermediate

goods from all sectors. Total expenditure on sectoral goods in country i, therefore, is given by

                                                                                  k
                                         j        J     kj      N               Xn    j
                                        Xi =            i                  k
                                                                           ni    k
                                                                                    + i Ii ,                                   (10)
                                                  k=1           n=1             ni

      kj                                                                                                        N        Xk
where i  is the cost share in country i and sector k on goods from sector j, and where                          n=1   k
                                                                                                                      ni  k is the
                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                          ni

world total expenditure (net of tariffs) on goods produced in sector k and country i (which equals the value

of production of sector k goods produced in i).

   Trade is unbalanced; hence,

                                 J         N     j   j
                                                 in Xi
                                                                    J           N      j   j
                                                                                       ni Xn
                                                  j
                                                         =                                  j
                                                                                                     + Di , .                  (11)
                                 j =1      n=1    in                j =1        n=1         ni

   In this equation, the left-hand side is country i s total imports and the right-hand side is country i s


                                                               21
exports plus the trade deficit Di , which we take as an exogenous transfer that captures trade imbalances.

   Finally, tariff revenue is collected and lump-sum transferred to households. Together with the income

households obtain from supplying labor, national income is given by


                                                Ii = wi Li + T Ri + Ti ,                                                   (12)


                  J        N     j           Xj
where T Ri        j =1     n=1   in - 1 j
                                        in  j is tariff revenue and Ti are net transfers from the rest of the
                                             i

                                              in

world. In the case of this model with exogenous trade imbalances, Ti = Di . We now formally define the

equilibrium in the model.


                                                                                                               N
   Equilibrium of the multi-country, multi-sector model. Given endowments                                 Li   i=1
                                                                                                                   ,   transfers
    N                               N,N,J                                     j N,J,J                                          J
 Di i=1 ,   fundamentals    Aj   j
                             i , in i=1,n=1,j =1 ,   parameters      j
                                                                     i   kj
                                                                       , i  , i i=1,j =1,k=1
                                                                                             ,   and trade elasticities j      j =1
                                                                                                                                    ,
                                        j            N,N,J
an equilibrium under a tariff structure in           i=1;n=1;j =1
                                                                    is a wage vector w  RN
                                                                                         ++ that satisfies equilibrium

conditions (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), and (12) for all i and j .




3.1.2   Using Tariff Variation to Estimate Trade Elasticities

Recent studies have used tariff policy variation to identify trade elasticities, which constitute an important

parameter for computing the equilibrium in quantitative trade models. Setting aside potential issues with

endogeneity, tariff changes could provide the variation needed to estimate these elasticities; however, only

a handful of recent studies have used observed changes in tariffs to estimate them. For example, Head

and Ries (2001), Romalis (2007), Spearot (2013), and Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal

(2019) use time-series variation in tariffs to estimate trade elasticities, while Caliendo and Parro (2015) and

Imbs and Mejean (2015) use cross-sectional variations in tariffs. In many structural models, there is a tight

link between the trade elasticity and the import demand elasticity. Moreover, both import demand and

export supply elasticities in response to tariffs play key roles for the welfare effects of trade policy (Dixit and

Norman 1980). Hillberry and Hummels (2013) and Head and Mayer (2013) provide reviews of approaches

that have been commonly used to estimate import demand and trade elasticities. In addition, Head and

Mayer (2013) perform a meta-analysis using 744 coefficients obtained from a sample of 32 papers. This

meta-analysis shows that when the trade elasticity is identified using tariffs/freight rates, it has an average

value of -5.03 (median of -6.74). When using prices/wages/exchange rates, the average estimated value is

considerably lower at -1.12 (median of -1.38). Empirical studies differ in the level of aggregation at which



                                                              22
these elasticities are estimated and in the underlying micro structure, and therefore, as we discuss below,

the estimated parameters in the literature do not always have the same interpretation.

   One major challenge when estimating demand and supply elasticities, i.e. the slopes of the demand and

supply curves, is that doing so requires at least two instruments (see Wright 1928): ideally, an exogenous

shift to the supply curve that could be used to trace out the demand curve and an exogenous shift to the

demand curve that could be used to trace out the supply curve. However, in certain circumstances, the

particularities of the economic environment allow the researcher to use variation in one policy instrument to

identify both the supply and demand elasticities.

   For example, consider a case in which there is a change in trade policy. Tariffs create a price wedge

between importers and exporters. As a result, for any price the exporter receives, the tariff shifts down the

demand curve, and this shift can be used to locally identify the shape of the supply curve. Likewise, for

any given price paid by consumers, the tariff shifts up the supply curve and can be used to identify demand

elasticity. This idea, which was put forward in the context of changes in tax policy, goes back to Ramsey

(1927), and it was recently formalized by Zoutman, Gavrilova, and Hopland (2018). Romalis (2007) applies

this idea to estimate demand and supply elasticities in the context of studying the effects of the North

American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), while Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019)

applies this insight to estimate demand and supply elasticities using the 2018 increases in import tariffs

the United States imposed on its trading partners. To see this idea more formally, we follow Fajgelbaum,

Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019). The authors assume an Armington structure in which product

varieties are differentiated by country of origin. In particular, within each traded sector, aggregate demand

adopts a nested CES structure, in which imported product varieties within a sector are aggregated with an
                                                                                                       g g
elasticity . Denote by mg                                                                         g
                        in the quantity imported of product g ' variety by country i from n. Let pin = in pin

be the domestic price of the variety imported from n, where p g
                                                             in is the CIF price of the variety imported from

n, which also includes bilateral iceberg costs. The quantity imported of product g ' variety is then given by


                                                            -
                                             mg     g    g
                                              in = Bin [pin ]      ,                                     (13)


       g            g      g
where Bin  mg aig [PM ] , PM is the price index of imported varieties, mg is the total demand for good g ,

and aig is a demand shock. Now consider an inverse export supply curve of the following form,


                                                                
                                             p g    g    g
                                              in = zin (min )      ,


                                             g
where   is the export supply elasticity and zin is the foreign marginal cost shifter. Fajgelbaum, Goldberg,



                                                     23
Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019) use time changes in tariffs to simultaneously estimate the import and

export demand elasticities. The estimation is performed at the product variety level g assuming that  is

constant across product/sectors. Adding time subscripts to the variables and taking log time differences

yields the estimating equations


                                             M   M     M
                                  ln min,t = t + n,t + nj -   ln pin + M
                                                                       in,t


                                 ln p      X   X     X                 X
                                     n,t = t + n,t + nj +   ln min,t + in,t ,


      M   X                                         M     X                                   M    X
where t , t         are product-time fixed effects, n,t , n,t are country-time fixed effects, nj , nj are

country-sector fixed effects, and M        X
                                  in,t and in,t are import demand and export supply shocks. The identifying

assumption is that tariffs are uncorrelated with unobserved import demand and export supply shocks. In

order to identify the import demand elasticity , one can use the change in tariffs to instrument for tariff-

inclusive changes in prices pg
                             in . Similarly, in order to identify the export supply elasticity, the change in tariffs

can be used as an instrument for the change in imports. Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal

(2019) use the 2018 increases in import tariffs imposed by the United States and estimate the elasticities

using imports from the United States at the HS-8 product level. Their estimates imply that  = 2.53 with

a standard error of 0.26 and   = -0.002 with a standard error of 0.05. These results allow them to conclude

that they cannot reject a horizontal supply curve. With the estimated elasticities, and assuming complete

tariff passthrough and no changes in both U.S. import and export prices, the authors perform a back-of-the

envelope computation of the impact of the tariff changes in real income.

   In the context of the model with an Eaton and Kortum (2002) structure presented in the previous section,

two aspects are worth mentioning. First, each sector in the Eaton-Kortum model is a continuum of varieties

that are aggregated under a CES structure, where each variety is produced by the lowest-cost supplier under
                                      g
perfect competition. It follows that zin = g   g     
                                           in xn and  = 0 at the variety level in the Eaton-Kortum model

since producers cannot influence the world price of a variety (given that there are infinite potential suppliers of

each variety). Second, the variety import demand elasticity  estimated in Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy,

and Khandelwal (2019) is not the same parameter as the sectoral trade elasticity j in equation (8), since

the latter also reflects how firms switch suppliers of varieties in a given sector.

   An approach to directly estimate the trade elasticities j is to use cross-sectional variation in tariffs and

trade flows. Caliendo and Parro (2015) consider three countries indexed by n, i, and h.16 Using equation

(8), if we take the cross-product of imports between the three countries­from n to i, from i to h, and from h
  16 For further details on this method, see Caliendo and Parro (2015), Head and Mayer (2013), Costinot and Rodr´
                                                                                                                iguez-Clare
(2014), and Imbs and Mejean (2015).




                                                            24
to n­and then the cross-product of the same goods shipped in the other direction­from n to h, from h to i,

and from i to n,­all the terms involving prices and parameters are canceled out, leaving us with an equation

that relates bilateral trade flows, tariffs, and iceberg trade costs. After parameterizing trade costs, Caliendo

and Parro (2015) estimate the trade elasticity at the ISIC rev.3 sectoral level using 1993 trade flows and

tariffs. The trade elasticities are very heterogeneous across sectors, and the estimated average elasticity for

the manufacturing sector is 4.5.

   Recent approaches have provided estimates of trade elasticity using tariff policy variation at different

time horizons. Notably, Boehm, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2020) exploit tariff policy variation using

changes to most-favored-nations tariffs as an exogenous tariff change to small countries. The study esti-

mates short-run and long-run trade elasticities that are somehow smaller than the values typically used in

quantitative trade literature. In consequence, quantifications with these numbers result in larger gains from

trade.

   Given the recent changes in trade policy across countries, we expect more studies to use trade policy

variation to estimate this key parameter. We now shift to explain how to perform trade policy counterfactuals

using a quantitative model like the one described in Section 3.1.1.



3.1.3    Trade Policy Counterfactuals

In this section we explain how to perform trade policy counterfactuals (change in import tariffs) using

the quantitative trade model presented in Section 3.1.1. One option for performing counterfactuals is to

estimate the entire set of fundamentals, parameters, and trade elasticities and then solve for the equilibrium

factor prices given a new tariff structure. Another approach is to use the exact-hat algebra methodology

developed by Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007).17 In particular, the exact-hat algebra method consists of

writing the equilibrium equations of an economy with a new set of policies relative to the economy with the

actual fundamentals and policies.18 Let us denote with a prime x the unknown value of a variable under a
                                 j       N,N,J
counterfactual tariff structure in       i=1;n=1;j =1
                                                      .   By x we denote the value of the endogenous variable under
                                                    j                N,N,J
the actual set of fundamentals and tariff structure in               i=1;n=1;j =1
                                                                                  ,   and by x
                                                                                             ^ = x /x we denote the ratio

between the counterfactual and actual endogenous variables. Namely, x
                                                                    ^ is the change in the equilibrium
                                              j           N,N,J
values as a result of the changes in tariffs ^in          i=1;n=1;j =1
                                                                       .   Using this notation, the equilibrium conditions
  17 Costinot and Rodr´iguez-Clare (2014) coined the term "exact-hat algebra" and showed how many quantitative models, even
under the presence of fixed costs, can be expressed this way. This representation can also be applied to models with nested
CES functional forms (e.g. Parro 2013). See also Caliendo, Parro, and Tsyvinski (2021c) for an example of an application of
the exact-hat algebra in a model with cross-country and cross-industry endogenous input-output shares in a gravity structure.
Moreover, Adao, Costinot, and Donaldson (2017) show that the exact-hat algebra can also be applied to non-CES environments.
  18 One can also use this method to study the effects of changes in fundamentals. However, given the theme of this chapter,

we focus on explaining how to solve for counterfactual changes in trade policy while holding the fundamentals fixed.



                                                               25
in hat-changes are given by
                                                                                                 jk
                                                                     j      J                    i
                                                                     i
                                                        ^j
                                                        x      ^i ]
                                                          i = [w
                                                                                       ^ik
                                                                                       P              ,                          (14)
                                                                            k=1



                                                                                                  -1/ j
                                                                N                       - j
                                              ^j
                                              P     =              j        ^in
                                                                             j j
                                                                                x
                                                                                ^n                         ,                     (15)
                                                i               n=1 in



                                                                   j j              - j
                                                             ^j = 
                                                             
                                                                  ^in x
                                                                      ^n
                                                                                             ,                                   (16)
                                                              in
                                                                    Pij
                                                                    ^


                                                            J               N            Xnk
                                           Xi j =                   kj
                                                                    i                k
                                                                                    ni    k
                                                                                               j
                                                                                             + i Ii ,                            (17)
                                                            k=1             n=1          ni


                                                            j
                                       J            N      in Xi j              J            N
                                                                                                       j
                                                                                                      ni Xnj
                                                              j
                                                                       =                                   j
                                                                                                               + Di              (18)
                                       j =1         n=1      in                 j =1         n=1          ni

          ^i wi Li + T Ri + Ti .19
with Ii = w

     A distinctive feature of the exact-hat method is that the system written in changes differentiates out

the unobservable fundamentals. The information about the fundamentals is contained in the observed
                     j                  j   kj     j
endogenous variables in , wi Li , while i , i  and i are parameters that have direct counterparts in the
                   kj
data. For example, i  comes directly from an input-output table.20 Hence, the computation of the general
                                             j                        N,N,J
equilibrium effects of trade policy changes ^in                       i=1;n=1;j =1
                                                                                        requires information on the actual allocations
j                                     j             jk                             j
in   and wi Li , the input shares     i    and      i  ,   the Cobb-Douglas shares i , and estimates of the trade elasticity

j , but it does not require the estimation of the unobservable fundamentals.

     Another issue in the computation of counterfactuals is the treatment of the trade imbalances Di . Since

the previously described model does not take into account endogenous savings decisions by households, the

country-aggregate trade deficits constitute another exogenous parameter in the system. Thus, the compu-

tation of counterfactuals requires an assumption about the country-aggregate counterfactual value Di after

the trade policy change. As we described before, to address (partially) this issue, the literature using static

frameworks has followed different approaches. One possibility is to assume that the country-aggregate trade

imbalances are constant relative to world GDP, and lump-sum transferred to consumers (e.g., Dekle, Eaton,

and Kortum 2007; Caliendo and Parro 2015). A second approach is to use the same system to eliminate the

trade imbalances: that is, to first compute the equilibrium allocations under Di = 0 and Ti = 0 and then

compute equilibrium under the counterfactual trade policy (e.g., Caliendo and Parro 2015; Ossa 2011; Ossa
 19 See,   e.g., Caliendo and Parro (2015) for the derivation of these equilibrium conditions in hat-changes.
 20 The    method is based on the idea of inverting choice probabilities; see Hotz and Miller (1993) and Berry (1994).




                                                                           26
2014). In this section we follow this second approach to treat trade imbalances. Later on we describe a third

approach for managing trade imbalances in the context of spatial models. The approach consists of using

tariff revenues or the income from other factors (e.g., landowners) to create transfers across locations that

match the observed deficits.

    Another issue that we subsequently discuss is the availability of data with which to obtain the initial
            j            j   kj       j
allocations in , wi Li , i , i  , and i .



3.1.4    Data: Advances and Limitations

                                                                              j
Taking the model to the data requires sectoral data on bilateral trade shares in , including domestic expen-
              j                                                                 j
diture shares ii , value added wi Li , the share of value added in gross output i , input-output coefficients
jk                            j
i  , final consumption shares i , and bilateral sectoral tariff data.

    Part of the progress in quantitative trade policy analysis in recent years has been the result of advances

in producing the publicly available, consistent, cross-country data at the sectoral level needed to undertake

quantitative general equilibrium analysis. The development of the World Input-Output Database (WIOD;

Timmer, Dietzenbacher, Los, Stehrer, and Vries 2015) has been particularly important in facilitating the data

construction used to compute general equilibrium counterfactuals. The WIOD traces the flow of goods and

services across countries at the NACE industry level. The 2013 release contains information for 35 industries,

40 countries, and a constructed rest of the world during the period 1995-2011. The 2016 release covers 56

industries, 43 countries, and a constructed rest of the world during the period 2000-2014. Since WIOD

is a world's input-output matrix, it contains consistent information on cross-country and within-country
                                                                                    j
transactions across sectors, which can be used to obtain the bilateral trade shares in and the domestic
                   j
expenditure shares ii . It also contains value added and gross output across sectors and countries that can
                                                                     j
be used to obtain wi Li and the share of value added in gross output i . Finally, it presents information

on input-output transactions and the final consumption data across sectors and countries, which is used to
                                     jk                                  j
obtain the input-output coefficients i  and the final expenditure shares i . The development of the WIOD

has helped quantitative trade literature to overcome the large hurdle of standardizing different production

and trade data across countries, sectors, and time.

    Although the WIOD is the most complete and widely used database in frontier quantitative trade litera-

ture, it has some limitations. In particular, WIOD data construction relies on the assumption that industries

use imports of materials proportional to their total use, the so-called "proportionality assumption".21 More-
  21 Recent research by Kee and Tang (2016) and de Gortari (2019) discusses the quantitative implications of the proportionality

assumption.




                                                              27
over, the WIOD uses input-output data from input-output tables that are not produced annually, and

therefore part of the input-output data is imputed with annual trade and macroeconomic data. An alter-

native world's input-output table is EORA (see Lenzen, Kanemoto, Moran, and Geschke 2012) that traces

input-output transactions for 26 sectors and 190 countries from 1990 to 2015. With this dataset one can use

quantitative trade models to study the effects of trade policy in developing countries, something that is not

possible with WIOD. However, the data in EORA is constructed with even more data imputations than the

data in WIOD due to the lack of data for many of the small countries in the sample.

    These publicly available datasets are an important advance in this literature and reveal the need for more

consistent and comprehensive datasets for the world economy. Recent work by Borchert, Larch, Shikher,

and Yotov (2021) is at the forefront of this task.

    Finally, quantitative trade policy analysis has also been facilitated by the development of tariff databases,

such as the World's Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) developed by the World Bank. This database contains

detailed information on bilateral tariffs for nearly all the countries in the world as well as constructed regions

and trading blocks for industries up to six digits of disaggregation, under different industry classifications,

and covering several decades. The WITS data has increased substantially the coverage and reduced the

number of missing observations over time, so that potential biases coming from non-random missing data

are heavily reduced in the more recent years of data compared with the initial years of data. Recent work by

Caliendo, Feenstra, Romalis, and Taylor (2015) and Feodora (2020) create comprehensive and longer span

of tariff datasets.



3.1.5    Application: Evaluating the Aggregate Effects of the 2018 Trade War

We now show how to apply the framework to study the effects of an actual trade policy change, the 2018

trade war between the United States and its trading partners. Following the discussion in the previous
                               j            j   jk       j
subsection, we collect data on in , wi Li , n , i  , and n from the WIOD for the year 2014 (the last available

year) and use the trade elasticities from Caliendo and Parro (2015). Initial bilateral tariffs at the industry

level are collected from WITS for the year 2017. We collect data for 22 industries, 12 tradable and 10

non-tradable, for a sample of 43 countries and a rest of the world contained in the WIOD database.22 In

Section B of the online appendix, we present the list of sectors and countries used in the analysis and in

Section C of the online appendix, we present the iterative algorithm we use to solve the model.

    As mentioned in Section 2.1, the average statutory tariff rate in affected imports increased from 2.6
  22 We use a somewhat more aggregated collection of industries than the 56 industries contained in the 2016 WIOD release

since we aim to keep the sample of countries and sectors constant throughout all the quantitative exercises performed in this
chapter. We later see that at this level of aggregation, we are able to intersect all the datasets used in all the quantitative
analyses we perform.


                                                              28
percent to 16.6 percent, which corresponds to about $300 billion of U.S. imports, or about 1.5 percent of

U.S. GDP (1.1 percent of U.S. total expenditure). To aggregate the 2018 changes in tariffs (imposed by the

United States and its trading partners) from the HS-8 tariff lines to the 12 tradable manufacturing industries

in our sample, we use a concordance table to ISIC Rev 3 and import shares in the year previous to the tariff

changes.23 In Section B of the online appendix, we present the changes in tariffs applied by the United

States and the retaliatory tariffs at our level of industry aggregation. To give a sense of the magnitudes,

the trade-weighted average of the change in tariff applied by the United States to China across the entire

manufacturing sector was 7.67 percentage points, while the trade-weighted average of the change in tariff

applied by China to the United States across the entire manufacturing sector was 9.16 percentage points.

    Table 1 presents the welfare effects of the 2018 trade war in the multi-sector framework with input-output

linkages. The first column shows the effects on real wages, while the second column shows the effects on

real income once the changes in tariff revenues are taken into account. Overall, the impact of the 2018 trade

war on real wages and real income was small. We find that the 2018 trade war resulted in a decline in real

wages in the United States of about 0.13 percent and in China of about 0.11 percent. When taking into

account tariff revenues, we find that real income slightly declined in both countries. If other countries would

have not retaliated, the United States would have been slightly better off, with an increase in real income

of about 0.02 percent, and the decline in real wages would have been somewhat smaller. Among countries

other than the United States and China (see Section D of the online appendix), we find that the big losers

are some of the United States' main trading partners such as Canada and Mexico.24


                              Table 1: Welfare effects of the 2018 trade war (percent)
                                                 2018 Trade war                No retaliation
                                           Real wages     Real income    Real wages    Real income
                          United States       -0.128         -0.010         -0.097         0.024
                          China               -0.112         -0.093         -0.068         -0.090
Note: This table shows the real wages and real income effects of the 2018 trade war, as well as the effects without retaliation
from trading partners.



    Table 2 displays the trade effects of the 2018 trade war in the United States across manufacturing sectors,

computed as the percentage change in U.S. total imports and U.S. total exports for each manufacturing

sector. We find that aggregate manufacturing imports declined by 6.5 percent and manufacturing exports

by about 8 percent as a result of the trade war. We also find very heterogeneous sectoral effects; for instance,

the metals and computers and electronics industries were the most hurt sectors in terms of imports, and
  23 We obtain the changes in tariffs at the HS-8 level of aggregation applied by the United States and the retaliatory tariffs

applied by trading partners from Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019).
  24 The terms of trade adjustments computed with the quantitative frameworks presented in this section are not necessarily

inconsistent with the reduced-form empirical findings described in Section 2.1. As we discussed before, terms of trade effects
might not be captured in reduced-form regressions.



                                                              29
the non-metallic, wood and paper, and textile industries were the most hurt sectors in terms of exports. As

emphasized in Caliendo and Parro (2015), sectoral trade effects are not only impacted by the size of the tariff

change in a given industry, but also by sectoral trade elasticities. This is also shown in Ossa (2015). Sectoral

trade effects are also affected by how linked an industry is with the other sectors through input-output

linkages. We also find large effects on sectoral trade imbalances reflecting asymmetric effects on imports and

exports in industries such as the textiles, non-metallic, and metals industries.

                              Table 2: Trade effects of the 2018 trade war (percent)
                                                                     Imports     Exports
                                  Aggregate manufacturing             -6.47       -7.86
                                  Food, Bev., Tobb.                    -0.98       -4.97
                                  Textiles                             -0.55      -11.30
                                  Wood, Paper                          -1.96      -13.92
                                  Petroleum, Coal                       5.48       -4.38
                                  Chemicals                            -1.83       -1.42
                                  Plastics, Rubber                     -2.55       -6.99
                                  Nonmetallic                          -3.68      -23.21
                                  Metals                              -30.56       -2.61
                                  Machinery                            -4.20       -8.54
                                  Computer, Electronics               -14.69       -2.13
                                  Transport Mtg.                       -0.61       -9.89
                                  Furniture Mtg                        -3.80       -1.21
Note: This table shows the effects of the 2018 trade war on imports and exports across U.S. manufacturing sectors.


   These aggregate effects are important, but following the empirical studies we presented in Section 2.3,

we also find it crucial to investigate the distributional effects of trade policy across labor markets in general

equilibrium. We now extend the framework to do so.




3.2     Spatial Model for Trade Policy Analysis

Guided by recent empirical evidence of the effects of trade shocks across local labor markets (e.g., Autor,

Dorn, and Hanson 2013), researchers have developed quantitative spatial frameworks that can be connected

to data in order to quantify the spatial effects of different type of trade-related shocks. These quantitative

frameworks can naturally be applied to study the spatial effects of trade policy, as we show in this section.

   We begin by adding to our baseline framework local labor markets. The geographic nature of the problem­

namely, the presence of labor mobility, local fixed factors, costly trade across regions, and regional trade

imbalances­introduces a different set of mechanisms through which changes in trade policy affect production,

wages, and employment across sectors and space relative to an aggregate multi-sector model like the one we

presented before.

   To make notation less cumbersome, we continue indexing countries by i and n but also allow for these

                                                            30
indexes to represent a location within a country. There are five key distinctions between the spatial model

and the aggregate multi-sector model. First, in this latter model, locations within a country can trade with

each other and with the outside world. We assume that trade across locations is subject to geographic trade

costs, while trade between a location and a foreign country is subject to geographic trade costs and import

tariffs. Second, we take into account that some inputs are immobile across locations. We assume that each

location has a fixed factor of production (a composite factor comprising both land and capital structures)

that creates congestion effects so that not all labor is located in the best place, and that this fixed factor is

owned by local landowners. Third, we make assumptions about how labor moves across space: first, that

labor is freely mobile across space, and second, that labor does not move across locations. Fourth, we make

an assumption about how labor income, rents from the fixed factor, and tariff revenue are distributed across

agents in the economy. Finally, we accommodate the large observed regional trade imbalances. To handle

these last two issues, we assume that workers receive income from their factor rewards, and as a result, their

labor mobility decisions are not distorted by other sources of external income. We assume that all the rents of

the local fixed factors are sent to a global portfolio and then redistributed proportionally to local landowners

in a manner that matches the observed imbalances in the data. Finally, we lump-sum redistribute the tariff

revenue of each location to the local income that is used to purchase local goods. We now describe how the

equilibrium conditions of the model change as a consequence of this new set of assumptions.

   We start with a version of the model in which labor is freely mobile across sectors within a region but

regional labor markets are segmented; namely, workers do not move across regions. We denote by wi the

labor factor payment in region i and by ri the local rent of a unit of local fixed factor Hi . The unit cost in

location i and sector j is now given by

                                                            j
                                                            i   J           jk
                                                                            i
                                                    1-i
                                    xj        i
                                     i = [wi ] [ri ]                  Pik        ,                          (19)
                                                                k=1



where the only difference compared to (7) is that a share i of the value added is generated by labor and the

rest is generated by the local fixed factor (the source of congestion in this model).

   The trade share equilibrium condition is the same as before. The only difference is that compared to the

equilibrium condition (8), trade flows across regions in a country are not subject to import tariffs; namely,
j
in = 1 for all i and n that belong to the same country. The same applies to the price index (9), which now

represents a regional-sectoral price index. The goods market clearing condition (10) also remains unaffected.

It now represents the total expenditure on goods in sector j and region i. Income Ii now represents the local
                                          j
income in location i, and the expenditure i is the share of income from workers and landowners spent on

goods from sector j. Note that now we are allowing for regional input-output relationships, so the model


                                                       31
features global and regional value-added chains. In this case, after adding across all regions and countries,
  N           Xk
  n=1   k
        ni  k is the world total sector k expenditure on region i final goods. The trade balance equation (11)
             n
              ni

is an equilibrium condition in which now Di is the endogenous trade imbalance at the regional level that we

subsequently explain.

    In this model, regional income Ii represents the income of workers, the income of landowners, and the

lump-sum proportional transfer of tariff revenue to location i. The equilibrium condition is exactly like (12)

at the regional level. The difference is that now tariff revenue is given by local tariff revenue, meaning that all

the imports of a particular region are taken into account. In addition, in this model, local world transfers Ti

are not exogenous as in (12). These transfers are given by what the local landowners collect from the global
                                           N
portfolio; namely, Ti = i  where  =        n=1 rn Hn .     Note that imbalances are then given by Di = Ti - ri Hi .

    Finally, the labor market clearing condition is given by

                                                                               k
                                                       J
                                                             k
                                                                  N          Xn
                                      wi Li = i              i          k
                                                                        ni    k
                                                                                 .                                     (20)
                                                       k=1        n=1        ni

    The local land and capital structures market clearing condition is satisfied by Walras's law. We now

formally define the equilibrium in the model with free labor mobility across sectors and no labor mobility

across regions.

                                                                                                                       N
    Equilibrium of the Spatial Model with Segmented Labor Markets. Given endowments {Li }i=1 ,
                                   N,N,J                                               N,J,J                                 J
     N
{Hi }i=1 , fundamentals Aj   j
                         i , in
                                                               j
                                                  , parameters i   kj
                                                                 , i    j
                                                                      , i , i , i                     , and elasticities j   j =1
                                                                                                                                  ,
                                   i=1,n=1,j =1                                        i=1,j =1,k=1
                                                                        N,N,J
                                                                  j                                                          N
an equilibrium of the spatial model under a tariff structure      in                   is a factor price vector (w, r)  R++
                                                                        i=1;n=1;j =1
that solves equilibrium conditions (19), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), and (20) for all countries and regions i and

sectors j .


    For some applications, one might also want to study the effects of trade policy across space in a model in

which agents can freely move from one labor market to another. In such an economic environment, workers

sort to different labor markets up to the point at which they become indifferent of the location at which

they are residing and supplying labor. As a result, real labor income is equated across regions in the spatial

equilibrium. This involves assuming that wi /Pi is equal for all i belonging to the same country. Imposing

this condition, then using the labor market clearing condition together with the land and capital structures

market clearing condition, we obtain the share of employment in each region in each country by

                                                          i ri Hi
                                                         1-i Pi
                                             Li =          n rn Hn
                                                                       L,                                              (21)
                                                        n 1-n Pn




                                                           32
where L is the total endowment of labor in the country and the summation in the denominator is over all

the labor markets within the country.

     The equilibrium of the spatial model with free mobility is formally defined.


     Equilibrium of the Spatial Model with Free Labor Mobility. Given endowments for each country
           N                                N,N,J                                                      N,J,J
L,    Hi   i=1
               ,   fundamentals   Aj   j
                                   i , in   i=1,n=1,j =1
                                                         ,     parameters         j
                                                                                  i   kj
                                                                                    , i    j
                                                                                         , i , i , i   i=1,j =1,k=1
                                                                                                                    ,   and elasticities
   J                                                                                              j                         N,N,J
 j j =1 ,   an equilibrium of the spatial model with free labor mobility under a tariff structure in                        i=1;n=1;j =1
                                      N
is a factor price vector (w, r)  R++ that solves equilibrium conditions (19), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), (20),

and (21) for all countries and regions i and sectors j .




3.2.1      Policy Counterfactuals in a Spatial Trade Policy Model

In order to perform trade policy counterfactuals with this model, we use the exact-hat algebra method

described in the previous section. In fact, the system of equilibrium conditions written in hat-terms is very

similar to the one in Section (3.1.3). Hence, we present only the new equations in hat-changes. In the

version of the model with perfect mobility across sectors and no mobility across locations, equation (14) now

incorporates the rental rate of the fixed factor; namely,

                                                                   j         J              jk
                                                     i         1-i i                        i
                                       ^j
                                       x i =    ^i
                                                w         r
                                                          ^i                          ^ik
                                                                                      P          ,.                                (22)
                                                                             k=1



     In addition, the labor market clearing condition takes into account that value added is split into the

payment to labor and the payment to the fixed factor; namely,


                                         ^ i w i Li = i
                                                                J
                                                                         k
                                                                             N
                                                                                       k    Xnk
                                      w
                                      ^i L                               i            ni     k
                                                                                                ,.                                 (23)
                                                                k=1          n=1            ni

     In the version of the model with free mobility across locations, equation (21) pins down the distribution

of employment across locations, which in hat-changes can be written as

                                                                  r  ^i
                                                                  ^i H
                                                                    ^i
                                                                    P
                                                     ^i =
                                                     L                           ..                                                (24)
                                                                       r  ^n
                                                                       ^n H
                                                                n Ln P   ^n




                                                                    33
3.2.2    Data: Advances and Limitations

As can be seen from these equations, applying the exact-hat algebra method to compute the effects of trade

policy changes using a spatial framework requires us to condition on additional regional and cross-country

data. With the previously described structure, we need to obtain the share of the labor payment in value

added i , as well as the payment to labor and the payment to the fixed factor wi Li , ri Hi . In the case of

free regional mobility, we also need to condition on the initial distribution of employment across locations

Li . Importantly, when applying this spatial model to the United States, unlike when applying the multi-
                                                                  j
sector model described in Section (3.1.1), bilateral trade shares in apply to trade flows across countries and

locations; thus, additional internal and external trade data is needed.

   The development of new detailed databases has expanded substantially the possibility of taking the

spatial framework to the data and the range of questions to be answered in the quantitative trade and

spatial literature. In particular, the Commodity Flows Survey (CFS) from the U.S. Census Bureau tracks

shipments (trade flows) across different U.S. geographic definitions (U.S. regions, states, metropolitan areas)

disaggregated up to NAICS four-digit manufacturing industries. The CFS has been released every five years
                                       j
since 1993, and it allows us to obtain in for i, n, which are locations within the United States.

   Regarding the bilateral trade flows between U.S. locations and foreign countries, the U.S. Census released

a database called USA Trade Online, that contains data on bilateral exports and imports between the U.S.

states and each country in the world, disaggregated up to NAICS four-digit industries. This database
                                j
allows us to directly construct in when i is a U.S. location and n is a foreign country. A downside of

this database is its relative short time-series coverage from 2008 through the present. Given this limited

coverage, researchers who have studied the effects of earlier trade shocks across U.S. labor markets have

followed a different approach to input the bilateral trade flows between U.S. labor markets (locations) and

foreign countries. For instance, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) measure the exposure of local labor markets

to international trade by combining trade data with local industry employment. Specifically, bilateral trade

flows at the country level are divided into bilateral trade flows between the U.S. locations and other countries

by assuming that the share of each location in total U.S. trade with any country in a given sector is determined

by the regional share of total employment in that industry.25

   The regional production data needed to construct the payment to labor wi Li , and the share of labor

payment in value added i can be obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) database, which

provides detailed regional statistics covering industries, geographic units, and years. The payment to struc-

tures ri Hi can be computed as the difference between the payment to labor and value added, and the initial
  25 Examples of recent research that extend the WIOD database to the 50 U.S. states using the databases described in this

section are Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) and Rodr´
                                                        iguez-Clare, Ulate, and Vasquez (2020).



                                                           34
distribution of employment Ln across U.S. locations is directly obtained from the BEA database. The

corresponding data for other countries are available at the industry level in the OECD Structural Analy-

sis Database (STAN) for the OECD countries and from national agencies analogous to the BEA for other

countries.

   Finally, regarding trade imbalances, we assume that the rents from the fixed factor are transferred to a

global portfolio and that each location in the world is the owner of a fraction n of the global portfolio. Hence,

the difference between the transfers to the global portfolio, rn Hn , and the remittances from it, n      i ri Hi ,

generate trade imbalances, where n is disciplined by observed trade imbalances in the initial period. Under

this formulation, trade imbalances become endogenous in the model since, for instance, productivity increases

in a given location increase the demand for factors, revenues from the fixed factor, and therefore transfers to

the global portfolio. Although clearly stylized, this is a convenient alternative to introduce endogenous trade

imbalances in static spatial frameworks (e.g., Caliendo, Parro, Rossi-Hansberg, and Sarte 2017; Fajgelbaum,

Morales, Su´
           arez Serrato, and Zidar 2018).



3.2.3   Evaluating the Aggregate and Distributional Effects of the 2018 Trade War

We now take the spatial framework to a world with 43 countries and a rest of the world and the 50 U.S.

states to compute the spatial effects of the 2018 trade war. We use the same cross-country data for the

22 industries as used in Section 3.1.3, and we obtain the regional production and input shares previously

described for the year 2014. To obtain the regional bilateral trade shares, we use the 2017 release of the

CFS.

   We first compute the effects on real wages and real income in the version of the model with free mobility

across sectors but not across locations. Figure 1 shows the spatial effects across U.S. states; the left panel

presents the effects on real wages and the right panel displays the effects on real income. We find that

real wages decline in all the U.S. states as a consequence of the 2018 trade war, but the effects are very

heterogeneous across space, ranging from real wage losses of less than 0.1 percent in states like Alabama,

Iowa, New Hampshire, and Wisconsin, to losses of more than 0.2 percent in California, Idaho, Nevada, and

New Mexico. We also find that while some states that suffer relatively large declines in real wages have high

exposure to changes in tariffs in the manufacturing sectors (measured as import penetration), the correlation

between the direct exposure to the tariff changes of each state and the effects on real wages is not high,

which highlights the importance of input-output linkages as well as the general equilibrium effects in the

quantification of trade policy changes. The right panel shows the effects on real income once we take into

account not only wages as a source of income, but also tariff revenues and the endogenous trade imbalances.


                                                       35
We can see the same degree of heterogeneity across space, although we also see that tariff revenues and trade

imbalances play some role in redistributing income across states.

    We find that U.S. aggregate real wages decline by 0.16 percent as a consequence of the 2018 trade war

while real income also declines by around 0.14 percent. The similar magnitudes of the declines in real wages

and real income are explained by the fact that an increase in tariff revenues is offset by a reduction in trade

deficits in our counterfactual analysis. In fact, if we eliminate trade imbalances as we did in the multi-sector

framework, we find that U.S. aggregate real wages decline by 0.16 percent while real income only declines

by 0.04 percent.


                                                        Figure 1: Welfare effects of the 2018 trade war across space

                       a) Changes in real wages (percent)                                                                                                               b) Changes in real income (percent)
                                                                                                                                      NH
                                                                                                                                      -0.03                                                                                                                                                            NH
                  WA                                                                                                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.18
                  -0.17                                                                                                                                       MA                   WA                                                                                                                             ME
                                         MT             ND                                                                 VT                    -0.1                                                                                                                                                                          MA
                                                                          MN                                                                                  -0.1                 -0.12                                                                                                    VT                    -0.2
                                         -0.1           -0.08                                                    MI        -0.18                                                                          MT             ND                MN                                                                                  -0.15
                  OR                                                      -0.13                                                                              RI                                           -0.26                                                                             -0.06
                                                                                                                 -0.09                                                                                                   -0.26             -0.15                                  MI
                  -0.09                                                                                                                                      -0.11                 OR                                                                                                                                         RI
                                                                                      WI                                      NY                                                                                                                                                  -0.17
                            ID                          SD                            -0.05                                                                                        -0.11                                                               WI                                      NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.09
                                                                                                                              -0.17                     CT                                   ID                          SD
                            -0.21          WY           -0.09                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.13                                                             CT
                                                                                                                                                        -0.08                                -0.15          WY           -0.24                                                                 -0.19
                                           -0.15                                                                         PA                   NJ                                                                                                                                                                         -0.03
                                                                            IA                                                                                                                              -0.24
                                                          NE                                                    OH                                                                                                                                                                        PA                   NJ
                    NV                                                      -0.06                                        -0.13                -0.16          DE                                                            NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IA
                                                          -0.15                            IL                   -0.08                                                                                                                                                            OH       -0.15                -0.13          DE
                    -0.23        UT                                                                 IN                                                       -0.15                   NV                                    -0.14             -0.08          IL
                                                                                           -0.18                                                                                                  UT                                                                             -0.15                                        -0.15
          CA                     -0.14          CO                                                  -0.08                                 MD                                         -0.24                                                                  -0.18    IN
                                                                  KS                                                      VA                                                CA                    -0.11           CO                                                                                       MD
          -0.21                                 -0.11                                                    KY                               -0.11                                                                                    KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1                  VA
                                                                  -0.12          MO                                       -0.13                                                                                   -0.2                                                                                     -0.18
                                                                                                         -0.15                                WV                            -0.2                                                                  MO                      KY               -0.2
                                                                                 -0.12                                                                                                                                             -0.15                                                                       WV
                                                                                                   TN                                         -0.1                                                                                                -0.15                   -0.11
                                                                  OK                                                                                                                                                                                                TN                                         -0.16
                             AZ                                                  AR                -0.21                                 NC
                                           NM                     -0.15                                                                                                                                                            OK             AR                -0.17
                             -0.07                                               -0.11                                                   -0.12                                                AZ                                                                                                          NC
                                           -0.24                                                                                                                                                            NM                     -0.2           -0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.21                                                                                                       -0.15
     AK                                                                                             AL           GA              SC                                                                         -0.2
     -0.17                                                                                          -0.04        -0.15                                                 AK                                                                                            AL           GA              SC
                                                                                                                                 -0.12
                                                             TX                                                                                                        -0.13                                                                                         -0.14        -0.18           -0.05
                                                             -0.19                                                                                                                                                            TX
                                                                                                        MS                                                                                                                    -0.14
                                      HI                                                                                  FL                                                                                                                                             MS
                                      -0.23                                           LA                -0.19             -0.15                                                                        HI                                                                                  FL
                                                                                      -0.2                                                                                                             -0.04                                           LA                -0.19             -0.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.11




Note: The figures present the effects of the 2018 trade war on real wages and real income in a model with free labor mobility
across sectors but no labor mobility across U.S. states.



    Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019) compute the effects of the 2018 trade war

through the lens of a similar spatial framework with labor, fixed factors, and input-output linkages. Unlike

the analysis using the previously presented framework, the researchers' analysis is performed at the county

and product levels under the assumption that labor cannot move across sectors or locations, and the quan-

titative analysis is performed taking foreign wages as exogenous. At the aggregate, similar to the results

presented earlier, they find a small decline in U.S. aggregate real wages, also unmasked by a large spatial

heterogeneity. The spatial effects are even more heterogeneous than the ones previously displayed as a con-

sequence of labor immobility in their framework.26 There are three additional results from their analysis

that are worth mentioning. First, as described earlier, the study finds evidence of a complete pass-through of

tariffs to duty-inclusive import prices that is systematic across products with heterogeneous characteristics.

Secondly, Fajgelbaum, Goldberg, Kennedy, and Khandelwal (2019) find evidence that U.S. import protec-
  26 In related research, Santacreu, Sposi, and Zhang (2021) also find heterogeneous effects of U.S. tariff increases across states

through the lens of a spatial model with labor immobility.




                                                                                                                                                                  36
tion was biased toward products made in electorally competitive counties, as measured by the counties' 2016

presidential vote shares, a finding that is consistent with the insights provided in Grossman and Helpman

(2005). Relatedly, Ma and McLaren (2018) show empirically that after controlling for other factors, the U.S.

tariff structure is systematically biased toward industries located in swing states. Third, similar to us, the

researchers find that due to input-output linkages across sectors, the reduction in the tradable sector real

wages across space is imperfectly correlated with protection received through import tariffs.


                             Figure 2: Welfare effects of the 2018 trade war across space with free mobility

                    a) Changes in real wages (percent)                                                                                                                                                             b) Changes in real income (percent)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.1
                                                                                                                                              NH                                                                              WA                                                                                                                                                 ME
                                                                                                                                              -0.14                                                                           -0.14                                                                                                                        VT                    -0.16      MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MT                      ND                 MN
                   WA                                                                                                                                    ME                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.08                            -0.12
                   -0.14                                                                                                                                              MA                                                                                       -0.25                   -0.22              -0.13                                  MI
                                                                                                                                 VT                      -0.14                                                                OR                                                                                                                                                           RI
                                          MT              ND                MN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.13
                                                                                                                                 -0.14                                -0.14                                                   -0.07                                                                                   WI                                                                   -0.06
                                          -0.14           -0.14             -0.14                                      MI                                                                                                                      ID                                      SD                                                                     NY
                   OR                                                                                                                                                RI                                                                                                                                               -0.05                                                           CT
                                                                                                                       -0.14                                                                                                                   -0.19             WY                    -0.22                                                                  -0.2
                   -0.14                                                                WI                                          NY
                                                                                                                                                                     -0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.01
                             ID                           SD                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.24
                                                                                        -0.14                                       -0.14                       CT                                                                                                                                          IA                                           PA                   NJ
                             -0.14          WY            -0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NE                                                 OH
                                                                                                                                                                -0.14                                                             NV                                                                        -0.02                                        -0.14                -0.15        DE
                                            -0.14                                                                              PA                     NJ                                                                                                                                    -0.14                          IL                  -0.11
                                                                              IA                                                                                                                                                  -0.29              UT                                                                            IN                                                      -0.15
                                                            NE                                                       OH                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.2
                     NV                                                       -0.14                                            -0.14                  -0.14          DE                                            CA                                -0.11             CO                                                          -0.06                                  MD
                                                            -0.14                            IL                      -0.14                                                                                                                                                                        KS                                                      VA
                     -0.14        UT                                                                      IN                                                         -0.14                                         -0.24                                               -0.18                                                             KY                               -0.16
                                                                                             -0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.13          MO                                       -0.19
           CA                     -0.14           CO                                                      -0.14                                   MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WV
                                                                    KS                                                          VA                                                                                                                                                                               -0.14                   -0.11
           -0.14                                  -0.14                                                        KY                                 -0.14                                                                                                                                                                           TN                                          -0.13
                                                                    -0.14          MO                                           -0.14                  WV                                                                                                                                         OK             AR               -0.2
                                                                                   -0.14                       -0.14                                                                                                                            AZ                                                                                                                       NC
                                                                                                       TN                                              -0.14                                                                                                     NM                               -0.2           -0.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.16                                                                                                                    -0.14
                                                                    OK             AR                  -0.14                                                                                                                                                     -0.26
                              AZ                                                                                                                 NC                                                        AK                                                                                                                      AL            GA
                                            NM                      -0.14          -0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SC
                              -0.14                                                                                                              -0.14                                                     -0.16                                                                                                                   -0.07         -0.19
                                            -0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.03
      AK                                                                                                  AL           GA                                                                                                                                                                    TX
                                                                                                                                         SC
      -0.14                                                                                               -0.14        -0.14             -0.14                                                                                                                                               -0.17
                                                               TX                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HI                                                                                            FL
                                                               -0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LA               -0.22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.09                                                                                         -0.2
                                                                                                            MS                  FL                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.15
                                       HI
                                       -0.14                                            LA                  -0.14               -0.14
                                                                                        -0.14




                                                                                             c) Changes in labor allocations (percent)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                                    WA                                                                                                                                                     ME
                                                                                                                    -0.05                                                                                                                           VT                     0.11         MA
                                                                                                                                                  MT                      ND                 MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.07                               0.09
                                                                                                                                                  0.08                    0.13               0.04                                      MI
                                                                                                                    OR                                                                                                                                                                 RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.11
                                                                                                                    0.12                                                                                 WI                                          NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.09
                                                                                                                                    ID                                    SD                             0.21                                        -0.04                        CT
                                                                                                                                    -0.13             WY                  0.1                                                                                                     0.13
                                                                                                                                                      -0.02                                                                                    PA                      NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                              IA
                                                                                                                                                                             NE                                                      OH
                                                                                                                       NV                                                                     0.17                                             0.04                    -0.04           DE
                                                                                                                                                                             -0.01                            IL                     0.14
                                                                                                                       -0.19             UT                                                                              IN                                                            -0.02
                                                                                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.08                                                 MD
                                                                                                       CA                                0.02                                                                            0.13
                                                                                                                                                                                     KS                                                             VA
                                                                                                       -0.12                                               0.08                                                               KY                                    0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.06          MO                                               0.03               WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.06                       -0.004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TN                                             0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                     OK             AR                  -0.12
                                                                                                                                     AZ                                                                                                                          NC
                                                                                                                                                      NM                             -0.01          0.07
                                                                                                                                     0.16                                                                                                                        0.04
                                                                                                                                                      -0.19
                                                                                                  AK                                                                                                                     AL            GA                 SC
                                                                                                  -0.07                                                                                                                  0.21          -0.02              0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                TX
                                                                                                                                                                                -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MS                     FL
                                                                                                                                                 HI
                                                                                                                                                 -0.18                                                   LA                  -0.11                  -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.11




Note: The figures present the effects of the 2018 trade war on real wages and real income in a model with free labor mobility
across sectors and across U.S. states.



   We now describe the results obtained using the spatial model with free mobility across sectors and across

U.S. states. Figure 2 shows the effects on real wages in Panel (a), real income in Panel (b), and the labor

allocation in Panel (c). Since there is free mobility and we assume that households do not receive direct

transfers from deficits and tariff revenues, we see that the decline in real wages as a consequence of the

2018 trade war is uniform across U.S. states. The changes in real income are still heterogeneous across

space. We also see that given the heterogeneous spatial effects on real wages previously described, with



                                                                                                                                                                     37
free regional mobility, labor tends to be redistributed to the U.S. states that experience relatively small real

wages declines. Another interesting observation is that the aggregate effects on real wages and real income

in the model with free mobility are very similar to those of the model with no regional mobility. One feature

of the model that might explain this result is the absence of transition costs in the static framework, an

aspect that we take into account in the dynamic framework that we discuss next.




3.3    Dynamic Spatial Model of Trade Policy

Motivated by the reduced-form evidence we described before, in this subsection our main focus is to present a

framework with which to study how labor is reallocated across space and over time after a trade policy shock.

To do this, we introduce labor market dynamics into a spatial framework. We build a regional version of

Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) and Artuc, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010)'s dynamic discrete choice

model of labor relocation. We present only the additional equilibrium conditions relative to the previous

framework, and we discuss estimation and how to perform policy counterfactuals.

   Time is discrete, and we denote it by t. At each moment in time, households in a location i can be

employed in any of the active sectors in that location. Households are forward-looking, observe the economic

conditions in all regions and sectors, and optimally decide at the end of each period where to supply labor

and locate tomorrow. Moving across locations is costly. Households face moving costs that apply equally to

all households in a given location that decide to move to another location. We also allow for idiosyncratic

shocks that affect households' moving decisions. We denote by vi,t the value of a household located in i

at time t. Households derive utility from consuming local goods and receive income from the unit of labor

they supply. As before, we denote by wi /Pi the real income of a household located in i and assume that

households have log utility. The Bellman equation of a household located in i is given by



                           vi,t = log (wi /Pi ) + max {E [vn,t+1 ] - min +     n,t } ,
                                                {n}N
                                                   n=1


                                                                                       N
where  is the discount factor, min is the cost to relocate from i to n, and {     n,t }n=1   are the idiosyncratic

stochastic preference shocks which are assumed i.i.d. and drawn from a Type-I extreme value distribution

with zero mean. Finally,  regulates the dispersion of the shocks and can be also interpreted as the migration

elasticity. Both the presence of migration costs and idiosyncratic preferences generate a gradual adjustment

of flows in response to changes to present and future real wages. To the extent that different regions are

exposed differently to the changes in trade policy, some households relocate more often than others.

   Denote by Vi,t  E [vi,t ] the expected (expectation over ) lifetime utility of a household located in i.



                                                         38
Using the properties of the Type-I extreme value distribution, we obtain

                                                                  N
                                                                                                    1/
                               Vi,t = log wi /Pi + log                 exp Vn,t+1 - min                  ..              (25)
                                                                 n=1


      As we can see, the first term in equation (25) represents the current period utility of households in i, and

the second expression on the right-hand side captures the option value of moving to a different location. At

each moment in time, some individuals, for idiosyncratic preferences and economic fundamentals, decide to

change location. In particular, the fraction of households in i that relocates to region n, which we denote by

µin,t , is given by

                                                                                      1/
                                                        exp (Vn,t+1 - min )
                                            µin,t =     N                                  1/
                                                                                                .                        (26)
                                                        k=1   exp (Vk,t+1 - mik )

      This equilibrium condition describes the gross flows of households across locations. It is clear from this

expression that 1/ represents the elasticity of migration flows to changes in migration costs. Over time, the

supply of households in any given location is given by Li,t . This state variable evolves over time according

to how individuals change locations; namely,

                                                                 N
                                                      Li,t+1 =         µni,t Ln,t .                                      (27)
                                                                 n=1

      These three new sets of equilibrium relations, together with the equilibrium conditions of the spatial

model, fully characterize the dynamics of the model.

      Solving for the dynamic model requires solving for the infinite sequence of factor prices, value functions,

and migration flows conditional on a sequence of fundamentals and trade policies. Caliendo, Dvorkin,

and Parro (2019) show that solving the model is computationally straightforward and can be done easily by

iterating the equilibrium conditions backwards starting from the steady state. The authors present a dynamic

version of the method used to solve static models, the dynamic exact hat-algebra that we subsequently

describe, which consists of expressing the model in relative time differences. Such a method reduces the

computational burden considerably and facilitates the computation of counterfactuals. We now formally

define the equilibrium of the model.


      Equilibrium of the Dynamic Spatial Trade Policy Model. Given an initial distribution of work-
              N                                                  N                                      N,N,J
ers    Li,0   i=1
                    and an endowment of structures, Hi           i=1
                                                                     , fundamentals Aj         j
                                                                                           i , in , min i=1,n=1,j =1 , parame-
     j   kj   j            N,J,J                                    J
ters i , i  , i , i , i    i=1,j =1,k=1
                                        ,   and elasticities     j j =1 , and  , a sequential competitive equilibrium of
                                                                   j    N,N,J,
the dynamic spatial model under a tariff structure                in,t  i=1;n=1;j =1,t=0
                                                                                         is characterized by a sequence of



                                                                 39
                                 N,                                       N,                                  N,N,
factor prices      wi,t , ri,t   i=1,t=0
                                         ,   value functions    Vi,t      i=1,t=0
                                                                                    migration flows   µin,t   i=1,n=1,t=0
                                                                                                                            and labor
        N,
 Li,t   i=1,t=0
                  that satisfy equilibrium conditions (19); (8); (9); (10); (11); (12); (20); (25); (26); (27) for all

countries and regions i and sectors j .



3.3.1    Policy Counterfactuals in a Dynamic Spatial Trade Policy Model

The main difference between this model and the static spatial framework is that in this model, the equilibrium

allocation of households across locations Ln,t results from the households' dynamic decisions, as described

by equations (25), (26), and (27). This dynamic system pins down the supply of labor across locations,

and the static trade structure described in the previous section determines the labor demand. Given all the

equilibrium conditions of the dynamic framework, we can see that computing the dynamic spatial model

is more challenging since it requires the identification of the path of a more extended set of unobservable
                                                      N,N,J
fundamentals; namely, Aj   j
                       i , in , min , Hi              i=1,n=1,j =1
                                                                   .

   Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) propose a method, dynamic-hat algebra (DHA), that resembles

the exact-hat algebra method used in static frameworks but that is applied in the context of the dynamic

discrete choice environment previously described. To facilitate the exposition of the DHA method, we first

assume that the unobservable fundamentals are time-invariant, and as before, that we want to study the

effects of a trade policy change, but in this case over time.

   The DHA with constant fundamentals consists of expressing all the equilibrium conditions, the ones from

the static trade problem and the ones from the household dynamic problem, in time differences. Here we

denote by x
           the time difference in variable x; namely, xt+1 = x
                                                              t+1 /xt . The static trade equilibrium looks

analogous to the one in previous sections, with a single difference: we replace the "hat" notation with the

"dot" notation. Namely, the system solves for w
                                               t+1 = wt+1 /wt instead of w
                                                                         ^ = w /w.

   Therefore, we now have to express the equilibrium conditions of the household dynamic problem in time

differences. The resulting equilibrium conditions of the household dynamic problem in time differences are

given by
                                                                N
                                                                                          / 
                                                u
                                                 i,t =  i,t+1          µin,t u
                                                                              n,t+1               ,                              (28)
                                                                n=1


                                                                                    /
                                                                 µin,t u
                                                                        n,t+1
                                                 µin,t+1 =                                /
                                                                                              ,                                  (29)
                                                                N
                                                                k=1    µik,t u
                                                                              k,t+1

                                                                      N
                                                       Li,t+1 =            µni,t Ln,t ,                                          (30)
                                                                    n=1




                                                                      40
where                              i,t = exp(Vi,t+1 - Vi,t ). Therefore, conditional on the initial gross flows
       i,t+1 = wi,t+1 /Pi,t+1 and u

µin,0 and the path of real wages  i,t+1 , equations (28), (29) and (30) solve for the path of the distribution

of households across space and time. Note that in doing so, the time difference of the household dynamic

problem with constant fundamentals differentiates out the mobility frictions min .



3.3.2    Data: Advances and Limitations

From this discussion, we can see that when computing the DHA, compared with the static spatial model,

the dynamic model requires us to condition the system on the initial gross flows µin,0 and estimates of the

mobility elasticity  and a value for the discount factor  . The initial gross flows across locations and sectors

can be obtained from standard micro-data from the U.S. Census Bureau: the American Community Survey

(ACS), the Current Population Survey (CPS), and most recently, the Jobs-to-Jobs flows (J2J). Recent work

has provided alternative ways to estimate the mobility elasticity  across sectors, occupations, and locations

using the structure of the dynamic framework (e.g., Artuc, Chaudhuri, and McLaren 2010; Artuc and

McLaren 2015; Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro 2019; Traiberman 2019).



3.3.3    Computing Counterfactuals

In order to apply the DHA to compute the effects of trade policy changes, we first solve for a baseline economy
                                                  N,N,J
with constant fundamentals Aj   j
                            i , in , min , Hi     i=1,n=1,j =1
                                                                 and a constant path of trade policy in,t+1 = in,t .

Section C of the online appendix presents the algorithm with which to solve the baseline economy. Here

we emphasize another feature of the solution method: the economy at the initial period is not necessarily

in steady state, and therefore the baseline economy, even with constant fundamentals and a time-invariant

trade policy, can have transitional dynamics. The intuition is that the DHA method requires us to condition

on actual data at the initial period, which represents a given year of an economy that might not be in steady

state. Crucially, if the initial observed gross flows µin,0 do not imply zero net flows in each location, then

the baseline economy will not be in steady state at the initial period. In other words, u
                                                                                         i,t = 1 will not solve

the system.

   We then solve for a counterfactual economy under constant fundamentals and a new path of trade policy
 j      N,N,J,
 in,t   i=1;n=1;j =1,t=0
                         .   The difference in the equilibrium paths of allocations between the counterfactual

economy and the baseline economy is the effect of the trade policy changes. A few other remarks are in

order. First, the counterfactual economy requires taking a stand on the agent's expectations of the future

path of trade policy. In the quantitative exercise that follows, we follow Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019)


                                                        41
and assume perfect foresight. In particular, we assume that at t = 0, households are not expecting a change

in trade policy, and at t = 1, the households learn about the new path of trade policy. Under this timing

assumption, the equilibrium gross flows at t = 0 equation (29) do not hold since the agents are surprised by

the change in trade policy (see Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro 2019 for details).

   The solution method with constant fundamentals answers the counterfactual question: starting from

an initial allocation, how does the economy evolve over time and what are its long-run features after an

unexpected trade policy change, given the fundamentals in the initial period? However, we might also

be interested in other type of trade policy counterfactual questions like: What would the world and the

United States have looked like in the absence of NAFTA? The DHA method can be extended to answer

counterfactual questions with time-varying fundamentals. In this case, the baseline economy now contains

the actual evolution of all fundamentals and policies; thus, the baseline economy contains the observed

evolution of allocations (endogenous variables). The counterfactual economy has a counterfactual path

of trade policy (e.g., constant tariffs) and assumes the actual path of fundamentals. By expressing the

counterfactual economy in time differences relative to the baseline economy in time differences, all the actual

time-varying fundamentals differentiate out. Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) show how to solve the

model with time-varying fundamentals. For an extension of the method and an application to the study

of the European Union's change in trade and migration policy, see Caliendo, Opromolla, Parro, and Sforza

(2021b).

   Following the notation in the previous section, we now denote by x
                                                                     t+1 the equilibrium allocations in time
                                                                                           j        N,N,J,
differences under the actual evolution of fundamentals and the actual path of trade policy in,t     i=1;n=1;j =1,t=0
                                                                                                                     ,

by x
    t+1 the equilibrium allocations in time differences under the actual evolution of fundamentals and the
                                     j      N,N,J,
counterfactual path of trade policy in,t    i=1;n=1;j =1,t=0
                                                             ,   and by x
                                                                        ^t+1 = x
                                                                                t+1 /x
                                                                                      t+1 the changes in the equi-

librium allocations between the baseline economy and the counterfactual economy. Caliendo, Dvorkin, and

Parro (2019) show how to write the equilibrium conditions in dynamic-hat changes. Instead of conditioning

on the initial observed allocations (i.e., in,0 , µin,0 , etc.), solving for the equilibrium in changes requires

conditioning on the observed times series of these allocations that contains all the information on the path

of actual fundamentals.



3.3.4   The Aggregate, Distributional, and Dynamic Effects of the U.S.-China Trade War

As in the static spatial framework, in the present framework, we take the model to a world of 43 countries

and a rest of the world, 50 U.S. states, and 22 industries.

   Since the quantitative analysis is performed at the industry level, we consider transitions across both


                                                        42
U.S. states and industries. The industry dimension does not modify the discussion of the framework in the

previous section; all the previous equilibrium conditions need to be indexed by sectors that we denote by

j, k. For example, the gross flows across regions and sectors are now given by

                                                                                                                                 /
                                                                                  µik,nk,t (u
                                                                                             nk,t+1 )
                                   µij,nk,t+1 =                      N                  J                                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                     m=1                h=1      µij,mh,t (u
                                                                                                            mh,t+1 )

    In addition, we allow for these gross flows to include transitions between employment and non-employment.

Following Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019), we assume that non-employed households in each U.S. state

consume home production bn , which is assumed to be exogenous and time-invariant. To evaluate the effects

of the 2018 trade war, in addition to using the data described in previous sections, we use the initial gross

flows across industries and U.S. states from Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) at the quarterly frequencies

and feed into the model the observed changes in tariffs.27

    We now turn to the results. We first present the effects of the 2018 trade war on welfare, measured

as the change in consumption equivalent of households in each region and sector. Unlike the effects on

real wages discussed in Section 3.2, the change in consumption equivalent takes into account not only the

changes in current real wages each period, but also the option value of moving to other locations (e.g., Artuc,

Chaudhuri, and McLaren 2010; Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro 2019).


                           Figure 3: Welfare effects of the 2018 trade war across space

                                               a) Changes in households' welfare (percent)

                                                                                                                                                                        NH
                                                                                                                                                                        -0.18
                                                 WA                                                                                                                               ME
                                                 0.02                                                                                                        VT                   -0.02       MA
                                                                        MT               ND                MN
                                                                                                                                                             -0.2                             -0.26
                                                                        0.004            -0.04             -0.08                                   MI
                                                 OR                                                                                                                                          RI
                                                                                                                                                   -0.17
                                                 0.01                                                                  WI                                       NY
                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.3
                                                           ID                            SD                            -0.07                                    -0.32                   CT
                                                           0.01           WY             -0.03                                                                                          -0.26
                                                                          -0.01                                                                            PA                   NJ
                                                                                                             IA
                                                                                           NE                                                    OH
                                                   NV                                                        -0.07                                         -0.14                -0.28        DE
                                                                                           -0.03                            IL                   -0.11
                                                   -0.04        UT                                                                   IN                                                      -0.12
                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                            -0.15                                          MD
                                          CA                    -0.05                                                                -0.06
                                                                                                   KS                                                       VA
                                          -0.1                                  -0.01                                                      KY                              -0.08
                                                                                                   -0.03          MO                                        -0.08               WV
                                                                                                                  -0.05                    -0.05
                                                                                                                                    TN                                          -0.06
                                                                                                   OK             AR                -0.1
                                                            AZ                                                                                                            NC
                                                                          NM                       0.03           0.04
                                                            -0.02                                                                                                         -0.07
                                                                          0.02
                                     AK                                                                                              AL            GA              SC
                                     -0.05                                                                                           -1.17         -0.05           -0.1
                                                                                              TX
                                                                                              0.08
                                                                                                                                         MS                 FL
                                                                     HI
                                                                     -0.1                                              LA                -0.22              -0.07
                                                                                                                       -0.03




Note: The figures present the effects of the 2018 trade war on the welfare of households, measured as the change in consumption
equivalent, across U.S. states.



    Figure 3 shows the spatial effects, and we can see that the distributional effects are much higher in
  27 We use the gross flows from Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) at the year 2007 and project them to the year 2014 using

equation (27) under constant fundamentals. We feed into the model the observed changes in tariffs during the 2018 trade war
at the quarterly frequencies, by spreading the total change in tariff over the fourth quarter of the first period in the model.



                                                                                        43
this framework than in the spatial static framework. Marking a crucial difference from the static spatial

framework, here we observe that a few states in the South such as Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and New

Mexico, as well as Washington, Idaho, and Oregon in the Northeast, are slightly better off with the trade war.

In the aggregate, we find that U.S. households' welfare declines 0.1 percent, similar but somewhat smaller

than the aggregate effects on real wages found in the static framework. These results show that heterogeneity

in mobility frictions and transitional dynamics cannot be ignored when quantifying the distributional effects

of changes to trade policy.


                                                     Figure 4: Employment effects of the 2018 trade war across space

a) Changes in employment after one quarter (percent) b) Changes in employment after one year (percent)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NH
                                                                                                                                            NH                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.02
                                                                                                                                            0.006                                                                   WA                                                                                                                                           ME
                    WA                                                                                                                                  ME                                                          -0.027                                                                                                                                                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                      MA                                                                           MT                     ND                                                                 VT                  -0.017
                    -0.007                                                                                                        VT                    -0.004                                                                                                                               MN                                                                              0.044
                                            MT              ND                 MN                                                                                     0.011                                                                        -0.019                 0.014                                                    MI        0.035
                                            -0.005                                                                                0.009                                                                             OR                                                                       0.004                                                                          RI
                                                            0.004              0.001                                 MI                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.021
                    OR                                                                                                                                            RI                                                -0.018                                                                                                                                                  0.056
                                                                                                                     0.006                                                                                                                                                                              WI                                      NY
                    -0.004                                                                WI                                        NY
                                                                                                                                                                  0.014                                                             ID                                    SD                            0.003
                               ID                           SD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.035                  CT
                                                                                          0.001                                                              CT                                                                     -0.024             WY                 0.008
                               -0.006         WY            0.003                                                                   0.009                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.052
                                                                                                                                                             0.014                                                                                     -0.01                                                                               PA                  NJ
                                              -0.002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IA
                                                                                IA                                             PA                  NJ                                                                                                                        NE                                                 OH
                                                              NE                                                                                                                                                       NV                                                                     0.019                                        -0.002              0.023        DE
                                                                                                                     OH        -0.0004             0.005          DE                                                                                                         -0.001                          IL                 0.013
                      NV                                      0                 0.005          IL                                                                                                                      -0.039              UT                                                                         IN                                                    -0.001
                                    UT                                                                               0.004                                        0                                                                                                                                          0.005
                      -0.011                                                                   0.001     IN                                                                                               CA                               0.011            CO                                                        0.004                               MD
           CA                       0.003          CO                                                                                            MD                                                                                                                                 KS                                                      VA
                                                                      KS
                                                                                                         0.002                    VA                                                                      -0.013                                            -0.008                                                         KY                             0.014
                                                   -0.002                                                                                        0.004                                                                                                                              0.01           MO                                       0.004
           -0.004                                                                    MO                       KY                  0.001                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.009                              WV
                                                                      0.003                                                                         WV                                                                                                                                             0.006
                                                                                     0.002                    -0.002                                                                                                                                                                                                 TN                                        0.005
                                                                                                        TN                                          0.002                                                                                                                           OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZ                                                           AR                -0.017                              NC
                                                                      OK             AR                 -0.004                                                                                                                                         NM                           -0.016
                                AZ                                                                                                            NC                                                                                      -0.003                                                       -0.027                                                -0.008
                                              NM                      -0.004         -0.007                                                                                                                                                            -0.038
                                -0.0005                                                                                                       -0.002
                                              -0.01                                                                                                                                                AK                                                                                                                 AL           GA             SC
      AK                                                                                                 AL           GA               SC                                                          -0.005                                                                                                             0.399        -0.008         0.007
      -0.002                                                                                             0.102        -0.002           0.002                                                                                                                                   TX
                                                                 TX                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.032
                                                                 -0.008                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MS
                                                                                                             MS                                                                                                                                  HI                                                                                         FL
                                         HI                                                                                       FL                                                                                                             0.008                                                  LA                -0.001            -0.008
                                         0.002                                            LA                 -0.0003              -0.002                                                                                                                                                                -0.007
                                                                                          -0.002




                                                                           c) Changes in employment in the long run (percent)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.247
                                                                                                                       WA                                                                                                                                               ME
                                                                                                                       -0.421                                                                                                                      VT                   0.153        MA
                                                                                                                                                   MT                      ND                 MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.358                             0.333
                                                                                                                                                   -0.218                  -0.055             -0.103                                  MI
                                                                                                                      OR                                                                                                                                                            RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.218
                                                                                                                      -0.341                                                                              WI                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.44
                                                                                                                                       ID                                  SD                             -0.007                                     0.463                     CT
                                                                                                                                       -0.298           WY                 -0.145                                                                                              0.385
                                                                                                                                                        -0.203                                                                                  PA                   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                IA
                                                                                                                                                                              NE                                                    OH
                                                                                                                          NV                                                                    0.02                                            0.23                 0.478          DE
                                                                                                                                                                              -0.16                            IL                   0.054
                                                                                                                          -0.17             UT                                                                           IN                                                         0.203
                                                                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.015                                             MD
                                                                                                             CA                             -0.038                                                                       -0.063
                                                                                                                                                                                     KS                                                          VA
                                                                                                             -0.13                                           -0.171                                                           KY                                 0.115
                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.217          MO                                          0.046               WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.139                   -0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TN                                            -0.022
                                                                                                                                                                                     OK              AR                0.01
                                                                                                                                         AZ                                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                                                                        NM                           -0.341          -0.344
                                                                                                                                         -0.131                                                                                                                 0.095
                                                                                                                                                        -0.425
                                                                                                       AK                                                                                                                AL           GA                SC
                                                                                                       -0.053                                                                                                            2.9          0.051             0.176
                                                                                                                                                                                TX
                                                                                                                                                                                -0.482
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MS                   FL
                                                                                                                                                   HI
                                                                                                                                                   -0.033                                                 LA                0.346                0.098
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.293




Note: The figures present the effects of the 2018 trade war on the distribution of employment across U.S. states at different
time horizons.



   We highlight two other results from our analysis. First, consistent with the reduced-form evidence

previously discussed, Figure 4 shows that mobility after trade policy changes takes time. Panel (a) and

Panel (b) show very little employment reallocation after one quarter and one year, respectively, compared

with Panel (c), which shows the long-run effects.




                                                                                                                                                                  44
                                                Figure 5: Trade war effects on manufacturing employment over time




                                                                                     Manuf. emp. across U.S. labor markets relative to baseline
                                                                                                                                                  1.14

                                                                                                                                                  1.12

                                                                                                                                                   1.1

                                                                                                                                                  1.08

                                                                                                                                                  1.06

                                                                                                                                                  1.04

                                                                                                                                                  1.02

                                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                  0.98

                                                                                                                                                  0.96

                                                                                                                                                  0.94
                                                                                                                                                            0            1               2                3                4                5        6                7                  8             9               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Time (years)

Note: The thick red line shows the U.S. aggregate manufacturing sector, and each gray thin line captures the effects across an
individual U.S. manufacturing labor market.




                                                        Figure 6: Real wage effects of the 2018 trade war across space

  a) Changes in real wages after one quarter (percent)                                                                                                                                                                                            b) Changes in real wages after one year (percent)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.05
                   WA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MA                                                    WA                                                                                                                                                 ME
                   -0.12                                                                                                                                                              VT                      -0.07
                                         MT                ND                MN                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.19                                                                                                                                              -0.11       MA
                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.07                                -0.06                                                                               MT                     ND                                                                      VT
                                         -0.09             -0.07                                                                                                         MI                                                                                                                                                                                  MN                                                                                 -0.12
                   OR                                                        -0.07                                                                                                                                         RI                                                                                  -0.15                  -0.12                                                         MI        -0.13
                                                                                                                                                                         -0.06                                                                                                   OR                                                                          -0.16                                                                            RI
                   -0.03                                                                                                            WI                                                 NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.07                                                                                                                                                                    -0.14
                             ID                            SD                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.09                                                                                   WI                                                                   -0.13
                                                                                                                                    -0.03                                              -0.09                       CT                                                                            ID                                    SD                                                                        NY
                             -0.1             WY           -0.07                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.09                                   -0.19                   CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.03                                                                         -0.17              WY                 -0.13
                                              -0.1                                                                                                                                PA                      NJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.1
                                                                               IA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.17
                                                             NE                                                                                                          OH                                                                                                                                                                                    IA                                           PA                   NJ
                     NV                                                        -0.05                                                                                              -0.07                   -0.12         DE                                                                                                                 NE                                                      OH
                                                             -0.09                                                                                 IL                    -0.05                                                                                                       NV                                                                        -0.1                                         -0.15                -0.2         DE
                     -0.14        UT                                                                                                                         IN                                                         -0.11                                                                                                              -0.15                              IL                   -0.12
                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                   -0.09                                              MD                                                                             -0.22             UT                                                                              IN                                                     -0.18
           CA                     -0.1                                                                                                                       0.01                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.18
                                                                     KS                                                                                                               VA                                                                              CA                               -0.17             CO                                                                                                  MD
           -0.11                                   -0.06                                                                                                          KY                                  -0.08                                                                                                                                        KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.09                 VA
                                                                     -0.08          MO                                                                                                -0.08                                                                                                                              -0.11                                                                                               -0.13
                                                                                                                                                                                                          WV                                                          -0.19                                                                                         MO                      KY               -0.14
                                                                                    -0.07                                                                         -0.1                                                                                                                                                                             -0.14                                                                         WV
                                                                                                                                                            TN                                            -0.05                                                                                                                                                     -0.12                   -0.17
                                                                     OK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN                                         -0.13
                              AZ                                                    AR                                                                      -0.15                                    NC
                                              NM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OK               AR                -0.24
                              -0.05                                  -0.07          -0.09                                                                                                            -0.06                                                                                        AZ                                                                                                                        NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NM                             -0.14            -0.13
                                              -0.12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.1                                                                                                                      -0.12
      AK                                                                                                                                                     AL           GA                 SC                                                                                                                     -0.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AK                                                                                                                     AL           GA              SC
      -0.11                                                                                                                                                  -0.06        -0.11              -0.07
                                                                TX                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.17                                                                                                                  -0.25        -0.17           -0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TX
                                                                -0.09
                                                                                                                                                                 MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.16
                                         HI                                                                                                                                           FL                                                                                                                                                                                                   MS
                                         -0.1                                                                                 LA                                 -0.12                -0.1                                                                                                                    HI                                                                                             FL
                                                                                                                              -0.1                                                                                                                                                                            -0.17                                                      LA                -0.21             -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.19




                                                                                                                                                            c) Changes in real wages in the long run (percent)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.27
                                                                                                                                                                                                  WA                                                                                                                                               ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.08                                                                                                                      VT                     -0.18      MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MT                 ND                 MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.28                             -0.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.01              -0.03              -0.05                                    MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  OR                                                                                                                                                         RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.04                                                                              WI                                       NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ID                              SD                               -0.14                                    -0.42                      CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.02              WY            -0.02                                                                                                -0.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.02                                                                             PA                     NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NE                                                       OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NV                                                                   -0.11                                        -0.28                  -0.44          DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.02                               IL                   -0.17
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.05              UT                                                                        IN                                                         -0.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.18                                            MD
                                                                                                                                                                                       CA                               -0.01                                                                     -0.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KS                                                            VA
                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.1                                               -0.02                                                        KY                                 -0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.01            MO                                           -0.14             WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.04                   -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TN                                           -0.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OK               AR                -0.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZ                                                                                                                 NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NM                       0.08             0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.04                                                                                                              -0.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                 AK                                                                                                               AL           GA                SC
                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.09                                                                                                            -2.25        -0.14             -0.24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MS                    FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.15                                               LA                -0.44                 -0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.07




Note: The figures present the effects of the 2018 trade war on real wages at different time horizons.



    Similarly, Figure 5 displays the dynamic employment effects of the 2018 trade war across individual

U.S. labor markets in the manufacturing industries, where the effects are computed relative to the baseline

economy with no changes in trade policy. Each of the thin lines represents a U.S. labor market and the thick

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           45
line shows the aggregate U.S. manufacturing sector. The main takeaway from the figure is the persistent

and increasing effects of trade policy on employment arising from the spatial framework with labor market

dynamics, which is in line with the reduced-form evidence described earlier. Second, and also consistent with

the reduced-form studies, Figure 6 shows a higher and persistent differential in real wages in the long run

compared with the short run, which is different from the real wage arbitrage predicted by the static model

with free mobility and reinforces the importance of the dynamics with heterogeneous mobility frictions.




3.4     Trade Policy and Exporter Dynamics

While we have focused thus far on the effects of trade policy on labor market dynamics across space, it is

important to attend to another strand of the literature that has developed quantitative frameworks with

exporters' dynamic decisions. These frameworks allow researchers to study the effects of trade policy on

exporters' dynamics.

   Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) and Alessandria and Choi (2007) build a sunk-cost model where

exporters face the upfront sunk cost of entering foreign markets and a smaller period-by-period continuation

cost. These sunk-cost frameworks successfully account for persistence in export status, low entry and exit

rates, and dependence on past activities observed in the data. In what follows we lay out the sunk-cost

model of exporting, following Alessandria, Arkolakis, and Ruhl (2020). Consider a firm i that already sells

to the domestic market and must decide whether to export. Denote by xit the export status of the firm,

where xit =1 if the firm exports in t and xit =0 otherwise. The current profit is  (xit , zit , dit ), where zit is

a stochastic production efficiency and dit is the demand for firm i's product in the foreign market. The

demand dit depends on prices, tariffs, and the stochastic iceberg cost of exporting jt . Exporting entails

a deterministic fixed cost, fit (xit-1 ), which depends on the firm's past export participation. In particular,

the fixed cost is f0 for a new exporter and f1 for a continuing exporter. The sunk-cost model assumes that

f0 > f1 , where the difference is the sunk entry cost. Notice that under this formulation, fixed costs depend

on the last period's export status only, so that experience in exporting does not affect the firm's decision.

   Denote by Vt0 (zit , it , fit ) the value of a firm if not exporting and by Vt1 (zit , it , fit ) the value of a firm if

exporting. Firms change export status. In particular, the value of a firm is given by


                             Vt (zit , it , fit ) = max Vt0 (zit , it , fit ), Vt1 (zit , it , fit ) ,


where




                                                               46
                                                                          1
                        Vt0 (zit , it , fit ) = t (0, zit , it ) + it E         Vt+1 (zit+1 , it+1 , fit+1 ),
                                                                    z, 1 + rt+1


and


                                                                                    1
               Vt1 (zit , it , fit ) = t (1, zit , it ) - fit (xi,t-1 ) + it E            Vt+1 (zit+1 , it+1 , fit+1 ),
                                                                           z,    1 + rt+1

where r is the interest rate and  is the probability that the firm survives to the next period. In this

environment, there is a cutoff rule for exporting that depends on the fixed cost, which in turn depends on

the export history. In particular, for each  there exists a z
                                                            ¯( ) such that a firm with variable export cost 

and z  z
       ¯( ) will choose to export. This cutoff condition is given by


                                                                     
                   fs - [ (1, z
                              ¯s ( ),  ) -  (0, z
                                                ¯s ( ),  )] =             E V 1 (z ,  , f1 ) - V 0 (z ,  , f0 )
                                                                   1 + r z ,

   Here the subscript s denotes the export status of the firm; namely, s =0,1. The left-hand side captures

the net cost of exporting, which is the fixed cost of exporting minus the extra current profit from exporting.

The right-hand side captures the future benefit of exporting. In the sunk-cost model, z
                                                                                      ¯1 ( ) < z
                                                                                               ¯0 ( ) since, as

mentioned earlier, new exporters must pay a higher fixed cost to export. Notice the contrast between the

sunk-cost model and a fixed-cost model. In a fixed-cost model f1 = f0 , the right-hand side of the policy

function is zero, and therefore the firm's decision is static and depends only on current profits. Moreover,

there is a single productivity threshold that is independent of export status.

   Two important properties arise from the sunk-cost model. First, it generates exporter hysteresis since an

exporter might continue to export even after its current conditions have worsened. Second, since firms are

forward-looking, the anticipation of reductions in tariffs or trade costs increases the number of exporters and

the volume of exports today. The adjustment is slow; thus, another implication is that the trade elasticity

with respect to trade cost shocks is larger in the long run than in the short run. In Alessandria, Choi, and

Ruhl (2014), in contrast to the sunk-cost model, new exporters make a small upfront investment to export

on a small scale, and they must make repeated investments in market access to expand their exports. Thus,

tariffs discourage investments on two margins: the market access for new exporters and the scale of market

access by all exporters. As a result, tariff reductions lead to a larger increase in trade and larger gains

from tariff reductions than they do in the sunk-cost model.28 Importantly, in both versions of the model,

the response of trade and consumption to changes in trade costs are highly non-linear; thus, the welfare
 28 Mix   (2020) study the effects of trade liberalization in a multi-country version of Alessandria, Choi, and Ruhl (2014).




                                                                  47
effects are substantially different from steady state to steady state comparison. Since the firm's decision in

the sunk-cost model is forward-looking, this framework is also useful for studying the effects of trade policy

uncertainty, a topic that we discuss next.




3.5     Trade Policy Uncertainty

In Section 2.4 we reviewed the reduced-form effects of trade policy uncertainty. We now discuss studies that

quantify the general equilibrium effects of trade policy uncertainty.

   Handley and Limao (2017) study the effects of a reduction in trade policy in a model with a sunk cost of

investing that generates an option value of waiting for exporters and domestic firms that face trade policy

uncertainty. The study finds that trade policy uncertainty reduces firms' entry and increases the price index

in the economy. Thus, trade policy uncertainty has real effects on the economy.

   Building on this research, Alessandria, Khan, and Khederlarian (2019) proposes an inventory model as

in Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2010) to study the effects of reductions in the NTR gaps and finds

a large increase in trade in anticipation of uncertainty regarding future tariff increases. Facing an uncertain

increase in tariffs, firms shift the timing of their purchases so they have relatively large purchases and stocks

of inventories in advance of the possible tariff increase.29

   Caldara, Iacoviello, Molligo, Prestipino, and Raffo (2020) construct measures of trade policy uncertainty

based on newspaper coverage, firms' earnings conference calls, and aggregate data on tariff rates, building

on the methodology developed by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). The authors then study the effects of

trade policy uncertainty on the U.S. economy through the lens of a New-Keynesian open economy model

(e.g., Gali and Monacelli 2005; Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc 2010). Using firm-level evidence, they find that

increases in trade policy uncertainty reduce investment and economic activity.




3.6     Discussion

Overall, the development of quantitative frameworks, methods, and datasets to undertake counterfactual

analysis marks a significant step forward in the quantitative trade literature in at least two main aspects.

First, quantitative frameworks allow researchers to evaluate the general equilibrium effects of actual or

counterfactual trade policy. Importantly, these frameworks are also an important tool to understand how

trade policy operates through different mechanisms, to quantify the relative importance of each mechanism,
  29 In subsequent work Graziano, Handley, and Limao (2021) apply the sunk-cost framework in Handley and Limao (2015) to

study the effects of the uncertainty caused by Brexit. In contrast, Steinberg (2019) uses a dynamic general equilibrium model
with heterogeneous firms and endogenous export participation to quantify the impact of the uncertainty caused by Brexit.



                                                             48
and to quantify the aggregate and distributional trade and welfare effects. Second, the exact-hat algebra and

dynamic-hat algebra methods are advantageous in that the frameworks are conditioned on detailed trade

and production data across sectors, locations, and countries, which allows researchers to match the model

to disaggregated moments in the data.

    Of course, the counterfactual effects of trade policy using these methods become more informative the

better the estimates of the key elasticities and the more realistic the structural assumptions in the model

are. For instance, Kehoe, Pujolas, and Rossbach (2017) argue that the rapid expansion of least-traded goods

after trade liberalization episodes shape the trade elasticity to tariff changes. Further progress in developing

tools to perform model evaluation applied to quantitative trade analysis will allow researchers to learn more

about the properties of the counterfactual predictions in quantitative trade models. However, we see two

important challenges. First, there are many policies and fundamentals changing at the same time; therefore,

a first hurdle is distinguishing between factual and counterfactual predictions of quantitative models that

compute the effects of a subset of changes in policies or fundamentals (e.g., tariff changes only). Second, even

if we overcome the first hurdle and we can compellingly argue that the predictions of a model are factual,

what is the right metric with which to evaluate the success of a framework? At the same time, how can we

develop a metric that can be carried to a wide class of quantitative trade frameworks?

    We now turn to the normative analysis of trade policy. We review the recent progress in the analysis of

optimal trade policy in models with heterogeneous products/firms and global value chains. At the end of

the section, we discuss the scope of further progress in the area in terms of the connection between the new

results on optimal trade policy and the quantitative analysis of actual changes to trade policy discussed in

the previous two sections.




4     Optimal Trade Policy with Heterogeneity

In this section we review the fast-growing literature that analyzes trade policy in the context of firm and

product heterogeneity. We mostly center the discussion on optimal unilateral import tariffs. In particular,

we focus on research that considers the problem of a government that from a unilateral standpoint, chooses

import taxes that maximize home welfare defined as real per-capita income (we abstract, therefore, from

political economy considerations in the welfare functions and international transfers). We present benchmark

results in the literature under different production structures, with and without trade in intermediate goods

and make the distinction between a large economy and a small open economy. We discuss to what extent

new trade theory provides new answers to the question about how countries should protect the traded sector.



                                                      49
   To organize the exposition, we first describe optimal tariffs in a neoclassical environment. By neoclas-

sical environment, we mean an economy in which firms have no market power and there are no domestic

distortions, like in a Ricardian model of trade. We then discuss optimal import tariffs in models with

monopolistically competitive heterogeneous firms. We also review recent developments that use techniques

borrowed from public finance literature to characterize the optimal trade policy more broadly in the context

of heterogeneous products and firms, and show how this approach can be applied to study how optimal

import tariffs vary across sectors. At the end of the section, we review other types of trade instruments

such as export taxes and import and export subsidies; we also review studies in which non-cooperative trade

policy is analyzed. We conclude by discussing possible avenues for future progress.




4.1     Optimal Unilateral Import Tariffs in Neoclassical Environments

In the neoclassical trade theory, trade protectionism can be justified by terms-of-trade manipulation, which

refers to the idea that an increase in tariffs can benefit a country by allowing it to extract rents from foreign

producers by forcing them to reduce prices in order to continue serving the home economy (e.g., Bickerdike

1907; de V. Graaff 1949; Johnson 1953; Kahn 1947). A direct implication of a neoclassical small open

economy in which the country cannot affect world prices is that the optimal tariff is zero. In the next

subsection, we revisit this and other results in neoclassical models with product heterogeneity.



4.1.1   A Two-country, One-sector Economy with a Continuum of Goods

Consider a one-sector Ricardian trade model. Denote countries by i and n. Assume that country n unilater-

ally chooses its import tariff and that the rest of the world (indexed by i) is not strategic. Total expenditure

on goods in country n is equal to income; labor income (wn Ln ) plus tariff revenue under the assumption

that it is lump-sum transferred to consumers. We denote the total expenditure of country n by Xn and

the expenditure (inclusive of tariffs) on goods from the rest of the world i as Xni . The share of the total

expenditure in country n that is spent on imported goods is given by ni = Xni /Xn . Denote by ni the one

plus ad-valorem import tariff applied by country n to goods imported from country i. Then


                                                                 ni Xn
                                        Xn = wn Ln + (ni - 1)          ,
                                                                 ni




                                                       50
and solving for per-capita expenditure we obtain,

                                           Xn            ni
                                              = wn                 ,                                           (31)
                                           Ln      1 + (ni - 1) nn

where ni + nn = 1.

   We assume that trade is balanced,
                                                 ni      in
                                                    Xn =    Xi ,                                               (32)
                                                 ni      in

where the tariff that the rest of the world applies to goods from n is in .

   The gravity structure follows Eaton and Kortum (2002) where

                                            -1/                           -1/
                                      wn                         An [wn ]
                          nn = An                 =            -1/                   -1/
                                                                                           ,                   (33)
                                      Pn              An [wn ]       + Ai [wi ni ni ]

where Pn is the ideal price index at n, ni are the iceberg-type trade costs incurred when shipping a good

across countries, and An is the technology fundamental (absolute advantage) in country n. In this section,

we define the parameter  as the dispersion of individual productivities as in Alvarez and Lucas (2007), and

therefore the trade elasticity is given by 1/.

   Finally, welfare in country n is given by

                                                            Xn
                                                  Wn =           .
                                                           Ln Pn

   Fully differentiating welfare, we obtain


                        ^n =    wn           1 - nn              nn (ni - 1) ^
                        W             +                   ^ni -
                                                                                nn ,                           (34)
                                Pn        nn (ni - 1) + 1       nn (ni - 1) + 1


where x
      ^ = dln (x). We now can use (33) to obtain ^ nn = - (1/)                  wn
                                                                                     . In addition, combining trade
                                                                                Pn

balance (32) with gravity (33) and per-capita income (31), we obtain

                                                                             -1/
                                      Ai in                           An [ ]      ni
                           Ln                   -1/
                                                      +1      = Li               -1/
                                                                                        +1
                                An [ in din ]                        Ai [ni ni ]

where    = wn /wi . Now, fully differentiating this expression, and assuming that ^in = 0 (the rest of the

world does not change tariffs), we obtain

                                                   (1 + )   ~ nn
                                            ^ =                   ^ni ,                                        (35)
                                                   +  ~ ii + ~ nn



                                                         51
where ~ ii =      ii in            ~ nn =      nn ni
               ii in +1-ii ,   and          nn ni +1-nn     are the share of production sold to domestic firms at each

country, or the domestic production shares. Solving for ^ nn as a function of ^ using (33) and substituting

for ^ using (35), we obtain
                                                            +  ~ ii + ~ nn
                                         ^ni =                                 ^ nn .
                                                                               
                                                 (1 - nn )  1 - ~ nn +    ~ ii


    Finally, substituting all these expressions into welfare, we obtain
                                                                                 
                                           + ~ ii + 
                                                    ~ nn            ( 
                                                                  nn ni -  1)
               ^ n = - +
               W                                             -                    ^ nn ,
                         nn (ni - 1) + 1  1 - ~ nn +    ~ ii   (nn (ni - 1) + 1)


where the optimal unilateral import tariff solves


                                                        + ~ ii + ~ nn        nn (ni
                                                                                    - 1)
                       - +                                                -                 =0
                                nn (ni - 1) + 1         1- ~ nn +    ~ ii   nn (ni - 1) + 1

and then we obtain
                                                                     
                                                        ni =1+         .                                                    (36)
                                                                    ~
                                                                    ii

    The optimal tariff responds to terms of trade considerations, and depends on the trade elasticity 1/ and

on the size of the foreign country captured by ~ ii .




4.1.2     Small Open Economy

We now turn to analyze the optimal tariff in a small open neoclassical economy with product differentiation.

We follow Gros (1987), Alvarez and Lucas (2007), and Demidova and Rodr´
                                                                      iguez-Clare (2009), and define

country n to be a small open economy as the limiting economy such that Ln /Li  0. Accordingly, in the

limiting economy, we have that ii = 1 and nn = 0.30 As we will see later on, with product heterogeneity

even a small economy can manipulate its terms of trade. This result contrasts with the case of homogeneous

goods in which a small economy is not able to manipulate its terms of trade.

    To obtain the optimal tariff in the limiting economy, we proceed to take the limit after solving for the

optimal tariff of a large economy. Namely, set ~ ii  1 and ~ nn  0 in the optimal tariff formula for the

large economy (36).31
  30 Itcan be shown that in the limiting economy     ~ ii = 1 and ~ nn = 0 (see Alvarez and Lucas 2007).
  31 As mentioned in Footnote 27 in Costinot and Rodr´      iguez-Clare (2014), one expects that in a small country, welfare must
change with import tariffs due to deadweight losses and tariff revenues. However, with linear technology we can see in equation
(34) that the welfare function is invariant to tariffs, thus the optimal tariff is undetermined. An optimal tariff can be found
by taking the limit of a small open economy after computing the optimal tariff for the large economy (see also Gros 1987).
Alternatively, in Section E.2 of the online appendix, we arrive at the same formula by computing the optimal tariff in a limiting
economy with intermediate goods and then taking the limit when the share of intermediate goods in output approaches to zero.




                                                               52
    The optimal import tariff is given by
                                                         
                                                         ni = 1 + .                                                        (37)


    A small economy cannot affect factor prices abroad; still, it would want to manipulate its terms of

trade. As emphasized in Alvarez and Lucas (2007), in a Ricardian economy with heterogeneous goods as in

Eaton and Kortum (2002), any economy, no matter how small, has some goods that it is extremely efficient

at producing. This "market power" cannot be exploited by individual sellers because others in the same

economy have free access to the efficient constant-returns technology. However, it can be exploited by the

government if the government imposes import tariffs to maximize real income.32 For smaller values of ,

goods produced across countries are more similar, and therefore there is less room for the government to

manipulate its terms-of-trade. The parameter  plays a role analogous to the elasticities of substitution in

Armington models that assume that goods produced in different countries appear as imperfect substitutes
                                                                                             ann [wn ]1-
in the utility function. Too see this, in an Armington model nn =                  ann [wn ]1- +ani [wi ni ni ]1-
                                                                                                                  ,   where ann

has the interpretation of preference weights on domestic goods, and  is the elasticity of substitution across
                                                                                       
goods. In this case, we obtain that the optimal tariff for a large economy is given by ni = 1+1/ ( - 1) ~ ii ,
                                           
and for the small open economy is given by ni = 1 + 1/( - 1), both increasing in the degree of production

differentiation.

    Note that the optimal import tariff in the case of a small open economy is smaller than in the case of a

large economy. This is because the terms of trade elasticity with respect to exports (or imports) is larger for

a large economy since the foreign country's domestic expenditure share is lower, leading to a higher optimal

tariff. The importance of the relative country size is captured by the degree of trade openness of the country
~ ii and is absent in the case of a small open economy. To summarize, the main results are that in a one-sector


Ricardian economy, the optimal unilateral uniform import tariff is positive and given by (36); for a small

open economy in a one-sector Ricardian economy, the optimal unilateral uniform import tariff is positive

and given by (37); and for a small open economy with no product heterogeneity, the optimal unilateral tariff

is zero.



4.1.3      Trade Policy Across Goods

Should governments take into account heterogeneity when designing trade policy? Namely, should taxes

vary at the product level according to comparative advantage? Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning
  32 Unlike the analysis in this section, Alvarez and Lucas (2007) present numerical simulations to show that the optimal tariff

in a small open economy is positive and increasing in . They assume a Ricardian model in which final goods are produced with
labor and intermediate goods, and under this assumption, the optimal import tariff does not have a closed-form solution. The
optimal tariff in Alvarez and Lucas (2007) can be mapped into (37) by making the share of labor in final goods approach zero.



                                                              53
(2015) explore the welfare-maximizing structure of trade taxes in the context of a canonical Ricardian model

of comparative advantage. The study investigates whether optimal trade taxes should vary according to the

comparative advantage at the variety level (which could be thought of as product-level trade taxes).

   Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015) show that in a canonical two-country Ricardian model

with CES utility, the overall level of trade taxes is indeterminated, but optimal trade policy depends on

the extent of heterogeneity at the micro level. In particular, optimal trade taxes have the following struc-

ture: import tariffs that are uniform across goods, and export taxes that vary with comparative advantage.

Examples of optimal trade taxes are zero uniform import tariffs and export taxes that are increasing with

respect to comparative advantage, or uniform and positive import tariffs and export subsidies that are de-

creasing with respect to comparative advantage. This latter result intuitively follows from the observation

that countries can better manipulate prices in their comparative advantage sectors than they can in their

less productive sectors. One should not think of this result as suggesting that governments have incentives to

subsidize less productive firms in order to expand the production and export of these varieties. Rather, the

home country is constrained in its ability to exploit monopoly power in all goods due to the threat of entry of

foreign goods. That is, the home country at most can have constant monopoly markups for exported goods

in its strongest comparative advantage varieties, while the threat of entry of foreign firms leads markups to

decline with comparative advantage. Optimal policy restricts overall trade on net and export subsidies are

optimal provided import tariffs are high enough. Interestingly, the optimal allocation with export subsidies

results in an equilibrium in which all goods are traded. This result relates to Itoh and Kiyono (1987) who

show that non-uniform export subsidies are welfare-maximizing in a Ricardian model and that such subsidies

allow for the expansion of the set of goods traded.

   Suppose we are interested in knowing the optimal trade taxes when the government is constrained to

use only one instrument; import tariffs. Opp (2010) and Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015)

show that the optimal import tariff is uniform across goods. The intuition builds on the Lerner symmetry

in a multiple-good environment. Import tariffs, at most, can be used to obtain the same average domestic

relative price between imported and exported goods as in the unconstrained environment. However, since

the relative world price of any pair of imported goods is not manipulable (it is equal to the relative unit

labor requirements in the rest of the world), there is no reason for the home country to impose heterogeneous

import tariffs, even if export taxes are ruled out.

   To perform the analysis, Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015) use techniques borrowed from

public finance literature. The authors follow the primal approach as in Baldwin (1948) and Dixit (1985) and

show how Lagrange multiplier methods can be used to characterize the structure of optimal trade taxes even

without knowing the aggregate variables and foreign wages. While Dixit (1985) presents general formulas


                                                      54
for the optimal trade taxes in terms of various elasticities, Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015)

relate those elasticities to primitives, such as patterns of comparative advantage between countries. In a

nutshell, the primal approach is as follows: first, assume that the government can directly choose output

and consumption and solve for the optimal allocation; second, show that the optimal allocation can be

implemented using trade taxes. Of course, the first best can be implemented if enough instruments are

available.

   The techniques applied in the study exploit the additive separability property of the Lagrangian, which

is a common property in many types of economic environments used in the field. The methodological

contribution entails solving for the planning problem in two steps. First, consider the problem of solving

for the micro-allocations (consumption and production) that maximize home welfare as a function of the

aggregate variables and foreign wages. This is what Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015) refer

to as the inner problem. Solving the inner problem provides a value function that is a function of the foreign

wage. With this function, one can solve for the outer problem; namely, the foreign wages that maximize

the value of the inner problem. Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015) show that the solution to

the inner problem is concave, which allows to compute the solution to the inner problem using Lagrange

multiplier methods. In addition, if the objective function and the constraints from the inner problem are

additively separable in the control variables, one can solve the inner problem cell by cell; namely, market

by market. They show that the optimization problem of the inner problem becomes a "cell-problem" and

can be solved cell by cell (see Everett 1963 for a description of more general types of ``cell problems'').

Importantly, note that after solving the inner problem, one can characterize the structure of trade taxes

even without knowing the foreign wage. Similar techniques have been applied by Amador, Werning, and

Angeletos (2006) and Amador and Bagwell (2013). More recently, Kortum and Weisbach (2020) apply this

method to characterize optimal trade, production, and carbon taxes in a two-country Ricardian model (akin

to Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson 1977) with elements from Markusen (1975).

   The techniques in Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015) can be applied to many other setups.

For example, to characterize optimal trade taxes across sectors. We now move to a multi-sector environment

and present and example of the primal method.



4.1.4   Trade Taxes Across Sectors

In the context of a Ricardian model, one can interpret goods as sectors, and given this, the structure of

optimal trade taxes across goods described above apply to a multi-sector environment. In fact, in a two-

country neoclassical model, Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015) show that optimal trade taxes


                                                     55
vary by sector, but that in order for the decentralized equilibrium to match the planners' solution, one should

use uniform import tariffs and non-uniform export subsidies.

   Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020) present similar results and derive the optimal trade tax formulas for a

class of general equilibrium trade models with multiple sectors and input-output linkages that have become

the workhorse models for quantitative work. Within that class of models, Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020)

show that optimal import tariffs are uniform even under the presence of input-output linkages as far as

export taxes are available. The authors then use estimates for 35 industries and 40 countries to quantify the

gains from optimal trade policy. Beshkar and Shourideh (2020) show in a dynamic Ricardian model with

endogenous trade imbalances that if the government has access to time-varying import and export taxes,

optimal import tariffs are also uniform across sectors, and countercyclical over time.

   It is important to stress again that the results in Costinot, Donaldson, Vogel, and Werning (2015),

Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020), and Beshkar and Shourideh (2020) apply only to two country frameworks.

Intuitively, as discussed before, in a two-country Ricardian world, the relative price of imported goods is

not manipulable since they are pinned down by the relative labor requirements in the foreign country. With

more than two countries, the government can manipulate the relative price of its imports by manipulating

the relative wage of the foreign countries it sources from.



Example of the Primal Approach with Multiple Sectors

We now show how to apply the primal approach to characterize trade policy at the sector level. We consider

a two-country, multi-sector Armington model and solve for the inner problem to characterize the optimal

import and export tariffs. We continue denoting countries by i and n and sectors by j . Consider country

i s planning problem, in which the planner directly chooses consumption at home and abroad and foreign

wages in order to maximize home welfare. Consider first a relaxed planner problem of choosing consumption

taking as given foreign wages wn . Namely,

                                                                                              j
                                                                   1-1/ j           1-1/ j    j -1
                         Vi (wn )       max               j
                                                          ln   cj
                                                                ii          +   cj
                                                                                 in                  ,    (38)
                                     cj    j    j
                                      ii ,cin ,cni   j



where j is the expenditure share of goods from sector j , cj
                                                           in denotes country i s consumption of goods

produced in n, and  j is the sectoral elasticity of substitution. The home solves this problem subject to the

resource constraints at home and foreign, and trade balance. We now describe each of these constraints.




                                                               56
   The resource constraint at home is given by


                                                                    aj  j     j
                                                                     i cii + cni  Li ,                                                   (39)
                                                               j



where aj
       i is the unit labor requirement to produce sector j goods in country i, and Li is the labor endowment

in country i. Home also chooses the consumption of goods from abroad that is feasible, taking into account

that trade has to be balanced. The trade balance condition is given by


                                                                  j     j   j        j
                                                           aj
                                                            n wn cin - pni cni , wn cni  0,                                              (40)
                                                   J


                                               j   j
where aj
       n wn is the price of foreign goods and pni cni , wn is the world price of domestic goods, which is a

function of foreign wages and the foreign consumption of domestic goods. In particular, this price function

is implicitly defined using the optimal consumption of domestic goods from foreign; namely,

                                                                                    - j
                                                               pj   j
                                                                ni cni , wn
                                     cj
                                      ni =                    1- j                            1- j
                                                                                                     j wn Ln .
                                                   aj
                                                    n wn              +   pj
                                                                           ni    cj
                                                                                  ni , wn



   Finally, home also takes into account the resource constraint of foreign,

                                                                                - j
                                                                      aj
                                                                       n wn
                                aj
                                 n   cj
                                      in   +             1- j                                 1- j
                                                                                                     j wn Ln  Ln ,                       (41)
                            j                      aj
                                                    n wn              +   pj
                                                                           ni    cj
                                                                                  ni , wn


where home internalizes that foreign is optimally choosing the consumption of its domestic goods.

   To solve this optimization problem, one would usually write the Lagrangian for the entire problem. Let

L cj     j     j      
   ii , cin , cni , ,  , µ, wn be the Lagrangian from the optimization problem (38) subject to the following

constraints: (39) with corresponding multiplier , (41) with corresponding multiplier  , and (40) with

corresponding multiplier µ. Formally,

                                                                                                      j
                                                                       1-1/ j             1-1/ j      j -1
     L   cj     j     j      
          ii , cin , cni , ,  , µ, wn                   j
                                                        ln         cj
                                                                    ii          +     cj
                                                                                       in                    -       aj  j     j
                                                                                                                      i cii + cni - Li
                                               j                                                                 j
                                                                                                         - j
                                                                j                     j wn Ln aj
                                                                                               n wn
                                        -                   aj
                                                             n cin +                  1- j                       1- j
                                                                                                                        - Ln
                                                       j                  aj
                                                                           n wn              + pj   j
                                                                                                ni cni , wn

                                                                   j     j   j        j
                                        -µ                  aj
                                                             n wn cin - pni cni , wn cni ,
                                                   J




                                                                           57
   As we can see, the Lagrangian is separable across sectors. Namely,

                    L cj     j     j      
                       ii , cin , cni , ,  , µ, wn =            F j cj     j                  j j      
                                                                     ii , cin , ,  , µ, wn + g cni , ,  , µ, wn
                                                        j


where
                                                                                          j
                                                       1-1/ j              1-1/ j         j -1
        F j cj     j                j    j
             ii , cin , ,  , µ, wn   ln cii                       + cj
                                                                     in                          - aj  j     j j        j     j
                                                                                                    i cii -  an cin - µan wn cin


and
                                                                                                                      - j
                                                                                                     j wn Ln aj
                                                                                                              n wn
            g   j
                    cj      
                     ni , ,  , µ, wn      µpj
                                            ni   cj
                                                  ni , wn   cj
                                                             ni   -   aj  j
                                                                       i cni    -     
                                                                                                     1- j                    1- j
                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                         aj
                                                                                          n wn              + pj   j
                                                                                                               ni cni , wn

   As a result, one can maximize the Lagrangian sector by sector (cell by cell). From the solution to this

problem, one can determine the optimal allocations sector by sector. The next step is to show that the
                                                      j
allocations can be implemented using trade taxes. Let in be the wedge between the domestic price and the

world price of a foreign-sector j good. Note that this wedge represents one plus the optimal import tariff on

foreign goods in the decentralized equilibrium. From the first-order conditions of the sector j Lagrangian,

we obtain


                                                            j                  
                                                            in = µ+               .
                                                                               wn
                                                                  j
   As becomes apparent in this expression, the right-hand side of in does not vary across sectors j ; therefore,
                                                                                      Xj
having uniform import tariffs across sectors is optimal. Following similar logic, let in be the wedge between

the domestic price and the world price of a domestic good from sector j . Then this wedge represents one

plus the optimal export subsidy on domestic goods in the decentralized equilibrium. To see this, from the

first-order conditions of the sector j Lagrangian, we obtain that export subsidies are implicitly defined as

                                                                               
                                            Xj
                                                                       µ+      wn
                                            in    =                                                   ,
                                                            1     aj
                                                                   n wn in
                                                                          Xj
                                                                                 j -1         j
                                                        j -1         ai j                +    j -1


                       Xj
where one can see that in are increasing with comparative advantage, aj   j
                                                                      i /an . Namely, sectors with weaker

comparative advantage should be subsidized more.




4.2     Monopolistic Competitive Firms

We now move to environments that feature monopolistic competition and firm heterogeneity. We start by

describing the results of optimal import tariffs when we restrict policies to be uniform across firms. We

discuss how the results differ in large economy and small open economy settings and how the presence of

                                                                      58
selection might change the results. We then shift to review results on firm-level trade taxes.



4.2.1   A Two-Country, One-sector Economy with a Continuum of Firms

Gros (1987) shows that in a Krugman (1980) model of trade with product differentiation and monopolistic

competition, the optimal unilateral import tariff is positive even for a small economy. The intuition comes

from the fact that product differentiation allows the home country to manipulate its terms of trade. This

result has been reassessed by Demidova and Rodr´
                                               iguez-Clare (2009) for a small open economy and by

Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch (2013) with two large countries in the context of heterogeneous firm models a

la Melitz (2003) with Pareto productivity distribution as in Chaney (2008). We now follow these papers and

describe the main findings. We direct the reader to Demidova and Rodr´
                                                                     iguez-Clare (2009), Haaland and

Venables (2016), and Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch (2013) for a complete characterization of the problem of

choosing the optimal tariff.

   Compared to the previous section (neoclassical), there are two new key equilibrium relationships: the

free entry condition and selection. The free entry condition implies that

                               -1            -             -
                                   fnn (nn )   + fni (ni )             = fE;
                               -+1

namely, that expected profits from selling domestically and from exporting are equal to the fixed cost of

entry. The parameters fnn and fni represent the fixed cost of production and f E represents the entry cost,

all in units of labor. Selection dictates that only the most productive firms operate domestically and an

even more selective group of firms are the only ones able to export. The productivity of the firms is denoted

by , where nn refers to the cut-off level of productivity that determines the productivity of the marginal

firm that is indifferent about entering the domestic market and ni is the cut-off level of productivity for

exporting. The parameter  represents the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution and  represents the

demand elasticity. We assume that  >  - 1, which is the standard regularity condition imposed to solve

the model.

   Combining the free entry condition with the labor market clearing condition, one can solve for the mass

of operating firms in the market; namely,

                                                          1-nn
                                                 nn +      ni     Xn
                                         Mn =
                                                            
                                                   wn f E    -1




                                                     59
where Xn is given by (31). Combining this expression with (31) we obtain

                                                             -1        Ln
                                                 Mn =                     ,
                                                                       fE

where we can immediately see that trade policy does not affect the entry margin in this model. This is quite

an interesting result that follows from having a CES demand system, a Pareto productivity distribution,

and a single sector. Several papers that we subsequently discuss have shown that this result does not hold

if we depart from the model in particular ways, such as by adding intermediate goods, multiple sectors, or

non-CES preferences.

   It turns out that the domestic expenditure share in this model can be expressed as

                                                                        1-
                                                               
                                                        Mn     -1 wn
                                 nn =                   1-                            1- .
                                                                        
                                          Mn    -1 wn         + Mi      -1 wi ni ni



   This expression needs to be compared with its neoclassical counterpart, equation (33). Using (33), we

can solve for the elasticity of trade flows with respect to tariffs (dlnXni /dlnni ) in the Ricardian model,

which is given by -1/. In the monopolistic competitive model, the elasticity of trade flows with respect
                             
to tariffs is given by 1 -    -1 .   Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch (2013) show that the optimal unilateral import

tariff is given by
                                                                    1
                                                ni =1+                       ,                             (42)
                                                             (
                                                                    - 1)~ ii
                                                               -1


where ~ ii is the foreign domestic production share.

   In order to understand the intuition of this formula, let us consider the case of a small open economy

(~ ii 1). First note that when  -1, we obtain the optimal import tariff formula derived by Gros (1987);

namely,
                                                              
                                                     ni =        .
                                                              -1

   Now let us consider the case with selection and a small open economy, as in Demidova and Rodr´
                                                                                                iguez-

Clare (2009). In this case, the optimal import tariff formula is


                                                                
                                                ni =                   ,                                   (43)
                                                         - 1 ( -1 - 1)


where now the optimal tariff formula is the product of the instrument for handling the markup distortion

and the "entry distortion." This second distortion is due to selection and arises because consumers at home

do not internalize the effect that their spending on imports has on the number of imported varieties available


                                                             60
for domestic consumption. In consequence, consumers spend less than is optimal and the number of foreign

varieties available to domestic consumers is below the optimal level. Note that since  >  - 1, then
   
           < 1, which indicates that the optimal policy to address this distortion is subsidizing the entry of
( -1 -1)

foreign varieties (Demidova and Rodr´
                                    iguez-Clare 2009 show alternative instruments to address this distortion,

including a tax on the consumption of domestic varieties, an import subsidy, or an export subsidy). We now

summarize the main findings. In a one-sector monopolistic competitive economy with heterogeneous firms,

CES utility, and Pareto distribution of productivity, the optimal unilateral uniform import tariff is positive

and given by (42). In the case of a small open economy, the optimal uniform import tariff is given by (43)

and it is lower than the one for the large economy; in this same case, the optimal uniform import tariff in a

model without selection is larger than that of a model with selection.

   Recent work has been able to generalize this result to environments with arbitrary distributions of pro-

ductivity (beyond Pareto). Costinot, Rodr´
                                         iguez-Clare, and Werning (2020) present a more general optimal

unilateral import tariff formula:
                                                        1 + /i
                                             ni =1+               .                                        (44)
                                                       ( - 1)~ ii

   As we can see, the generalized formula contains a new term, i , which denotes the elasticity of the

transformation curve of the foreign country. In a model with a general distribution of productivity, the

elasticity may be positive or negative; namely, there can be non-convexities in the production possibility

frontier and the sign determines whether the tariff is higher or lower than it is in a model without firm

heterogeneity. It turns out that with a Pareto distribution, Feenstra (2010) shows that the aggregate pro-

duction possibility frontier has a constant elasticity of transformation. Following our notation, it is given
          -( -1)
by i = - -( -1) < 0. One can see that after substituting this expression into (44), we obtain (42).

This result is a generalization of the formulas in Gros (1987), Demidova and Rodr´
                                                                                 iguez-Clare (2009), and

Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch (2013) and it provides further insight into the role that firm heterogeneity and

selection play in optimal unilateral trade tariffs. Note that the sign of i crucially determines whether the

optimal tariff is larger or smaller compared to the tariff in a model without selection. As we saw before,

with a Pareto distribution we know that it is smaller, but beyond Pareto, this might not be the case.

   A set of studies considers economic environments with non-CES utility functions and endogenous markups.

Demidova (2017) studies trade policy in the context of the Melitz (2003) model with a linear demand system

and horizontal product differentiation following Ottaviano, Tabuchi, and Thisse (2002). This model is a

single-sector version of the Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) model. The study finds that from the unilateral

perspective of the home country, a strictly positive import tariff is optimal. In addition, the paper finds that

import tariffs are optimal even if home is a small open economy, but the optimal tariff is smaller compared



                                                      61
to the large economy case. The paper also shows that with variable markups, the optimal level of protection

is higher than it is in an economy with constant markups, as in Melitz (2003). This is because import tariffs

can shift resources away from the high-markup firms to the low-markup firms and in this way partially

address the misallocation distortion generated by the variable markups. Imposing an import tariff leads to

the survival of the least productive domestic firms (the ones with lower markups) that otherwise would have

exited.

   Beyond these single-sector results, optimal unilateral trade policy has been characterized in a variety of

economic environments in recent literature. For example, Caliendo, Feenstra, Romalis, and Taylor (2015)

analyze import tariffs in the context of a multi-sector Melitz (2003) model with Pareto distribution of

productivity and trade in intermediate goods. They show in a symmetric two-sector, two-country model

starting at free trade, that under certain conditions related to the importance of roundabout production

and the size of the non-tradable sector, a country may gain from the unilateral introduction of a small

import subsidy. Bagwell and Lee (2020) analyze optimal trade policy in a symmetric two-country and two-

sector heterogeneous firm model with quadratic preferences, as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). The authors

highlight three forces that shape optimal trade policy in their model. First, there is a selection effect by which

an increase in the import tariff by home lowers the cut-off cost level for domestic sales in home and increases

the cut-off cost level for domestic sales in the foreign country. Second, there is a firm delocation effect by

which an increase in the import tariff by home increases the number of entrants (varieties) in home and

decreases the number of entrants (varieties) in the foreign country. This second effect generates a Metzler

paradox wherein an import tariff reduces the domestic price index and increases the foreign price index.

Third, the difference in markups between the differentiated and the competitive outside sectors generates

a distortion that tariffs may be able to correct.33 The authors show that a country can gain by imposing

a small import tariff; they also identify conditions under which a country can gain by introducing a small

export subsidy. An export subsidy has two opposite effects. It facilitates entry and lowers the average price

while expanding varieties in the intervening country, but it also gives rise to a subsidy expense. Given this,

the country gains from the introduction of a small export subsidy if selection effects are strong enough. In a

subsequent paper, Bagwell and Lee (2018) replace quadratic preferences with quasi-linear preferences in the

Bagwell and Lee (2020) framework and show that in this case, the home country always gains from imposing

a small export subsidy.

   Beyond the terms of trade manipulation, in the context of imperfect competition models, several papers

have focused on a firm delocation motive to trade policy introduced by Venables (1985, 1987) and Helpman
 33 This   entry distortion is not present in a single-sector CES model; see Dhingra and Morrow (2019).




                                                              62
and Krugman (1989).34 In this context, Grossman, McCalman, and Staiger (2021) study the unilateral

incentives to invoke regulatory protectionism to induce firm delocation. Other recent studies characterizing

optimal policy in this setup with delocation motives include Ossa (2011), Bagwell and Staiger (2012a),

Campolmi, Fadinger, and Forlati (2014), and Bagwell and Staiger (2015). There is another strand of the

literature that studies a profit-shifting motive to trade policy. Namely, governments use trade policy to shift

profits from foreign to domestic firms (see Brander and Spencer 1985). More recent studies investigating

trade policy under these motives include Mrazova (2011), Bagwell and Staiger (2012b), and Ossa (2012).

Finally, in an economic environment where prices are determined by bilateral bargaining, Antr`
                                                                                             as and Staiger

(2012b) and Antr`
                as and Staiger (2012a) show that it generates a trade-volume externality due to the fact

that prices are not determined by market clearing. The government policies can then affect the terms of

trade and the volume of trade separately, which is not the case in a model where prices are determined by

supply and demand. These studies are explained and reviewed in great detail in Maggi (2014).

    Trade policy uncertainty may also generate an additional reason to reconsider optimal trade policy.

Governments might want to use policies to manage the uncertainty generated by unexpected changes in the

economic or political environment, which in turn affect trade policies. Limao and Maggi (2015) consider

an "uncertainty managing" motive for trade policy. In the study, they characterize conditions under which

the degree of uncertainty might require governments to consider policies that regulate the degree of policy

uncertainty. They find gains from reducing trade policy uncertainty, conditional on the degree of risk

aversion, when economies are more open, export supply elasticities are lower, and economies are more

specialized. Importantly, as countries become more open, the gains from decreasing tariff uncertainty are

larger relative to those from decreasing the overall level of tariffs.



4.2.2    Trade Policy Across Firms

We now revisit the question of how governments should take into account firm heterogeneity when design-

ing trade policy. Costinot, Rodr´
                                iguez-Clare, and Werning (2020) study optimal unilateral trade taxes in

the context of monopolistic competitive environments with heterogeneous firms. The authors separate the

problem of finding the optimal trade taxes into a series of micro sub-problems where the planner chooses

micro-allocations conditional on aggregate quantities (domestic and foreign). Then the authors write down

the macro problem that allows them to solve for the optimal aggregate quantities. The solution to the

micro problem allows them to characterize the optimal micro structure of trade taxes, while the solution
  34 While not justified theoretically or empirically, policymakers have explicitly mentioned this argument for trade protectionism

(see Baldwin, Forslid, Martin, Ottaviano, and Robert-Nicoud 2003).




                                                                63
to the macro problem allows them to characterize the level of such taxes. Directly solving the government

problem requires addressing an optimization problem that is infinite-dimensional and non-convex. By invok-

ing the Lagrangian necessity theorem, the paper shows that the micro problem can be reduced to a simple

one-dimensional Lagrangian problem.

    Several new important results follow from this research. The study shows that at the micro-firm level,

unilaterally optimal policies are as follows: domestic taxes that are uniform across all domestic producers,

export taxes that are uniform across all exporters, and import taxes that are uniform across the most

profitable foreign exporters and strictly increasing with profitability across the least profitable ones (import

subsidies). As we can see, these results contrast with the findings in a neoclassical economy whose optimal

trade taxes consist of uniform import tariffs and non-uniform export subsidies.

    The paper shows that one way to implement these policies is by imposing uniform export taxes and

import subsidies to foreign varieties sold at home that are decreasing in profitability and setting the overall

level of other taxes to zero. This follows from Lerner symmetry, which Costinot and Werning (2019) show

still holds in the context of monopolistic competition. As explained in the paper, this result is driven by

the selection of firms and the fact that consumers and firms do not internalize the effect of their import

decisions on import prices. As a result, the self-selection of heterogeneous firms into exporting motivates the

imposition of import subsidies on the least profitable foreign firms. Costinot, Rodr´
                                                                                    iguez-Clare, and Werning

(2020) also analyze optimal uniform tariffs on final differentiated goods with general separable preferences.




4.3     Trade in Intermediate Goods - Global Value Chains

Beyond the research we presented earlier in this chapter, several studies have found evidence of the impact of

trade policy along supply chains. For example, Yi (2003), Costinot and Rodr´
                                                                           iguez-Clare (2014) and Caliendo

and Parro (2015) show that quantitatively, the trade and welfare effects of import tariffs are affected by the

presence of intermediate goods. Accordingly, one might ask to what extent optimal trade policy is affected by

the presence of intermediate goods. Surprisingly, there are not many studies that characterize this problem.

    In order to make progress in addressing this question, one needs to extend the economic framework to

accommodate trade in intermediate goods. For a recent review on how the literature has modeled intermedi-

ate goods with roundabout production and global value chains, see Johnson (2018), Antr`
                                                                                      as and Chor (2018),

and Antr`
        as (2020). We now review papers that show how optimal import tariffs differ with and without

intermediate goods.35
  35 Grubel and Johnson (1971) provide an early review of the effective rate of protections. Ruffin (1969), Casas (1973), Suzuki

(1978), and Das (1983) are examples of pioneering studies looking at optimal tariffs on intermediate and final goods.




                                                              64
   We start with Blanchard, Bown, and Johnson (2017), who introduce global value chains into a specific-

factors model with quasi-linear preferences and an outside sector, as in Grossman and Helpman (2005),

Broda, Limao, and Weinstein (2008), and Ludema and Mayda (2013).36 Global value chains are modeled

assuming that final output is produced using both home and foreign factors of production. In order to

accommodate the high degree of input specificity in value chains, the model features factor specificity. While

the paper does not specify the production structure by which factors are transformed into final goods, one

can interpret the model as an economy in which intermediate inputs produced are traded and combined

with foreign intermediate inputs and assembled into final goods. The paper then characterizes the optimal

bilateral import tariffs on final goods. The key findings are that when domestic content in foreign final goods

is high, governments have less incentive to manipulate the terms of trade on final goods. In addition, when

foreign content in domestic final goods is high, then part of the benefits of protection are passed back up the

value chain to foreign suppliers. Both mechanisms imply lower optimal tariffs, and the paper finds empirical

evidence of these mechanisms at play in the data.

   As we described before, Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020) characterize and quantify the effects of optimal

import tariffs in multi-sector Ricardian models with input-output linkages. Building on their result, and

in order to gain more insight into the way intermediate goods affect optimal policy, we now extend the

analysis from the previous subsection and show how the optimal uniform import tariff is lower in a one

sector neoclassical Ricardian environment due to the presence of intermediate goods. Suppose that in order

to produce, firms use labor and materials. In particular, let the unit cost of a firm in country n be given
          1-
by xn = wn Pn , where  is the value added share in production. Materials are produced as a bundle of

domestic and imported varieties that for simplicity are aggregated with the same CES aggregator as that

used to produce final goods. Following the same steps as in Section 4.1.1, we obtain that the per-capita

expenditure of goods is given by
                                                Xn         ni      wn
                                                   =                  .
                                                Ln   ni nn + 1 - nn 

   Then, solving for the optimal import tariff, we obtain that the welfare-maximizing import tariff is given

by (see Section E of the online appendix for the derivation)

                                                              (1- )
                                                                                         
                                                                              1-nn
                                         1 +          ( + )~ nn - (1- )nn          -1)
                                                                            1+nn (ni
                              ni   =1+                                                   .
                                       ~ ii 1 +
                                                              (1- )           1+nn
                                                           ~ nn - (1- )nn          -1)
                                                                            1+nn (ni
                                                      ( + )


   Note that this is an implicit function of the optimal tariff. However, we can still characterize the structure

of the tariff. It is easy to see that, conditional on the domestic expenditure shares nn and ii , the term
 36 For   a related study, see Cadot, de Melo, and Olarreaga (2003).



                                                              65
inside the parentheses is smaller than one; as a result, this tariff is lower than it would be if there were no

intermediates, ( = 1). Of course, quantitatively, the magnitude of the optimal tariff in economies with

and without intermediate goods also depends on the level of trade openness, (nn and ii ). Second, in the

case of a small open economy, (~ ii = 1 and ~ nn = 0), we can see that the optimal tariff formula becomes

ni = 1 + , and therefore the optimal tariff in a small open economy is the same as it is in an economy with

no intermediate goods.

   Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2020), in a large economy setup with multiple industries, show that industry-

level tariffs are imperfect substitutes for industry-level export taxes. As a result, if export taxes are restricted,

they find that import tariffs can be used as a second-best instrument to manipulate export market power

via the input-output network. Similarly, Lashkaripour (2021), in the context of a competitive model (e.g.,

Armington, Ricardian), analyzes the second-best use of import tariffs in an economy with input-output

linkages. The author finds that the welfare impact of tariffs depends on their ability to raise wages in the

importing country and that input-output linkages reduce the calculated optimal tariffs.

   In monopolistic competitive multi-sector economies in the presence of markup distortions and without

access to targeted subsidies, it has been shown that it is optimal to raise (lower) tariffs on high-markup (low

markup) sectors relative to the first-best benchmark (e.g., Flam and Helpman 1987; Haaland and Venables

2016; Lashkaripour and Lugovskyy 2021). Existing second-best results, however, overlook input-output

linkages. Caliendo, Feenstra, Romalis, and Taylor (2021a) show that accounting for "double marginalization"

(due to sectoral linkages) implies a lower optimal tariff than the one implied by models without sectoral

linkages. This is an important point that speaks directly to prevalent trade policy practices.

   Global supply chains are created when generic intermediate goods are traded across economies, but in

many cases, intermediate goods are customized for particular final good producers. This is particularly true

when a firm outsources the production of a specific intermediate good to a foreign firm. As a result, hold-

up problems might arise under the presence of relationship-specific investments and incomplete contracts.

Trade policy in the presence of a hold-up problem can look very different in this situation compared to the

ones we described before. Recent papers that study the effect of import tariffs in a model with customized

intermediate goods and incomplete contracts are Ornelas and Turner (2008), Ornelas and Turner (2012),

    as and Staiger (2012a), and Ornelas, Turner, and Bickwit (2021).37
Antr`

   Ornelas and Turner (2008) present a model where a firm can purchase either a standardized version of

the input from the home country at a competitive price or a specialized version from the foreign country

supplier with an incomplete contract. The foreign supplier has to make a relationship-specific investment
  37 In a related strand of the literature, Grant (2020) develops a model with political economy aspects to rationalize the

existence of special economic zones in which tariffs depend on the identity of the importer of intermediate goods.




                                                            66
to produce the input. The paper shows that import tariffs on intermediate inputs aggravate the hold-up

problem. Ornelas and Turner (2012) builds on this framework but considers the reverse case in which the

standardized input is produced abroad and the customized input may be domestic or foreign. They find that

an import tariff mitigates the hold-up problem faced by domestic firms. Yet the tariff may result in inefficient

organizational choices. Ornelas, Turner, and Bickwit (2021) extend Ornelas and Turner (2012) to a setup

where buyers can match with heterogeneous suppliers and focus on the welfare effects of a preferential trade

agreement. A key finding is that a preferential trade agreement may generate welfare gains even without

trade creation.

   Antr`
       as and Staiger (2012a) consider an economic environment with two small countries in which there

is an homogeneous good sold at an exogenous world price. The final good producers are located at home,

and the input suppliers are foreign. Inputs are customized with no value apart from the relationship, and

the terms of exchange are negotiated after the inputs have been produced. Incomplete contracting results in

a hold-up problem. The study shows that the constrained-efficient trade policy (the policy that maximizes

aggregate world welfare subject to the contractual frictions) has free trade in the final good and an import

subsidy on inputs with the aim of solving the hold-up problem and reaching an efficient volume of input

trade.

   More recently, Grossman and Helpman (2020b) show that global supply chains that involve firm-to-

firm supply relationships are formed in anticipation of free trade. The model builds on Venables (1987) and

extends the economic environment to allow for firms that produce differentiated products to undertake costly

searches for input suppliers. In particular, firms negotiate bilateral prices with suppliers who are above a

certain cut-off level of match productivity. The authors then study how the structure of the supply chain is

affected after the home government unexpectedly introduces a tariff on imports of intermediate goods. The

paper finds that tariffs disrupt the supply chain, leading to renegotiation with the initial suppliers or even

the initiation of a new search for a replacement. They provide the conditions under which the renegotiation

can generate improvements or deterioration in the terms of trade. Yet the calibrated model shows that these

unanticipated changes generate welfare losses that increase with import tariffs.




4.4      Industrial, Political and Social Considerations

We finalize this section on optimal trade policy by briefly mentioning other strands of the literature that

take into account the interaction between trade and industrial policy, and incorporate political and social

aspects in the analysis of trade policy.



                                                      67
   Recent research has studied the interaction between optimal trade policy and optimal industrial policy.

For example, in the context of a small open Ricardian economy with sector-level external economies of

scale Bartelme, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodr´
                                             iguez-Clare (2019) estimate the sectoral variation in external

economies of scale, and find that sector-level economies of scale differ considerably across sectors. The

authors then quantify the gains from industrial and trade policy and find larger welfare gains from optimal

trade policy than from optimal industrial policy. Finally, the study shows that the gains from optimal

industrial policy are larger in the presence of intermediate goods and input-output linkages. Lashkaripour

and Lugovskyy (2021) study the optimal industrial and trade policy for a large economy in a monopolistically

competitive environment. The paper finds that trade policy is ineffective at correcting misallocation in

domestic industries and that coordinated optimal industrial policies across countries result in welfare gains

that exceed those of non-cooperative alternatives.

   Changes in the economic environment can cause increased income inequality or heightened racial and

ethnic tensions that may lead to changes in social identification patterns. These changes in identification

patterns might result in pronounced changes in trade policy. In fact, Atkin, Colson-Sihra, and Shayo (2021)

provide evidence of how social identities may change as a consequence of shifts in the economic environment.

Motivated by the recent reversal of trade attitudes and trade policies in some countries, Grossman and

Helpman (2020a) incorporate aspects of social identity in models of the political economy of trade policy

(like Lindbeck and Weibull 1987, Dixit and Londregan 1996, and Grossman and Helpman 1996). They

show that in the two-goods and two-factor model, identity politics can result in positive import tariffs when

individuals (regardless of their skill) identify with an expansive group in society. Inequality aversion in their

political behavior may result on protectionism as a way to make these individuals similar to the expansive

group. Motivated by the empirical evidence on the distributional consequences of trade and technological

change, Costinot and Werning (2018) study the optimal taxes on technology (robots) and trade in a second

best world. The authors show that more robots or more trade may concur with more inequality and lower

taxes, despite robots or trade being responsible for the rise in inequality, and governments having extreme

preferences for redistribution.




4.5    Discussion

Our review of the recent literature on optimal trade policy shows that one main advance in this area

is the study of optimal trade policy in different environments that involve heterogeneous goods and/or

heterogeneous firms, as well as new insight into how optimal trade policy is altered in the presence of global

value chains. We end this section summarizing some main takeaways from recent literature in this area.


                                                       68
   Dixit (1985) shows that in general economic environments the optimal unilateral uniform import tariff

is inversely proportional to the foreign export supply elasticity; which in turn is shaped by the elasticity

of trade flows with respect to tariffs. We have presented results for small open economies in which the

optimal tariff in a wide class of two-country models (one sector neoclassical models with or without product

heterogeneity, and in monopolistic competitive models with or without firm heterogeneity) is given by


                                                                   1
                                                  ni =1+                    ,
                                                              dlnXni /dlnni

where dlnXni /dlnni is the elasticity of trade flows with respect to tariffs. Different models have different

microstructure and as a result the elasticity might depend on different parameters reflecting preferences,

technology or both (as we saw, for instance, in the case of Armington, Eaton and Kortum, and Melitz).

However, at the aggregate, optimal import tariffs in all these models can be mapped to the same elasticity.

   Micro-level considerations lead to different policy recommendations regarding the optimal structure of

trade taxes when one considers trade taxes that vary across firms (or goods). For example, in a neoclassical

Ricardian model it is optimal to set export taxes that are heterogeneous across goods and optimal import

tariffs that are uniform, while in a monopolistic competitive model (as Melitz 2003) optimal export taxes

are uniform across exporters, and import taxes that are uniform across the most efficient foreign exporters

and strictly increasing with profitability across the least efficient foreign exporters (import subsidies). As we

can see, while for a wide class of heterogeneous goods and firms trade models there is an equivalent welfare

gain from trade openness (Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodr´
                                                       iguez-Clare 2012), such equivalence result does not

hold for the case of optimal trade policy.

   Characterizing optimal trade policy in these environments has been challenging, and the studies described

in this section have brought new methods and intuition to this strand of the literature. We believe that a

promising avenue for future work in this area involves a more thorough investigation of the actual changes in

trade policy. The recent trade war between the United States and its trading partners seems to indicate that

terms of trade manipulation is not the main reason behind these trade policy changes.38 Similarly, some of

the results described in this chapter are hard to reconcile with the actual policy changes during this period

(for instance, the theoretical result on uniform import tariffs across goods versus the observed wide range

of tariff changes across products during the recent trade war). While some strands of the literature have

provided new theoretical insights to rationalize episodes like these, with the exception of the work by Ossa

(2014), this literature remains highly disconnected from the quantitative frameworks that are used for trade

policy evaluation. Recent work by Bagwell, Staiger, and Yurukoglu (2018) showcases a promising approach
 38 In   fact, it looks like policymakers have ignored more than 100 years of trade policy research.



                                                                69
to closing this gap. In this work, a model of tariff negotiations is embedded into a workhorse quantitative

trade framework to capture the design of the institutional rules of the GATT/WTO.




5    Conclusion

There has been substantial progress on trade policy analysis in the last decade. Recent reduced-form studies

have provided robust evidence of how trade policy affects global value chains and the importance of the

input-output structure. The revival of shift-share analysis likewise has been a useful tool to analyze the

distributional effects of trade policy across local labor markets. In addition, the recent trade war between the

United States and its trading partners and the availability of detailed trade and tariff data have encouraged

researchers to evaluate the economic consequences of trade protectionism and trade policy uncertainty. The

findings of reduced-form studies have guided researchers in developing quantitative trade models to study the

aggregate and distributional effects of trade policy changes in general equilibrium. New rich datasets across

and within countries and the development of new methods to undertake counterfactuals have also contributed

to progress in the evaluation of the effects of trade policy using frameworks that take into account global value

chains, local labor markets, and different sources of dynamics. There has also been progress in researchers'

understanding of optimal trade policy in a variety of neoclassical and monopolistic competition environments

that involve goods or firm heterogeneity, in large and small open economies, and with global value chains.

Looking ahead, the recent trade war between the United States and its trading partners raises the question of

the reasons behind these trade policy changes. Some strands of the literature have provided new theoretical

insights to rationalize episodes like this, and we believe that a stronger connection between them and the rich

quantitative frameworks that are used for trade policy evaluation would provide fresh views on the analysis

of trade policy.




                                                       70
References
Adao, R., C. Arkolakis, and F. Esposito (2019a): "General Equilibrium Effects in Space: Theory and
 Measurement," Working Paper 25544, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Adao, R., A. Costinot, and D. Donaldson (2017): "Nonparametric Counterfactual Predictions in
 Neoclassical Models of International Trade," American Economic Review, 107, 633­89.

Adao, R., M. Kolesar, and E. Morales (2019b): "Shift-Share Designs: Theory and Inference*," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1949­2010.

Alessandria, G. and H. Choi (2007): "Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export Dynamics?"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 289­336.

Alessandria, G., H. Choi, and K. Ruhl (2014): "Trade Adjustment Dynamics and the Welfare Gains
 from Trade," Working Paper 20663, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alessandria, G., J. P. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan (2010): "Inventories, Lumpy Trade, and Large
 Devaluations," American Economic Review, 100, 2304­39.

Alessandria, G. A., C. Arkolakis, and K. J. Ruhl (2020): "Firm Dynamics and Trade," Working
 Paper 27934, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alessandria, G. A., S. Y. Khan, and A. Khederlarian (2019): "Taking Stock of Trade Policy
 Uncertainty: Evidence from China Pre WTO Accession," NBER Working Papers 25965, National Bureau
 of Economic Research, Inc.

Alvarez, F. (2017): "Capital Accumulation and International Trade," Journal of Monetary Economics,
 91, 1­18.

Alvarez, F. and R. E. Lucas (2007): "General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton­Kortum Model of
 International Trade," Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1726­1768.

Amador, M. and K. Bagwell (2013): "The Theory of Optimal Delegation With an Application to Tariff
 Caps," Econometrica, 81, 1541­99.

Amador, M., I. Werning, and G.-M. Angeletos (2006): "Commitment vs. Flexibility," Econometrica,
 74, 365­396.

Amiti, M., S. H. Kong, and D. Weinstein (2020a): "The Effect of the U.S.-China Trade War on U.S.
 Investment," Working Paper 27114, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Amiti, M., S. J. Redding, and D. E. Weinstein (2019): "The Impact of the 2018 Tariffs on Prices and
 Welfare," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33, 187­210.

------ (2020b): "Who's Paying for the US Tariffs? A Longer-Term Perspective," AEA Papers and Proceed-
  ings, 110, 541­546.

Anderson, J. E., M. Larch, and Y. V. Yotov (2019): "Trade and Investment in the Global Economy:
 A Multi-Country Dynamic Analysis," European Economic Review, 120, 1­26.



                                                 71
Anderson, J. E. and E. van Wincoop (2003): "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle,"
 American Economic Review, 1, 170­192.

    ` s, P. (2020): "Conceptual Aspects of Global Value Chains," World Bank Economic Review, 34,
Antra
 551­574.

    ` s, P. and D. Chor (2018): On the Measurement of Upstreamness and Downstreamness in Global
Antra
 Value Chains, Taylor & Francis Group, 126­194.

------ (2021): "Global Value Chains," Working Paper 28549, National Bureau of Economic Research.

    ` s, P. and R. W. Staiger (2012a): "Offshoring and the Role of Trade Agreements," American
Antra
 Economic Review, 102, 3140­83.

------ (2012b): "Trade Agreements and the Nature of Price Determination," American Economic Review,
  102, 470­76.

Arkolakis, C., N. Ramondo, A. Rodr´   iguez-Clare, and S. Yeaple (2018): "Innovation and Produc-
 tion in the Global Economy," American Economic Review, 108, 2128­73.

Arkolakis, K., A. Costinot, and A. Rodr´ iguez-Clare (2012): "New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?"
 American Economic Review, 102(1), 94­130.

Artuc, E., S. Chaudhuri, and J. McLaren (2010): "Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural
 Empirical Approach," The American Economic Review, 100, 1008­1045.

Artuc, E. and J. McLaren (2015): "Trade Policy and Wage inequality: A Structural Analysis with
 Occupational and Sectoral Mobility," Journal of International Economics, 97, 278­294.

Atkin, D., E. Colson-Sihra, and M. Shayo (2021): "How Do We Choose Our Identity? A Revealed
 Preference Approach Using Food Consumption," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Atkin, D. and A. K. Khandelwal (2020): "How Distortions Alter the Impacts of International Trade in
 Developing Countries," Annual Review of Economics, 12, 213­238.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects
 of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103, 2121­68.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and J. Song (2014): "Trade Adjustment: Worker-Level
 Evidence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1799­1860.

Bagwell, K. and S. H. Lee (2018): "Trade Policy under Monopolistic Competition with Heterogeneous
 Firms and Quasi-linear CES Preferences," .

------ (2020): "Trade Policy under Monopolistic Competition with Firm Selection," Journal of International
  Economics, 127.

Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger (2012a): "The Economics of Trade Agreements in the Linear Cournot
 Delocation Model," Journal of International Economics, 88, 32­46.

------ (2012b): "Profit Shifting and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly Competitive Markets," International
  Economic Review, 53, 1067­1104.

                                                   72
------ (2015): "Delocation and Trade Agreements in Imperfectly Competitive Markets," Research in Eco-
  nomics, 69, 132­156.

Bagwell, K., R. W. Staiger, and A. Yurukoglu (2018): "Quantitative Analysis of Multi-Party Tariff
 Negotiations," Working Paper 24273, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016): "Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty*," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1593­1636.

Baldwin, R., R. Forslid, P. Martin, G. Ottaviano, and F. Robert-Nicoud (2003): Economic
 Geography and Public Policy, Princeton University Press Princeton, N.J. ; Oxford.

Baldwin, R. E. (1948): "Equilibrium in International Trade: A Diagrammatic Analysis," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 62, 748­762.

Balistreri, E. J., R. H. Hillberry, and T. F. Rutherford (2011): "Structural Estimation and
 Solution of International Trade Models with Heterogeneous Firms," Journal of International Economics,
 83, 95­108.

Barattieri, A. and M. Cacciatore (2020): "Self Harming Trade Policy? Protectionism and Production
 Networks," Working Paper 27630, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bartelme, D. G., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and A. Rodr´      iguez-Clare (2019): "The Textbook
 Case for Industrial Policy: Theory Meets Data," Working Paper 26193, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. S. Kortum (2003): "Plants and Productivity in
 International Trade," American Economic Review, 93, 1268­90.

Berry, S. T. (1994): "Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation," The RAND Journal
 of Economics, 25, 242­262.

Beshkar, M. and A. Lashkaripour (2020): "The Cost of Dissolving the WTO: The Role of Global Value
 Chains," Indiana University, mimeo.

Beshkar, M. and A. Shourideh (2020): "Optimal Trade Policy with Trade Imbalances," Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 109, 65­82.

Bickerdike, C. F. (1907): "Review of A.C. Pigou's Protective and Preferential Import Duties," Economic
  Journal, 17, 98­108.

Blanchard, E. J., C. P. Bown, and R. C. Johnson (2017): "Global Supply Chains and Trade Policy,"
 Working Paper 21883, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Boehm, C. E., A. A. Levchenko, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2020): "The Long and Short (Run) of
 Trade Elasticities," Working Paper 27064, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bond, E. W., M. J. Crucini, T. Potter, and J. Rodrigue (2013): "Misallocation and Productivity Ef-
 fects of the Smoot Hawley Tariff," Review of Economic Dynamics, 16, 120­134, special issue: Misallocation
 and Productivity.



                                                   73
Borchert, I., M. Larch, S. Shikher, and Y. Yotov (2021): "The International Trade and Production
 Database for Estimation (ITPD-E)," International Economics, 166, 140­166.

Borusyak, K., P. Hull, and X. Jaravel (2018): "Quasi-Experimental Shift-Share Research Designs,"
 Working Paper 24997, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bown, C. P., P. Conconi, A. Erbahar, and L. Trimarchi (2021): "Trade Protection along Supply
 Chains," CEPR Discussion Paper 15648 8812, CEPR.

Bown, C. P., A. Erbahar, and M. Zanardi (2020): "Global Value Chains and the Removal of Trade
 Protection," CEPR Discussion Papers 14451, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Brander, J. A. and B. J. Spencer (1985): "Export Subsidies and International Market Share Rivalry,"
 Journal of International Economics, 18, 83­100.

Brandt, L. and P. M. Morrow (2017): "Tariffs and the Organization of Trade in China," Journal of
 International Economics, 104, 85­103.

Broda, C., N. Limao, and D. E. Weinstein (2008): "Optimal Tariffs and Market Power: The Evidence,"
 American Economic Review, 98, 2032­65.

Burstein, A., J. Cravino, and J. Vogel (2013): "Importing Skill-Biased Technology," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 32­71.

Burstein, A. and J. Vogel (2017): "International Trade, Technology, and the Skill Premium," Journal
 of Political Economy, 125, 1356­1412.

Cadot, O., J. de Melo, and M. Olarreaga (2003): "The Protectionist Bias of Duty Drawbacks:
 Evidence from Mercosur," Journal of International Economics, 59, 161­182.

Caldara, D., M. Iacoviello, P. Molligo, A. Prestipino, and A. Raffo (2020): "The Economic
 Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty," Journal of Monetary Economics, 109, 38­59.

Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2019): "Trade and Labor Market Dynamics: General
 Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock," Econometrica, 87, 741­835.

Caliendo, L., R. C. Feenstra, J. Romalis, and A. M. Taylor (2015): "Tariff Reductions, Entry,
 and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for the Last Two Decades," Working Paper 21768, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

------ (2021a): "A Second-best Argument for Low Optimal Tariffs," Working Paper 28380, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Caliendo, L., L. D. Opromolla, F. Parro, and A. Sforza (2021b): "Goods and Factor Market Inte-
 gration: A Quantitative Assessment of the EU Enlargement," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2010): Welfare gains from changing partners in a trade bloc: The case
 of MERCOSUR, United Kingdom: Emerald Group Publishing Ltd., 41­60, Frontiers of Economics and
 Globalization.

------ (2015): "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA," The Review of Economic Studies,
  82, 1­44.

                                                 74
Caliendo, L., F. Parro, E. Rossi-Hansberg, and P.-D. Sarte (2017): "The Impact of Regional and
 Sectoral Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy," The Review of Economic Studies, 85, 2042­96.

Caliendo, L., F. Parro, and A. Tsyvinski (2021c): "Distortions and the Structure of the World
 Economy," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Campolmi, A., H. Fadinger, and C. Forlati (2014): "Trade Policy: Home Market Effect versus Terms-
 of-Trade Externality," Journal of International Economics, 93, 92­107.

Caron, J., T. Fally, and J. Markusen (2020): "Per Capita Income and the Demand for Skills," Journal
 of International Economics, 123, 1­18.

Casas, F. R. (1973): "Optimal Effective Protection in General Equilibrium," The American Economic
 Review, 63, 714­716.

Cavallo, A., G. Gopinath, B. Neiman, and J. Tang (2021): "Tariff Pass-Through at the Border and
 at the Store: Evidence from US Trade Policy," American Economic Review: Insights, 3, 19­34.

Chaney, T. (2008): "Distorted gravity: the Intensive and Extensive Margins of International Trade,"
 American Economic Review, 98, 1707­21.

Cherkashin, I., S. Demidova, H. L. Kee, and K. Krishna (2015): "Firm Heterogeneity and Costly
 Trade: A New Estimation Strategy and Policy Experiments," Journal of International Economics, 96,
 18­36.

Conconi, P., D. R. DeRemer, G. Kirchsteiger, L. Trimarchi, and M. Zanardi (2017): "Suspi-
 ciously Timed Trade Disputes," Journal of International Economics, 105, 57­76.

Conconi, P., M. Garcia-Santana, L. Puccio, and R. Venturini (2018): "From Final Goods to
 Inputs: The Protectionist Effect of Rules of Origin," American Economic Review, 108, 2335­65.

Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2010): "Optimal Monetary Policy in Open Economies," in
 Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford, Elsevier, vol. 3 of Handbook
 of Monetary Economics, chap. 16, 861­933.

Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, J. Vogel, and I. Werning (2015): " Comparative Advantage and
 Optimal Trade Policy," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 659­702.

Costinot, A. and A. Rodr´    iguez-Clare (2014): "Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Conse-
 quences of Globalization," Handbook of International Economics, 197­261.

Costinot, A., A. Rodr´iguez-Clare, and I. Werning (2020): "Micro to Macro: Optimal Trade Policy
 With Firm Heterogeneity," Econometrica, 88, 2739­76.

Costinot, A. and I. Werning (2018): "Robots, Trade, and Luddism: A Sufficient Statistic Approach to
 Optimal Technology Regulation," Working Paper 25103, National Bureau of Economic Research.

------ (2019): "Lerner Symmetry: A Modern Treatment," American Economic Review: Insights, 1, 13­26.

Creamer, D. (1943): Shifts of Manufacturing Industries, Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office,
 85­104.


                                                 75
Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2007): "Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity, and
 Export Dynamics," Econometrica, 75(3), 837­873.

Das, S. P. (1983): "Optimum Tariffs on Final and Intermediate Goods," International Economic Review,
 24, 493­508.

de Gortari, A. (2019): "Disentangling Global Value Chains," Working Paper 25868, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

de V. Graaff, J. (1949): "On Optimum Tariff Structures," Review of Economic Studies, 17, 47­59.

Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2007): "Unbalanced Trade," American Economic Review, 97,
 351­355.

Demidova, S. (2017): "Trade Policies, Firm Heterogeneity, and Variable Markups," Journal of International
 Economics, 108, 260­273.

Demidova, S. and A. Rodr´   iguez-Clare (2009): "Trade Policy Under Firm-Level Heterogeneity in a
 Small Economy," Journal of International Economics, 78, 100­112.

Devlin, A., B. K. Kovak, and P. M. Morrow (2021): "The Long Run Labor Market Effects of Canada-
 U.S. Free Trade Agreement," University of Toronto, mimeo.

Dhingra, S. and J. Morrow (2019): "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity under
 Firm Heterogeneity," Journal of Political Economy, 127, 196­232.

Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2017): "Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics," American
  Economic Review, 107, 2908­46.

Dix-Carneiro, R., J. P. Pessoa, R. M. Reyes-Heroles, and S. Traiberman (2021): "Globalization,
  Trade Imbalances and Labor Market Adjustment," Working Paper 28315, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Dixit, A. (1985): "Tax Policy in Open Economies," in Handbook of Public Economics, ed. by A. J. Auerbach
  and M. Feldstein, Elsevier, vol. 1, chap. 06, 313­374, 1 ed.

Dixit, A. and J. Londregan (1996): "The Determinants of Success of Special Interests in Redistributive
  Politics," The Journal of Politics, 58, 1132­55.

Dixit, A. and V. Norman (1980): Theory of International Trade: A Dual, General Equilibrium Approach,
  Cambridge Economic Handbooks, Cambridge University Press.

Dixon, P. and D. Jorgenson, eds. (2012): Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling, vol. 1,
  Elsevier, 1 ed.

Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson (1977): "Comparative Advantage, Trade, and
 Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," The American Economic Review, 67, 823­
 839.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002): "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica, 70, 1741­79.

------ (2012): "Putting Ricardo to Work," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 65­90.

                                                   76
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and B. Neiman (2016a): "Obstfeld and Rogoff International Macro Puzzles: a
 Quantitative Assessment," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 72, 5­23.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, B. Neiman, and J. Romalis (2016b): "Trade and the Global Recession,"
 American Economic Review, 106, 3401­38.

Edmonds, E. V., N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010): "Trade Adjustment and Human Capital In-
 vestments: Evidence from Indian Tariff Reform," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2,
 42­75.

Erbahar, A. and Y. Zi (2017): "Cascading Trade Protection: Evidence from the U.S." Journal of Inter-
 national Economics, 108, 274­299.

Everett, H. (1963): "Generalized Lagrange Multiplier Method for Solving Problems of Optimum Alloca-
 tion of Resources," Operations Research, 11, 399­417.

Fajgelbaum, P. and A. Khandelwal (2016): "Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 131, 1113­80.

Fajgelbaum, P. D. and C. Gaubert (2020): "Optimal Spatial Policies, Geography, and Sorting*,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 959­1036.

Fajgelbaum, P. D., P. K. Goldberg, P. J. Kennedy, and A. K. Khandelwal (2019): "The Return
  to Protectionism," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 1­55.

Fajgelbaum, P. D., E. Morales, J. C. Sua     ´ rez Serrato, and O. Zidar (2018): "State Taxes and
  Spatial Misallocation," The Review of Economic Studies, 86, 333­376.

Feenstra, R. C. (2010): "Measuring the Gains from Trade under Monopolistic Competition," The Cana-
  dian Journal of Economics / Revue canadienne d'Economique, 43, 1­28.

Felbermayr, G., B. Jung, and M. Larch (2013): "Optimal Tariffs, Retaliation, and the Welfare Loss
  from Tariff Wars in the Melitz Model," Journal of International Economics, 89, 13­25.

Feodora, T. (2020): "30 Years of Trade Policy: Evidence from 5.7 Billion Tariffs," ifo Working Paper
  Series 334, ifo Institute - Leibniz Institute for Economic Research at the University of Munich.

Fieler, A. C. (2011): "Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Explanation,"
  Econometrica, 79, 1069­1101.

Flaaen, A., A. Hortacsu, and F. Tintelnot (2020): "The Production Relocation and Price Effects of
  US Trade Policy: The Case of Washing Machines," American Economic Review, 110, 2103­27.

Flaaen, A. and J. R. Pierce (2019): "Disentangling the Effects of the 2018-2019 Tariffs on a Globally
  Connected U.S. Manufacturing Sector," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-086, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Flam, H. and E. Helpman (1987): "Industrial Policy under Monopolistic Competition," Journal of In-
  ternational Economics, 22, 79­102.

Gali, J. and T. Monacelli (2005): "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open
 Economy," The Review of Economic Studies, 72, 707­734.

                                                 77
Galle, S., A. Rodr´  iguez-Clare, and M. Yi (2017): "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggregate and
 Distributional Effects of Trade," University of California at Berkeley, mimeo.

Gertler, S. (2021): "Export Shocks and Labor Markets: Evidence from the 1997 Asian Crisis," MIT,
 mimeo.

Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik (2016): "Chapter 3 - The Effects of Trade Policy," North-Holland, vol. 1
 of Handbook of Commercial Policy, 161­206.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (2020): "Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why,
 and How," American Economic Review, 110, 2586­2624.

Grant, M. (2020): "Why Special Economic Zones? Using Trade Policy to Discriminate across Importers,"
 American Economic Review, 110, 1540­71.

Graziano, A. G., K. Handley, and N. Limao (2021): "Brexit Uncertainty and Trade Disintegration,"
 The Economic Journal, 131, 1150­85.

Greenland, A. N., M. Ion, J. W. Lopresti, and P. K. Schott (2020): "Using Equity Market
 Reactions to Infer Exposure to Trade Liberalization," NBER Working Papers 27510, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Inc.

Gros, D. (1987): "A Note on the Optimal Tariff, Retaliation and the Welfare Loss from Tariff Wars in a
 Framework with Intra-Industry Trade," Journal of International Economics, 23, 357­367.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1996): "Electoral Competition and Special Interest Politics," The
 Review of Economic Studies, 63, 265­286.

------ (2005): "A Protectionist Bias in Majoritarian Politics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120,
  1239­82.

------ (2020a): "Identity Politics and Trade Policy," The Review of Economic Studies, 88, 1101­26.

------ (2020b): "When Tariffs Disturb Global Supply Chains," Working Paper 27722, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Grossman, G. M., P. McCalman, and R. W. Staiger (2021): "The New Economics of Trade Agree-
 ments: From Trade Liberalization to Regulatory Convergence?" Econometrica, 89, 215­249.

Grubel, H. G. and H. G. Johnson (1971): "Effective Tariff Protection," Published by GATT and Grad-
 uate lnstitute of International Studies, Geneva.

Haaland, J. I. and A. J. Venables (2016): "Optimal Trade Policy with Monopolistic Competition and
 Heterogeneous Firms," Journal of International Economics, 102, 85­95.

Hakobyan, S. and J. McLaren (2016): "Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of NAFTA," The Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 98, 728­741.

Handley, K., F. Kamal, and R. Monarch (2020): "Rising Import Tariffs, Falling Export Growth:
 When Modern Supply Chains Meet Old-Style Protectionism," Working Paper 26611, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.


                                                   78
Handley, K. and N. Limao (2015): "Trade and Investment Under Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Firm
 Evidence," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7, 189­222.

------ (2017): "Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for China and the United
  States," American Economic Review, 107, 2731­83.

Head, K. and T. Mayer (2013): "Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook, chapter to
 appear in the Handbook of International Economics Vol. 4, eds. Gopinath, Helpman, and Rogoff," .

Head, K. and J. Ries (2001): "Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as an Expla-
 nation for the Pattern of US-Canada trade," American Economic Review, 91, 858­876.

Helpman, E. and P. R. Krugman (1989): Market structure and Foreign Trade, The MIT press.

Hillberry, R. and D. Hummels (2013): "Trade Elasticity Parameters for a Computable General Equi-
  librium Model," Elsevier, vol. 1, chap. Chapter 18, 1213­69.

Hotz, V. J. and R. A. Miller (1993): "Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic
 Models," The Review of Economic Studies, 60, 497­529.

Hummels, D., R. Jorgensen, J. Munch, and C. Xiang (2014): "The Wage Effects of Offshoring:
 Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data," American Economic Review, 104, 1597­1629.

Imbs, J. and I. Mejean (2015): "Elasticity Optimism," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7,
  43­83.

Irwin, D. A. (2017): Clashing Over Commerce: A History of U.S. Trade Policy, University of Chicago
  Press.

Itoh, M. and K. Kiyono (1987): "Welfare-enhancing Export Subsidies," Journal of Political Economy,
  95, 115­137.

Johnson, H. G. (1953): "Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation," Review of Economic Studies, 21, 142­153.

Johnson, R. C. (2018): "Measuring Global Value Chains," Annual Review of Economics, 10, 207­236.

Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera (2012): "Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing and Trade
  in Value Added," Journal of International Economics, 86, 224­236.

Jones, R. W. (1975): "Income Distribution and Effective Protection in a Multi-commodity Trade Model,"
  Journal of Economic Theory, 11, 1­15.

Ju, J. and K. Krishna (2005): "Firm Behaviour and Market Access in a Free Trade Area with Rules of
  Origin," Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue Canadienne D'economique, 38, 290­308.

Kahn, R. F. (1947): "Tariffs and the Terms of Trade," Review of Economic Studies, 15, 14­19.

Kee, H. L. and H. Tang (2016): "Domestic Value Added in Exports: Theory and Firm Evidence from
 China," American Economic Review, 106, 1402­36.

Kehoe, T. J., P. S. Pujolas, and J. Rossbach (2017): "Quantitative Trade Models: Developments and
 Challenges," Annual Review of Economics, 9, 295­325.


                                                  79
Kim, R. and J. Vogel (2021): "Trade Shocks and Labor Market Adjustment," American Economic Review:
  Insights, 3, 115­130.

Kortum, S. and D. Weisbach (2020): "Optimal Unilateral Carbon Policy," Yale University, mimeo.

Kovak, B. K. (2013): "Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What Is the Correct Measure of Liberalization?"
 American Economic Review, 103, 1960­76.

Krugman, P. (1980): "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade," The American
 Economic Review, 70, 950­959.

Lashkaripour, A. (2021): "The Cost of a Global Tariff War: A Sufficient Statistics Approach," Journal
  of International Economics, 131, 1­38.

Lashkaripour, A. and V. Lugovskyy (2021): "Profits, Scale Economies, and the Gains from Trade and
  Industrial Policy," Indiana University, mimeo.

Lee, E. (2020): "Trade, Inequality, and the Endogenous Sorting of Heterogeneous Workers," Journal of
  International Economics, 125, 1­22.

Lenzen, M., K. Kanemoto, D. Moran, and A. Geschke (2012): "Mapping the Structure of the World
  Economy," Environmental Science & Technology, 46, 8374­81.

Levchenko, A. and J. Zhang (2016): "The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Measurement and
  Welfare Implications," Journal of Monetary Economics, 78, 96­111.

Limao, N. and G. Maggi (2015): "Uncertainty and Trade Agreements," American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics, 7, 1­42.

Lindbeck, A. and J. W. Weibull (1987): "Balanced-Budget Redistribution as the Outcome of Political
  Competition," Public Choice, 52, 273­297.

Ludema, R. D. and A. M. Mayda (2013): "Do Terms-of-Trade Effects Matter for Trade Agreements?
  Theory and Evidence from WTO Countries," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1837­93.

Lyon, S. and M. Waugh (2019): "Quantifying the Losses from International Trade," New York University,
  mimeo.

Ma, X. and J. McLaren (2018): "A Swing-State Theorem, with Evidence," NBER Working Papers 24425,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Maggi, G. (2014): "Chapter 6 International Trade Agreements," in Handbook of International Economics,
 ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff, Elsevier, vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics,
 317 ­ 390.

Markusen, J. (1975): "International Externalities and Optimal Tax Structures," Journal of International
 Economics, 5, 15­29.

McLaren, J. (2017): "Globalization and Labor Market Dynamics," Annual Review of Economics, 9, 177­
 200.



                                                  80
Melitz, M. J. (2003): "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity," Econometrica, 71, 1695­1725.

Melitz, M. J. and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2008): "Market Size, Trade, and Productivity," Review of
 Economic Studies, 75, 295­316.

Menezes-Filho, N. A. and M.-A. Muendler (2011): "Labor Reallocation in Response to Trade Reform,"
 Working Paper 17372, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mix, C. (2020): "Technology, Geography, and Trade over Time: The Dynamic Effects of Changing Trade
 Policy," International Finance Discussion Papers 1304, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 (U.S.).

Mrazova, M. (2011): "Trade Agreements When Profits Matter," University of Geneva, mimeo.

Muuls, M. and D. Petropoulou (2013): "A Swing State Theory of Trade Protection in the Electoral
 College," The Canadian Journal of Economics / Revue canadienne d'Economique, 46, 705­724.

Opp, M. M. (2010): "Tariff Wars in the Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," Journal of Inter-
 national Economics, 80, 212­225.

Ornelas, E. and J. L. Turner (2008): "Trade Liberalization, Outsourcing, and the Hold-up Problem,"
 Journal of International Economics, 74, 225­241.

------ (2012): "Protection and International Sourcing," The Economic Journal, 122, 26­63.

Ornelas, E., J. L. Turner, and G. Bickwit (2021): "Preferential Trade Agreements and Global
 Sourcing," Journal of International Economics, 128, 1­39.

Ossa, R. (2011): "A New Trade Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations," Journal of Political Economy, 119,
 122­152.

------ (2012): "Profits in the "New Trade" Approach to Trade Negotiations," American Economic Review,
  102, 466­69.

------ (2014): "Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data," The American Economic Review, 104, 4104­46.

------ (2015): "Why Trade Matters After All," Journal of International Economics, 97, 266­277.

------ (2016): "Chapter 4 - Quantitative Models of Commercial Policy," North-Holland, vol. 1 of Handbook
  of Commercial Policy, 207­259.

Ottaviano, G., T. Tabuchi, and J.-F. Thisse (2002): "Agglomeration and Trade Revisited," Interna-
 tional Economic Review, 43, 409­435.

Parro, F. (2013): "Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Skill Premium in a Quantitative Model of
  Trade," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 72­117.

Pavcnik, N. (2017): "The Impact of Trade on Inequality in Developing Countries," Working Paper 23878,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016): "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing Employ-
  ment," American Economic Review, 106, 1632­62.

                                                  81
Ramsey, F. (1927): "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation," The Economic Journal, 37, 47­61.

Ravikumar, B., A. M. Santacreu, and M. Sposi (2019): "Capital Accumulation and Dynamic Gains
 from Trade," Journal of International Economics, 119, 93­110.

Redding, S. J. (2020): "Trade and Geography," Working Paper 27821, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Redding, S. J. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2017): "Quantitative Spatial Economics," Annual Review of
 Economics, 9, 21­58.

Reyes-Heroles, R. (2017): "The Role of Trade Costs in the Surge of Trade Imbalances," Federal Reserve
 Board, mimeo.

Rijkers, B., L. Baghdadi, and G. Raballand (2015): "Political Connections and Tariff Evasion Evi-
  dence from Tunisia," The World Bank Economic Review, 31, 459­482.

Rodr´iguez-Clare, A., M. Ulate, and J. P. Vasquez (2020): "New-Keynesian Trade: Understand-
 ing the Employment and Welfare Effects of Trade Shocks," Working Paper 27905, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Romalis, J. (2007): "NAFTA's and CUSFTA's Impact on International Trade," The Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 89, 416­435.

Ruffin, R. J. (1969): "Tariffs, Intermediate Goods, and Domestic Protection," American Economic Review,
 59, 261­269.

Santacreu, A. M., M. Sposi, and J. Zhang (2021): "A Quantitative Analysis of Tariffs across U.S.
  States," Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis, mimeo.

Sequeira, S. (2016): "Corruption, Trade Costs, and Gains from Tariff Liberalization: Evidence from
  Southern Africa," American Economic Review, 106, 3029­63.

Sequeira, S. and S. Djankov (2014): "Corruption and Firm Behavior: Evidence from African Ports,"
  Journal of International Economics, 94, 277­294.

Shikher, S. (2012): "Putting Industries into the Eaton­Kortum Model," The Journal of International
  Trade & Economic Development, 21, 807­837.

Spearot, A. (2016): "Unpacking the Long-Run Effects of Tariff Shocks: New Structural Implications from
  Firm Heterogeneity Models," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8, 128­167.

Spearot, A. C. (2013): "Variable Demand Elasticities and Tariff Liberalization," Journal of International
  Economics, 89, 26­41.

Sposi, M. (2012): "Evolving Comparative Advantage, Structural Change, and the Composition of Trade,"
  Southern Methodist University, mimeo.

------ (2021): "Demographics and the Evolution of Global Imbalances," Southern Methodist University,
  mimeo.



                                                   82
Sposi, M., K.-M. Yi, and J. Zhang (2020): "Trade Integration, Global Value Chains, and Capital Accu-
  mulation," Departmental Working Papers 2012, Southern Methodist University, Department of Economics.

Steinberg, J. B. (2019): "Brexit and the Macroeconomic Impact of Trade Policy Uncertainty," Journal of
  International Economics, 117, 175­195.

Suzuki, K. (1978): "The Welfare Effects of an Export Tax Levied on an Intermediate Good," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 92, 55­69.

Timmer, M. P., E. Dietzenbacher, B. Los, R. Stehrer, and G. J. Vries (2015): "An Illustrated
  User Guide to the World Input­Output database: The Case of Global Automotive Production," Review
  of International Economics, 23, 575­605.

Topalova, P. (2010): "Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence on
 Poverty from India," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 1­41.

Traiberman, S. (2019): "Occupations and Import Competition: Evidence from Denmark," American
 Economic Review, 109, 4260­4301.

Venables, A. J. (1985): "Trade and Trade Policy with Imperfect Competition: The Case of Identical
 Products and Free Entry," Journal of International Economics, 19, 1­19.

------ (1987): "Trade and Trade Policy with Differentiated Products: A Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model,"
  Economic Journal, 97, 700­717.

Waugh, M. E. (2019): "The Consumption Response to Trade Shocks: Evidence from the US-China Trade
 War," NBER Working Papers 26353, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Wright, P. G. (1928): "The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils," in The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable
 Oils, Brookings Institution.

Yi, K.-M. (2003): "Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?" Journal of Political
  Economy, 111, 52­102.

Zoutman, F. T., E. Gavrilova, and A. O. Hopland (2018): "Estimating both Supply and Demand
  Elasticities Using Variation in a Single Tax Rate," Econometrica, 86, 763­771.




                                                  83
