                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PARTISAN FERTILITY AND PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS

                                        Gordon Dahl
                                        Runjing Lu
                                       William Mullins

                                      Working Paper 29058
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29058


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Prashant Bharadwaj, Joseph Engelberg, Mark Huson, Vincent Pons, and Tom Vogl for
valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gordon Dahl, Runjing Lu, and William Mullins. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Partisan Fertility and Presidential Elections
Gordon Dahl, Runjing Lu, and William Mullins
NBER Working Paper No. 29058
July 2021
JEL No. D72,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

Changes in political leadership drive large changes in economic optimism. We exploit the
surprise 2016 election of Trump to identify the effects of a shift in political power on one of the
most consequential household decisions: whether to have a child. Republican-leaning counties
experience a sharp and persistent increase in fertility relative to Democratic counties: a 1.1 to 2.6
percentage point difference in annual births, depending on the intensity of partisanship.
Hispanics, a group targeted by Trump, see fertility fall relative to non-Hispanics, especially
compared to rural or evangelical whites. Further, following Trump pre-election campaign visits,
relative Hispanic fertility declines.

Gordon Dahl                                       William Mullins
Department of Economics                           Rady School of Management
University of California, San Diego               University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                           9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0553
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                           La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
and NBER                                          wmullins@ucsd.edu
gdahl@ucsd.edu

Runjing Lu
Alberta School of Business
University of Alberta
11211 Saskatchewan Dr. NW
Edmonton, Canada
Canada
runjing1@ualberta.ca
1. Introduction

   Shifts in political power drive sharp changes in optimism about the future in the United
States. Voters become more positive about the direction of the nation's economy when they
are politically aligned with the winning president, and vice versa. These swings by parti-
san orientation are large, immediate and persistent, and especially so after the unexpected
victory of President Trump in the 2016 election. Similarly, after the 2020 Presidential elec-
tion, Democratic and Republican optimism rapidly exchanged positions (see Figures 1 and
A1). The swings around these two elections are larger than the COVID-19 induced drop in
economic optimism.
   Do these sharp partisan changes in outlook result in meaningful downstream effects? This
paper examines fertility choices following a surge in Republican sentiment and a parallel col-
lapse in Democratic sentiment. Fertility is an irreversible, long-horizon decision made by
households, with ensuing effects on labor force participation, housing investment, and con-
sumption choices. These effects may have distributional consequences, with groups targeted
by political rhetoric or policy promises responding more to changes in national leadership.
   The surprise outcome of the 2016 Presidential election is especially valuable for identify-
ing the effect of shifts in political power. Using option markets, Langer and Lemoine (2020)
calculates a 12% probability of a Trump victory, while The New York Times and FiveThir-
tyEight's polling-based forecasts were 15% and 29%, respectively. We exploit the 2016 upset
as a sharp and unexpected change in political power, using event study designs to compare
fertility choices across groups likely to favor Republican or Democratic candidates.
   Using administrative data for the universe of U.S. births, our first approach compares
fertility across counties with low versus high Democratic vote shares, before versus after
the November 2016 Presidential election. Republican-leaning counties experience a marked
increase in fertility relative to Democratic counties, equaling a 1.1 percentage point (pp)
difference in annual births. Relative to Democratic counties, this amounts to roughly 23,000
more births to mothers in Republican counties in the year following the election. These effects
persist for the two years post-election for which data is available.
   Trump's candidacy attracted a different set of voters compared to prior Republican coali-
tions (Confessore and Cohn, 2016). To capture these new Republican voters, we use the


                                               1
county-level change in the Republican vote share between 2008 and 2016. Using this second
measure, we estimate a 1.7 pp increase in annual births in counties whose rightward shift was
above versus below the median.
    These two measures of partisanship measure different sources of variation: the correlation
between them is only 0.16. We can combine both measures to define counties in the tails
of the partisan distribution. To do so, we take counties which had a high ex ante level of
Republican support and shifted strongly towards Trump, and compare them to those with a
high level of Democratic support and shifted less. This contrast estimates a 2.6 pp difference
in annual births in the extreme Republican counties relative to extreme Democratic counties.
    Our second approach compares Hispanics to other groups within the same counties. His-
panics were specifically targeted by the Trump campaign and voted approximately two-to-one
for Hillary Clinton in 2016.1 Over the subsequent twelve months, we estimate a 1.7 pp decline
in births for Hispanic mothers relative to non-Hispanics. When we contrast Hispanics to two
groups that heavily supported Trump -- whites in rural counties and whites in evangelical
counties -- we find even stronger effects (2.8 pp and 2.5 pp, respectively). We further find het-
erogeneous effects by the degree of political polarization in a county (Autor et al., 2020): the
relative fertility decline for Hispanics is more than twice as large in more versus less polarized
counties.
    Taken together, the larger effects we find as the intensity of partisanship increases --
i.e., more politically extreme counties, Hispanics versus rural and evangelical whites, and
more polarized counties -- all point towards partisanship driving these effects, as opposed to
changes in policy.2 All of our results display parallel pre-trends, each measure of partisanship
is robust to alternate definitions, and effects are persistent.3
    Our estimated fertility effects are comparable to the effects of unemployment and cash
transfers on fertility. For example, Dettling and Kearney (2014) and Schaller (2016) report

   1
       When launching his campaign, Trump said "When Mexico sends its people, they're not sending their
best... They're sending people that have lots of problems, and they're bringing those problems with us.
They're bringing drugs. They're bringing crime. They're rapists. And some, I assume, are good people... It's
coming from all over South and Latin America." (Phillips, 2017).
     2
       Mian et al. (2021) finds little evidence of changes in county or state level tax rates and transfers that
differentially benefited partisans following the 2000 and 2008 elections. Immigration policy changes may
contribute to differential Hispanic fertility, but excluding Hispanics leads to similar across-county results by
political party.
     3
       As an alternative outcome, we find supporting evidence using Google search data for "pregnancy test."

                                                       2
that a 1% increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a decrease in birth rates
between 1.4% and 2.2%. Similarly, Raute (2019) and Milligan (2005) find that a $1,000
increase (in 2020 USD) in cash subsidies for a birth results in a 1.8% to 2.1% increase in
fertility.
    To further bolster the idea that it is political sentiment which drives fertility changes, we
examine the effects of Presidential campaign visits. Our dynamic event study design compares
Hispanic versus non-Hispanic fertility over time in counties visited by Trump, using counties
he will visit later as controls. In the months following a campaign visit, the fertility rate for
Hispanics relative to non-Hispanics falls by 1.2% of the mean.
    To place our results in perspective, we examine the two preceding party-switching Presi-
dential elections. After George W. Bush barely won the 2000 election, we find some evidence
that relative fertility in Democratic counties falls, particularly for those with low evangelical
shares. For Obama's 2008 election victory, which was not a surprise, we find no partisan
fertility effect; however, the Great Recession confounds this analysis.
    Our paper relates to a recent literature which documents rising political polarization in the
United States (Gentzkow, 2016, Autor et al., 2020, Boxell et al., 2020, Bertrand and Kamenica,
2018, Pew, 2020). The literature has also documented that survey-based economic optimism
of partisans changes around elections (Bartels, 2002, Evans and Andersen, 2006, Mian et al.,
2021). A few papers report a relationship between partisanship and spending on consumer
goods (Gerber and Huber, 2009, Benhabib and Spiegel, 2019, Gillitzer and Prasad, 2018),
but others have challenged this link (McGrath, 2017, Mian et al., 2021). Further, a group of
papers have linked partisanship with financial outcomes, such as tax evasion, stock market
trading, corporate credit ratings, and retirement investing (Cullen et al., 2021, Cookson et al.,
2020, Kempf and Tsoutsoura, 2020, Meeuwis et al., 2021).4
    Across many nations, growing political polarization and declining fertility are two funda-
mental challenges facing society. We estimate effects at the intersection of these two forces.
Our contribution is to causally link partisan sentiment to one of the most consequential house-
hold decisions: whether to have a child (Becker, 1960). Unlike many consumption and invest-
    4
      More broadly, our paper relates to a literature on how economic factors influence fertility choices, including
unemployment, income, housing prices, coal busts, fracking booms, Medicaid eligibility, COVID-19, cash
transfers, and child subsidies (Autor et al., 2019, Cohen et al., 2013, Schaller, 2016, Dettling and Kearney,
2014, Kearney and Levine, 2009, 2020, Lindo, 2010, Lovenheim and Mumford, 2013, Black et al., 2013, Aizer
et al., 2020, McCrary and Royer, 2011, Raute, 2019, Duncan et al., 2017).

                                                         3
ment choices, having a child is a long-term commitment requiring significant time and money.
According to the USDA, the estimated financial cost of raising a child from birth to age 17 is
$233,000 (Lino, 2020).
    Growing partisanship makes understanding the downstream effects of elections increas-
ingly relevant. The shifts in fertility we identify have practical implications for regional public
finance and population-based congressional apportionment, given partisan sorting across res-
idential geographies (Kaplan et al., 2020, Brown and Enos, 2021).5 Moreover, understanding
the drivers of fertility is important in light of below-replacement fertility and its structural
effects on economic growth (Jones, 2020).


2. Optimism, Data, and Research Design

    We begin by examining how fertility responds to the unexpected election victory of candi-
date Trump in 2016. We use two main strategies in a difference-in-differences (DID) design:
comparing fertility in Republican versus Democratic-leaning counties, and comparing Hispanic
fertility to that of non-Hispanics within the same county.


2.1. Optimism and Elections

    It is well established that partisans of the winning side in a Presidential election become
more optimistic about the direction of the economy.6 Figure 1 plots the percentage of positive
minus negative responses (labeled "net better") to the question "Do you think the nation's
economy is getting better or worse?" among registered voters. Republican voters became
immediately more optimistic following the November 2016 election, with the net better fraction
rising from -63% to +63% over the course of four months. In contrast, the net better fraction
for Democrats falls from +52% to -4% over the same period, after which it continues to erode.
Similar swings in optimism, but in the opposite direction, occurred after the close election
which candidate Biden won in 2020. To benchmark the large magnitude of these swings, the
COVID-19 stock market crash caused the Republican net better percentage to fall from +83%
to -19% and the Democratic percentage from -42% to -87%.
   5
      For example, New York lost a congressional seat to Minnesota by 89 residents based on the 2020 Census
(Goldmacher, 2021).
    6
      Shifts in optimism may reflect general expectations, or beliefs about specific policies that could impact
an individual's group.

                                                      4
    An alternative measure of economic optimism is the Bloomberg Consumer Comfort Index,
reported in Figure A1. This uses a different sampling scheme, but reveals comparable patterns
over a longer time frame. The figure highlights the sharp reversal in sentiment after the
surprise 2016 election; in contrast, optimism changes were more gradual for preceding elections.
Using micro-data from both Gallup and the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers, Mian
et al. (2021) find similar patterns for the 2008 and 2016 elections. While these various surveys
measure economic optimism, individuals' non-economic outlook could be similarly affected
along party lines.


2.2. Fertility Data

    We use restricted-use U.S. administrative natality data between 1994 and 2019 from the
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). The data covers the universe of U.S. births
and provides detailed information that includes the month of birth (MOB), the month of the
first day of the mother's last menstrual period (MLMP), and the mother's age, education,
race/ethnicity and county of residence. We restrict our attention to singleton births to U.S.
resident mothers between the ages of 18 and 44.
    Our main outcome of interest is the number of births conceived in a county-month per
1,000 females between 15 and 44 years old.7 We use mothers' reported MLMP as a proxy for
conception date following the literature (e.g., Dehejia and Lleras-Muney 2004).8 Summary
statistics for fertility are in Table A1; the mean monthly fertility rate in a county is 4.5
births per 1,000 females. We deseasonalize fertility by subtracting its county × month-of-year
average using data starting from 2010, and refer to this variable as excess fertility.
    The natality data only records the month of the beginning of the mother's last menstrual
period. There is typically a seven-day lag between the first day of menses and the fertile
period, which lasts approximately two weeks (NCHS, 2005). Thus, MLMP measures the
month of conception with noise. Since the election occurred on November 8, 2016, a mother
   7
      We use as the denominator the number of fertile females between 15 and 44 years old ­ rather than
18 and 44 ­ because U.S. intercensal county population estimates by age, sex, and ethnicity are reported in
five-year age bins. The population estimates are from Census Bureau. We adjust births due to the extra day
in February of leap years by multiplying the fertility rate in that month by 28/29. To ensure that the fertility
rate is calculated based on a reasonably-sized female pool, we drop counties whose fertile female population
is below the 10th percentile in 2012 (i.e., 769 women).
    8
      We remove misreported records by requiring the difference between MOB and MLMP to be between five
and 12 months.

                                                       5
whose MLMP is in October could have conceived her child after the election. Assuming a
uniform distribution of conception dates in a month, about 30% of mothers whose MLMP is
in October are predicted to conceive after the election.


2.3. Difference-in-Differences Event Study

   Our main research design is a DID event study using the 2016 Presidential election as
the event. Our first approach compares fertility across Democratic and Republican counties
before versus after the election. To measure county partisanship, we obtain the county-level
vote share in Presidential elections from the MIT Election Data and Science Lab. In our first
definition, counties are categorized as Democratic if their Democratic vote share in 2012 is
above the median, and Republican otherwise.
   To include the new Republican voters who were drawn to Trump in 2016, our second
definition uses the county-level change in the Republican vote share between 2008 and 2016
and classifies counties with an above-median change (i.e., a shift more than 5.8 percentage
points) as Republican, and Democratic otherwise.
   Our first regression model is:

                                     3
                            Yct =          t × Democraticc + c + t +         ct                         (1)
                                    t=-3


where Yct is the excess fertility rate in county c and time t, which is the number of time
periods relative to the Presidential election. We use t = -1 as our comparison period. Our
treatment variable is Democraticc , which equals one if county c is classified as Democratic,
and zero otherwise. We include event time fixed effects t to control for national fertility
trends. Including county fixed effects c is largely redundant, because our excess fertility rate
already controls for county × month-of-year effects.9 We cluster standard errors by county.
   While the data is monthly, for precision and ease of presentation in our main analyses we
collapse the data by quarter. For the 2016 election we define t = 0 as October, November,
and December. As described in section 2.2, October is a partially-treated month, which is
why we group it with November and December.

   9
     We obtain excess fertility by subtracting county × month-of-year means, which is not perfectly colinear
with county fixed effects because it is based on a longer sample period.

                                                     6
   Our second approach compares fertility by race and ethnic group within the same county.
Our comparison focuses on Hispanic versus non-Hispanic fertility due to Trump's adversarial
rhetoric towards this group. Our second regression model is:

                             3
                   Ykct =          t × Hispanick + Hispanick × c + t +     kct               (2)
                            t=-3


where Ykct is the excess fertility rate for females belonging to ethnic group k in county c in
quarter t. Hispanick is one if the ethnic group is Hispanic, and zero otherwise. Similar to
equation 1, the Hispanic × county fixed effects are largely redundant given that excess fertility
is calculated by subtracting ethnicity × county × month-of-year means for each group.
   If the result of the 2016 Presidential election was unanticipated, and fertility trends across
counties and across different ethnic groups are parallel in the absence of the election, the t
vectors in equations 1 and 2 identify the impact of Presidential election on fertility decisions
before and after the election. As we will show, both of these conditions appear to hold.


3. Results from the 2016 Presidential Election

3.1. Fertility Effects across Political Geographies

   In Figure 2, we show the effects of the 2016 election on fertility in Democratic and Repub-
lican counties. In panel A1, we start by comparing the raw trend of monthly excess fertility in
counties with above- or below-median Democratic vote share in the 2012 presidential election.
The blue line captures the excess fertility in Democratic counties and the red in Republican
counties. Both lines are normalized to be 0 in September 2016. The vertical shaded area
spanning the months of October and November indicates the period immediately surrounding
the election. As described in section 2.2, October represents a partially-treated month due to
how conceptions are measured in our data.
   The first thing to note is that the blue and red lines lie on top of each other in the pre-
period. These parallel trends diverge after the election, with the red line rising rapidly in
November and December. There remains a gap between the red and the blue lines through
the remainder of the sample period.
   Panel A2 plots the t coefficients from equation 1, representing the effect of the Presidential


                                                7
election on fertility in Democratic versus Republican counties. Confirming the pattern in the
raw data, there are no pre-trends, but large effects in all four quarters after the election, which
are statistically different from zero.
   In 2016, Trump attracted a different voter coalition relative to prior Republican candidates.
We use the county-level change in the Republican vote share between 2008 and 2016 to capture
these new voters. Panel B1 plots the monthly excess fertility for counties with an above-median
shift towards the Republican party (red dashed line) and counties with a below-median shift
(blue line). Panel B2 plots the quarterly regression coefficients. Again there is no evidence of
differential pre-trends either in the raw data, or in the regression setting. Further, the gaps
in excess fertility rate are as large, or larger, compared to those in column A.
   Since the measures of partisanship in columns A and B capture different sources of variation
(their correlation is 0.16), we combine them to identify counties in the tails of the partisan
distribution. In column C, we define extreme Republican counties (dashed red line) as those
with a below-median Democratic vote share and an above-median vote shift towards Trump.
We similarly define extreme Democratic counties (blue line).
   Comparing more extreme counties yields larger effects: the fertility gap in column C
approximately doubles compared to either column A or B. In panel C1, the jump in the
dashed red line is particularly dramatic. This pattern suggests it is Republican fertility in the
most extreme counties that drives the majority of the effect, assuming the excess birth rates
would have stayed at zero for both groups otherwise. The stronger fertility effects we find
for more politically extreme counties adds credence to the idea that partisanship drives our
results.10
   Regression results corresponding to these figures are found in Table 1, columns (1) through
(3). For example, consider the T reat0 coefficient in column (1); this represents a drop of 0.144
excess births per 1,000 women in Democratic versus Republican counties in the quarter of the
election (quarter 0).
   The sum of the treatment effects in quarters 0 through 3 in column (1) indicates there
were 0.597 fewer excess births per 1,000 women in Democratic versus Republican counties in
the year following the election, which corresponds to a 1.1 pp difference. This translates to

  10
    In May 2016, there is a sizable jump in the dashed red line in panel C1. This was the month that Trump
became the presumptive nominee of the Republican party, which may have contributed to the jump.

                                                    8
an annual fertility gap of 23,000 births (or 0.7% of all 2015 births) between Republican and
Democratic counties.11 Similarly, column (2) indicates 0.964 fewer excess births per 1,000
women in counties which experienced a below versus above median shift in Republican vote
share, corresponding to a 1.7 pp difference. Finally, column (3) reports that extreme Demo-
cratic (versus extreme Republican) counties experienced an even larger effect: a difference of
2.6 pp in excess fertility.
    In our main specification we restrict the time window to the three quarters before and after
the election, in order to minimize contamination by midterm elections. Appendix Figure A2
expands the time window to seven quarters pre and post election, that is, the period between
the two midterms. These figures show similar patterns and reveal persistence of the treatment
effect out to a two year horizon, suggesting no short-run harvesting.


3.2. Fertility Effects by Ethnicity

    As a different measure of political partisanship, we compare Hispanics to non-Hispanics.
This split is motivated by Trump's harsh rhetoric towards the Hispanic population, beginning
with his first campaign speech in which he compared Hispanic immigrants to rapists and
criminals. Moreover, Hispanics have historically backed Democratic candidates by a wide
margin, voting two-to-one for Hillary Clinton in 2016.
    Figure 3 plots excess fertility for Hispanics and non-Hispanics surrounding the 2016 elec-
tion. Panel A1 shows similar pre-trends for Hispanic and non-Hispanic women. Following
the election, non-Hispanic fertility rises for two months while that of Hispanics falls markedly
over time; the gap between the two persists in every month in the post-election period. Panel
A2 plots the quarterly regression estimates for equation 2. There are no pre-trends, but large
and consistent negative fertility effects. Corresponding quarterly estimates are reported in
Table 1. Over the post-treatment year there are 1.107 fewer Hispanic versus non-Hispanic
births per 1,000 fertile women, which corresponds to a fertility effect of 1.7 pp.
    Given the strong support for Trump among whites in rural areas, in column B we replace
the control group of non-Hispanics with non-Hispanic whites in predominantly rural counties

  11
     This translation to number of births, makes the additional assumption that pre-post comparisons for
treated and control groups are separately identified, so we can calculate the number of births for each group
using the estimated rate coefficients. We multiply the sum of the group-specific post coefficients by the 2015
female population for each group (divided by 1,000), and then take the difference.

                                                      9
as defined by the Census Bureau. Panel B1 shows an immediate and dramatic rise in rural
non-Hispanic white fertility. As panel B2 shows, there are no differential pre-trends, and the
estimated annual effect corresponds to a sizable 2.8 pp.
   Trump also had strong support from evangelical whites, so in column C we use counties
with an above-median evangelical share as the control (excluding historically black protestant
churches). These evangelical counties have weak correlation with the rural counties (0.17).
Panel C1 plots excess fertility, and reveals a sharp post-election difference between the groups:
the estimated annual effect from Panel C2 corresponds to a 2.5 pp difference.
   Appendix Figure A3 expands the time window to two years before and after the election.
The panels in this figure show that after Trump became the presumptive Republican nom-
inee there was an immediate drop in relative Hispanic fertility.12 We view this as a second
unexpected shock, which generated similar relative fertility declines for Hispanics, likely as a
result of his aggressive anti-Hispanic rhetoric. In Appendix Figure A2 there is not a similar
effect by partisan affiliation; this likely reflects the fact that Trump winning the nomination
was viewed as, if anything, increasing the probability of a Democratic victory. In the two
years after the Presidential election the effects persist.
   As a final exercise, we explore whether more politically polarized counties experience larger
effects. We take advantage of the arguably exogenous shock to local economic conditions
caused by the China trade shock. Autor et al. (2020) show that trade-exposed counties
become more polarized, both on the left and right of the political spectrum; we use their
proxy for county-level polarization.
   We create two interaction terms, multiplying t in equation 2 with whether a county is
above or below the median of the instrumented China trade shock of Autor et al. (2020).
Results are plotted in Appendix Figure A4. The difference in the gap between Hispanics and
non-Hispanics in more versus less polarized counties, summed over the four quarters after
the election, is statistically significant (p value = 0.037). The post-election percentage point
difference between Hispanics and non-Hispanics is more than twice as large (117%) in more
versus less polarized counties.
   Taken in combination, the larger effects we find as the intensity of partisanship increases --

  12
   We determine the timing of Trump's presumptive nomination using the Iowa Electronic Markets
(RCONV16).

                                                10
i.e., when we consider more politically extreme counties, compare Hispanics to non-Hispanic
whites in rural or evangelical counties, and contrast more to less-polarized counties -- strongly
point towards partisanship driving these effects, as opposed to alternative mechanisms.


3.3. Robustness

   Table A2 provides the results for a variety of robustness tests. Columns (1) to (6) re-
peat our main regressions in Table 1, with the addition of controls for county income, income
squared, and 2-digit NAICS employment shares. This mediation analysis controls for po-
tentially endogenous variables, which could be channels for the estimated fertility effects.
However, our estimates are unaffected by their inclusion.
   To examine whether the county-level results are driven by Hispanic fertility we re-estimate
columns (1) to (3) of Table 1 excluding Hispanic births. The (unreported) estimated effects
summed over the following year fall by 31, 17, and 13 percent, respectively. This suggests that
while changes to immigration policy may contribute to differential Hispanic fertility, Hispanics
are not the principal driver of the county-level political party results.
   Column (7) changes the definition of county partisanship used in Table 1 column (1) and
in Figure 2 column A. Instead of using the 50th percentile of Democratic vote share in a
county as the partisan classification cutoff, here we define Democratic counties as those with
Democratic vote shares above the 60th percentile, and Republican counties as those below
the 40th percentile. We drop the counties with vote shares in between these cutoffs. Using
this classification, the cumulative effect in the year after the election is similar to our original
estimate.
   Column (8) of Table A2 changes the measure we use in Table 1 column (2) and in Figure 2
column B. Our main estimate uses counties' shift towards the Republican party between 2008
and 2016 to define treatment and control groups; here we use the shift between 2012 and 2016.
The results are likewise unaffected.
   Columns (9) and (10) change the treatment group that we use in Table 1 column (4) and
in Figure 3. Column (9) replaces the treatment group (Hispanics) with Mexicans, as Trump
often referred to them specifically in his anti-Hispanic rhetoric, and they make up the largest
Hispanic group in the U.S. For Mexicans, the fertility effect approximately doubles relative to
all Hispanics (from 1.7 to 3.3 pp). To test whether the relative fertility losses we identify are

                                                11
specific to Hispanics, or whether they occurred among all minority groups, we drop Hispanics
from column (10). We use non-Hispanic minorities as the treatment group, and non-Hispanic
whites as the control. While there is a relative fertility drop in quarter one after the election,
the effect over the whole year is much smaller, and not statistically distinguishable from zero.
   As a final exercise, we perform our main analysis using the Google search index for "preg-
nancy test" (scaled by the highest local weekly search rate for the term) as the dependent
variable. Consistent with our main results, Table A3 shows that Democratic-leaning desig-
nated marketing areas (DMAs) and those with a high proportion of Hispanics both see relative
falls in this search following the 2016 election.


3.4. Results from Preceding Elections

   To place our results in perspective, we examine the two preceding party-switching Presi-
dential elections. We note that in these elections the level of polarization in U.S. politics (and
across candidates), was substantially lower compared to the 2016 election (Pew, 2014, Enke,
2020).
   In the year 2000, George W. Bush barely won the election, with the Supreme Court deter-
mining the final outcome in December. When we compare Republican to Democratic-leaning
counties in Appendix Figure A5 we find some evidence that relative Democratic fertility falls.
George W. Bush had particularly strong support among evangelical voters (Niebuhr, 2000).
Comparing counties with high and low evangelical shares, we find sizable drops in relative
fertility for less evangelical counties in the three quarters after the election.
   Obama's 2008 election victory was not a surprise (as is visible in Appendix Figure A1),
but his nomination was. We find no relative difference in Republican and Democratic fertility
in Appendix Figure A6 column A. However, in column B we find some suggestive evidence
that Black versus non-Black fertility rose after Obama became the presumptive nominee. One
caveat is that the Great Recession (December 2007-June 2009) confounds this analysis.


4. Evidence from Pre-Election Campaign Visits

   To bolster the notion that it is political sentiment that drives fertility changes, we examine
the effects of Trump's pre-election campaign visits. Local residents appear to pay attention to


                                                12
these events. Appendix Figure A7 shows that the Google search index for "Trump" starts to
rise about two weeks before Trump's first campaign visit to a DMA, peaking in the week of the
visit. We hypothesize that when Trump visits an area for the first time on the campaign trail,
it excites his base and may reduce the optimism of his opponents, in turn affecting relative
fertility.


4.1. Data

    We collect Trump's campaign visits between January 2015 and November 2016 from the
National Journal's Travel Tracker.13 The data contains date, time, and city information for
each visit. We map city names to county. Trump visited a total of 230 counties during his
campaign; the mean and variance of these counties' fertility are reported in Table A1.
    While we have the actual date of Trump's campaign visit, the natality data only records
the month of the first day of mother's last menstrual period (MLMP). This means that women
whose menses occur in the second half of the month preceding a visit may be fertile when a
visit occurs. Likewise, women whose menses begin in the month of a visit may not be fertile
until the following month. This means that women whose MLMP is in month -1 can also be
treated by Trump's campaign visit. Similarly, women whose MLMP is in month 0 may not
have been treated.14


4.2. Research Design

    We use a triple DID dynamic event study comparing fertility between Hispanic and non-
Hispanic fertile females in counties visited by Trump before and after the visit, using counties
he will visit later as controls. We focus on Trump's first campaign visit to a county so as
not to contaminate our estimate with the effects from prior visits. We use counties that
Trump will visit in the future as controls, rather than counties he will never visit, because
unvisited counties are considerably different. We use a dynamic event study because there may
   13
      Travel Tracker compiles information from candidates' public campaign schedules and excludes events that
candidates hold in their home states.
   14
      The predicted percentage of fertile days in the month of a campaign visit (month 0) for women whose
MLMP occurs in month -1, is approximately two thirds that of women whose MLMP occurs in month 0. This
calculation assumes a uniform distribution of conception dates and visits throughout a month. Moreover,
Google search data in Figure A7 suggests some anticipation of the campaign visit. Including anticipation
would increase the percentage of fertile days for women whose MLMP occurs in month -1 to over 90% that of
women whose MLMP occurs in month 0.

                                                     13
have been heterogeneous effects across counties visited at different times as Trump's campaign
strategy and rhetoric evolved over time (Sun and Abraham, 2020). To implement the dynamic
event study we stack our panel data as a series of 4×2 matrices (Hispanics/non-Hispanics in
treatment/control counties × pre/post), and adapt the R package from Novgorodsky and
Setzler (2019).
    The outcome is the fertility rate among women by Hispanic ethnicity in a county and
month. We define the omitted period as month -3, because women whose MLMP occurs in
month -1 may also be treated, and to allow for potential anticipation one month before the
actual visit. We define counties visited in month g as cohort g , and cohort-specific event time
in calendar month m as eg = m - g .
    Under the identifying assumption that earlier visited and later visited counties share similar
fertility trends in the absence of Trump's campaign visits, we can identify the treatment effect
on the fertility of Hispanics versus others in treated cohort g in event time eg , which we label
   H
as e g
       . Following Sun and Abraham (2020), we define the average treatment effect for event
time e as:
                                            H            H
                                            e =          e g
                                                             × wg                                          (3)
                                                   g G

where wg (the aggregation weight) is the Hispanic fertile female population in counties be-
                                                                 H
longing to cohort g . We calculate clustered standard errors for e via the delta method.
    All counties in the regression sample experience their first Trump visit by November 2016.
As a result, restricting controls to be eventually-visited counties forces us to trade off the
number of post periods with the number of cohorts we can estimate treatment effects for. We
estimate effects for event times from -7 to +5 months. This implies that the last cohort we
can estimate effects for have their first Trump visits in April 2016.15


4.3. Fertility Response to Trump Campaign Visits

    Figure 4 plots the average treatment effect from seven months before a visit to five months
after. The Hispanic fertility rate relative to non-Hispanics in the same county starts to decrease
in month -1, which is when partial treatment of mothers begins, and continues through month


  15
      Since control counties must be visited by November 2016 and there is one month of anticipation, treatment
effects can only be estimated up to September 2016. Five months before September 2016 is April 2016.

                                                      14
2. However, the positive treatment effect in month 5 indicates that the depressed fertility in
months -1 to 2 may constitute harvesting. Following a campaign visit, the monthly average
fertility rate for Hispanics falls relative to non-Hispanics by 1.5% of the mean. Corresponding
regression estimates are reported in Table A4 column (1). As a robustness test, we use the
total fertile female population in counties belonging to cohort g as the aggregation weights wg
in column (2); results are quantitatively similar.


5. Conclusion

   This paper documents a new consequence of elections and a new determinant of fertil-
ity. We are the first to causally link political partisanship to fertility choices. Unlike many
consumption and investment choices, this is a long-term commitment, requiring significant
time and money. We compare Republican to Democratic-leaning counties, before and after
the 2016 Presidential election. We find a reallocation of births across political geographies,
which corresponds to a 1.1 to 2.6 pp increase in Republican versus Democratic county births.
We likewise find a disparate and negative impact on relative Hispanic fertility (1.7 to 2.8 pp).
Reinforcing the idea that political sentiment drives these changes, relative Hispanic fertility
declines after a Trump pre-election campaign visit.
   Growing political polarization and declining fertility are two challenges facing society, and
we estimate effects at the intersection of the two. From a policy perspective, shifts in fertility
across political groups have practical implications for regional public finance and population-
based congressional apportionment, given partisan sorting across residential geographies.
   This paper opens up several avenues for future research, such as disentangling whether
fertility is responding to pure sentiment, to different partisan information-processing models,
or to expectations of how future policy will benefit them. While we estimate relative effects, it
is still unknown how aggregate fertility responds, including over longer time horizons. Further
questions include how partisanship impacts other consequential choices, and whether growing
polarization amplifies effects.




                                               15
References

Aizer, A., Eli, S., and Lleras-Muney, A. (2020). The incentive effects of cash transfers to the
  poor. NBER Working Paper.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G., et al. (2019). When work disappears: Manufacturing decline
 and the falling marriage market value of young men. American Economic Review: Insights,
 1(2):161­78.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G., Majlesi, K., et al. (2020). Importing political polariza-
 tion? the electoral consequences of rising trade exposure. American Economic Review,
 110(10):3139­83.

Bartels, L. M. (2002). Beyond the running tally: Partisan bias in political perceptions. Political
  Behavior, 24(2):117­150.

Becker, G. S. (1960). An economic analysis of fertility. In Demographic and economic change
  in developed countries, pages 209­240. Columbia University Press.

Benhabib, J. and Spiegel, M. M. (2019). Sentiments and economic activity: Evidence from us
  states. The Economic Journal, 129(618):715­733.

Bertrand, M. and Kamenica, E. (2018). Coming apart? cultural distances in the united states
  over time. NBER Working Paper.

Black, D. A., Kolesnikova, N., Sanders, S. G., and Taylor, L. J. (2013). Are children "normal"?
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(1):21­33.

Boxell, L., Gentzkow, M., and Shapiro, J. M. (2020). Cross-country trends in affective polar-
  ization. NBER Working Paper.

Brown, J. R. and Enos, R. D. (2021). The measurement of partisan sorting for 180 million
  voters. Nature Human Behaviour, pages 1­11.

Cohen, A., Dehejia, R., and Romanov, D. (2013). Financial incentives and fertility. Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 95(1):1­20.

Confessore, N. and Cohn, N. (2016). Donald Trump's victory was built on unique coalition
  of white voters. New York Times, November 9 ,2016.

Cookson, J. A., Engelberg, J. E., and Mullins, W. (2020). Does partisanship shape investor be-
  liefs? evidence from the covid-19 pandemic. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 10(4):863­
  893.

Cullen, J. B., Turner, N., and Washington, E. L. (2021). Political alignment, attitudes toward
 government and tax evasion. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, (Forthcom-
 ing).

Dehejia, R. and Lleras-Muney, A. (2004). Booms, busts, and babies' health. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 119(3):1091­1130.


                                               16
Dettling, L. J. and Kearney, M. S. (2014). House prices and birth rates: The impact of the
  real estate market on the decision to have a baby. Journal of Public Economics, 110:82­100.
Duncan, B., Mansour, H., and Rees, D. I. (2017). It's just a game the super bowl and low
 birth weight. Journal of Human Resources, 52(4):946­978.
Enke, B. (2020). Moral values and voting. Journal of Political Economy, 128(10):3679­3729.
Evans, G. and Andersen, R. (2006). The political conditioning of economic perceptions. The
  Journal of Politics, 68(1):194­207.
Gentzkow, M. (2016). Polarization in 2016. Working Paper.
Gerber, A. S. and Huber, G. A. (2009). Partisanship and economic behavior: Do partisan
 differences in economic forecasts predict real economic behavior? American Political Science
 Review, pages 407­426.
Gillitzer, C. and Prasad, N. (2018). The effect of consumer sentiment on consumption:
  Cross-sectional evidence from elections. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  10(4):234­69.
Goldmacher, S. (2021). New york loses house seat after coming up 89 people short on census.
 New York Times, April 26, 2021.
Jones, C. I. (2020). The end of economic growth? unintended consequences of a declining
  population. NBER Working Paper.
Kaplan, E., Spenkuch, J., and Sullivan, R. (2020). Partisan spatial sorting in the united
 states: A theoretical and empirical overview. Working Paper.
Kearney, M. and Levine, P. (2020). The coming covid-19 baby bust. Brookings.
Kearney, M. S. and Levine, P. B. (2009). Subsidized contraception, fertility, and sexual
  behavior. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1):137­151.
Kempf, E. and Tsoutsoura, M. (2020). Partisan professionals: Evidence from credit rating
  analysts. NBER Working Paper.
Langer, A. and Lemoine, D. (2020). What were the odds? estimating the market's probability
  of uncertain events. NBER Working Paper.
Lindo, J. M. (2010). Are children really inferior goods? evidence from displacement-driven
  income shocks. Journal of Human Resources, 45(2):301­327.
Lino, M. (2020). The cost of raising a child. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.
Lovenheim, M. F. and Mumford, K. J. (2013). Do family wealth shocks affect fertility choices?
  evidence from the housing market. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2):464­475.
McCrary, J. and Royer, H. (2011). The effect of female education on fertility and infant health:
 evidence from school entry policies using exact date of birth. American Economic Review,
 101(1):158­95.

                                              17
McGrath, M. C. (2017). Economic behavior and the partisan perceptual screen. Quarterly
 Journal of Political Science, 11(4):363­83.

Meeuwis, M., Parker, J. A., Schoar, A., and Simester, D. I. (2021). Belief disagreement and
 portfolio choice. Working Paper.

Mian, A. R., Sufi, A., and Khoshkhou, N. (2021). Partisan bias, economic expectations, and
 household spending. The Review of Economics and Statistics, (Forthcoming).

Milligan, K. (2005). Subsidizing the stork: New evidence on tax incentives and fertility. Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 87(3):539­555.

Niebuhr, G. (2000). The 2000 campaign: The christian right; evangelicals found a believer in
  Bush. New York Times, February 21, 2000.

Novgorodsky, D. and Setzler, B. (2019). Practical guide to event studies.

Pew (2014). Political polarization in the American public. Pew Research Center Report.

Pew (2020). America is exceptional in the nature of its political divide. Pew Research Center.

Phillips, A. (2017). `They're rapists.' President Trump's campaign launch speech two years
  later, annotated. Washington Post, June 16, 2017.

Raute, A. (2019). Can financial incentives reduce the baby gap? evidence from a reform in
  maternity leave benefits. Journal of Public Economics, 169:203­222.

Schaller, J. (2016). Booms, busts, and fertility testing the becker model using gender-specific
  labor demand. Journal of Human Resources, 51(1):1­29.

Sun, L. and Abraham, S. (2020). Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies with
  heterogeneous treatment effects. Journal of Econometrics.




                                              18
       100




                                         2016 Election                                                                                             Covid Stock Crash 2020 Election
       50
 Net better (%)
       0
       -50
       -100
                  n


                           r


                                    l

                                          ct


                                                    n


                                                             r


                                                                      l

                                                                           ct


                                                                                     n


                                                                                              r


                                                                                                       l

                                                                                                             ct


                                                                                                                       n


                                                                                                                                r


                                                                                                                                         l

                                                                                                                                              ct


                                                                                                                                                        n


                                                                                                                                                                 r


                                                                                                                                                                          l

                                                                                                                                                                               ct


                                                                                                                                                                                         n


                                                                                                                                                                                                  r


                                                                                                                                                                                                           l
                                 Ju




                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                       Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ju
                       Ap




                                                         Ap




                                                                                          Ap




                                                                                                                            Ap




                                                                                                                                                             Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                              Ap
            Ja




                                                  Ja




                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja
                                         O




                                                                           O




                                                                                                            O




                                                                                                                                              O




                                                                                                                                                                               O
                               16




                                                                 17




                                                                                                  18




                                                                                                                                    19




                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                      21
                      16




                                        16




                                                        17




                                                                          17




                                                                                         18




                                                                                                           18




                                                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                             19




                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                             21
       16




                                               17




                                                                                18




                                                                                                                  19




                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                    21
                            20




                                                              20




                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                  20




                                    20




                                                    20




                                                                      20




                                                                                     20




                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                         20
  20




                                             20




                                                                               20




                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                  Democrat                  Republican



                                             Figure 1: Economic Outlook by Party Affiliation
Note: This figure plots the percentage of positive minus negative responses ("net better") to the question "Do
you think the nation's economy is getting better or worse?" among registered voters. The survey is admin-
istered by CIVIQS, which uses a list-based sampling methodology to select panelists to receive online polls.
They use dynamic Bayesian multilevel regression with post-stratification weights to adjust the demographics
of the sample to those of the U.S. population and to smooth out day-to-day sampling variability.




                                                                                                           19
               .2




                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
               .1




                                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
 Excess fertility




                                                                                                           Excess fertility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Excess fertility
      0




                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
               -.1




                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.1
               -.2




                                                                                                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2
                      2016Jan         2016Apr    2016Jul      2016Oct      2017Jan     2017Apr   2017Jul                        2016Jan         2016Apr     2016Jul      2016Oct      2017Jan     2017Apr   2017Jul                       2016Jan           2016Apr    2016Jul      2016Oct      2017Jan     2017Apr   2017Jul

                                                   Democratic                     Republican                                                               Low Rep. shift                    High Rep. shift                                                 Dem. x Low Rep. shift                      Rep. x High Rep. shift


                                                A1. By vote share                                                                                B1. By Republican shift                                                                               C1. By vote share × Rep. shift




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
               .2




                                                                                                                         .2
 Differential excess fertility




                                                                                                           Differential excess fertility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Differential excess fertility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                       0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.2
          -.2




                                                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.4
               -.4




                                                                                                                         -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.6
               -.6




                                                                                                                         -.6




                                 -3         -2         -1              0           1         2         3                                   -3         -2          -1              0           1         2         3                                    -3         -2         -1              0           1         2         3
                                                            Quarters from election                                                                                     Quarters from election                                                                                     Quarters from election



                                                A2. By vote share                                                                                B2. By Republican shift                                                                               C2. By vote share × Rep. shift

                                      Figure 2: 2016 Presidential Election and Fertility in Democratic versus Republican Counties
Note: This figure plots effects (and 95% confidence intervals) for the excess fertility rate in Democratic-leaning relative to Republican-leaning counties
around the 2016 Presidential election. Fertility rates in panels A1 to C1 are normalized to September 2016. As described in section 2.3, October represents
a partially-treated month, so we shade October and November to indicate the onset of treatment. Panel A1 plots the excess fertility rate in counties with
above-median versus below-median Democrat vote shares in the 2012 Presidential election; Panel B1 counties with above-median versus below-median
change in Republican vote shares between the 2008 and 2016 Presidential elections; Panel C1 counties with both below-median Democrat vote shares
and above-median Republican shifts versus counties where both measures are the opposite. Panels A2 to C2 plot the interactions between quarters and
an indicator for Democratic-leaning counties from equation 1. The omitted quarter is -1 (July-September 2016). Specifications correspond to Table 1
columns (1) to (3).
               .2




                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
               .1




                                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
 Excess fertility




                                                                                                           Excess fertility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Excess fertility
      0




                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
               -.1




                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.1
               -.2




                                                                                                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2
                      2016Jan         2016Apr    2016Jul      2016Oct      2017Jan     2017Apr   2017Jul                        2016Jan         2016Apr    2016Jul      2016Oct      2017Jan     2017Apr   2017Jul                        2016Jan          2016Apr    2016Jul      2016Oct      2017Jan     2017Apr   2017Jul

                                                   Hispanic                   Non-Hispanic                                                                     Hispanic                   Rural white                                                                 Hispanic                   Evangelical white


                                 A1. Hispanic vs non-Hispanic                                                                                   B1. Hispanic vs rural white                                                                          C1. Hispanic vs evangelical white
               .3




                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3
                             0




                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
 Differential fertility rate




                                                                                                           Differential fertility rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Differential fertility rate
            -.3




                                                                                                                      -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.3
               -.6




                                                                                                                         -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.6
               -.9




                                                                                                                         -.9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.9
                                 -3         -2         -1              0           1         2         3                                   -3         -2         -1              0           1         2         3                                    -3         -2         -1              0           1         2         3
                                                            Quarters from election                                                                                    Quarters from election                                                                                     Quarters from election



                                 A2. Hispanic vs non-Hispanic                                                                                   B2. Hispanic vs rural white                                                                          C2. Hispanic vs evangelical white

                                 Figure 3: 2016 Presidential Election and Hispanic versus Non-Hispanic Fertility (within-county)
Note: See note to Figure 2. This figure plots effects (and 95% confidence intervals) for the excess fertility rate of Hispanics versus other groups around
the 2016 Presidential election. Panel A1 plots the excess fertility rate of Hispanics versus non-Hispanics; Panel B1 versus non-Hispanic whites living in
rural counties (using the Census Bureau definition); Panel C1 versus non-Hispanic whites living in counties with above-median evangelical share (using
data from the Association of Religion Data Archives). Panels A2 to C2 plot the interactions between quarters and an indicator for Hispanic ethnicity
from equation 2. Specifications correspond to Table 1 columns (4) to (6).
                                    .6
                                    .4
                      Differential excess fertility.
                          -.2       0
                                    -.4
                                    -.6     .2




                                                       -7   -6   -5   -4      -3   -2     -1     0     1     2      3   4   5
                                                                  Month of last menstrual period from 1st Trump visit



         Figure 4: Trump Campaign Visits and Relative Hispanic Fertility
Note: This figure plots dynamic event study coefficients (and 95% confidence intervals) that compare fertility
between Hispanic and non-Hispanic females (difference 1), in counties visited by Trump before and after his
first campaign visit (difference 2), using counties he will visit later as controls (difference 3). As described in
section 4.1, month -1 represents a partially-treated month, so we shade both months -1 and 0 to indicate the
onset of treatment. The omitted period is month -3. Specification corresponds to Table A4 column (1).




                                                                                      22
                    Table 1: 2016 Presidential Election and Fertility

                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                            Dem. vs      High vs low     Vote share      Hisp. vs      Hisp. vs        Hisp. vs
                             Rep.         Rep. shift      × shift       non-Hisp.     rural white    evan. white

Treat-3                        -0.031        -0.055           -0.082      -0.050         -0.007         -0.061
                              (0.061)       (0.060)          (0.094)     (0.057)        (0.086)        (0.073)
Treat-2                        -0.012        -0.065           -0.084      -0.065         -0.062         -0.106
                              (0.053)       (0.057)          (0.088)     (0.050)        (0.082)        (0.069)
Treat0                       -0.144**      -0.168***        -0.264***   -0.196***      -0.245***      -0.258***
                              (0.056)       (0.058)          (0.091)     (0.049)        (0.083)        (0.067)
Treat1                        -0.099*      -0.198***        -0.368***   -0.275***      -0.434***      -0.377***
                              (0.059)       (0.062)          (0.087)     (0.056)        (0.089)        (0.074)
Treat2                      -0.179***      -0.289***        -0.421***   -0.318***      -0.513***      -0.433***
                              (0.066)       (0.064)          (0.093)     (0.056)        (0.088)        (0.072)
Treat3                       -0.175**      -0.308***        -0.448***   -0.319***      -0.546***      -0.477***
                              (0.075)       (0.073)          (0.105)     (0.058)        (0.096)        (0.083)

Sum Treat (0 to 3)            -0.597         -0.964          -1.501       -1.107         -1.739         -1.545
p value                        0.005         0.000           0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000

Observations                  19,691        19,691           11,438       39,620        30,947          29,694
R-squared                      0.424        0.425            0.446        0.372          0.306          0.331
County FE                        Y             Y                Y            N             N              N
County × ethnicity FE            N             N                N            Y             Y              Y
Quarter event FE                 Y             Y                Y            Y             Y              Y
N clusters (counties)          2,813         2,813            1,634        2,830         2,830          2,830
 Note: This table reports the estimates depicted in panels A2 to C2 in both Figures 2 and 3. The dependent
 variable is the excess fertility rate. Columns (1) to (3) report interactions between quarters and a Democratic-
 leaning indicator from equation 1. Column (1) compares counties with above-median versus below-median
 Democrat vote shares in the 2012 Presidential election; column (2) counties with above-median versus below-
 median change in Republican vote shares between the 2008 and 2016 Presidential elections; column (3) counties
 with both below-median Democrat vote shares and above-median Republican shifts versus counties where both
 measures are the opposite. Columns (4) to (6) use within county variation, reporting interactions between
 quarters and an indicator for Hispanic ethnicity from equation 2. Column (4) compares Hispanics versus
 non-Hispanics; column (5) versus non-Hispanic whites living in rural counties; column (6) versus non-Hispanic
 whites living in counties with above-median evangelical share. The omitted quarter is -1 (July-September of
 2016). Standard errors are clustered by county.
 *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10% significance level




                                                       23
              Online Appendix for
"Partisan Fertility and Presidential Elections"
       Gordon B. Dahl, Runjing Lu, and William Mullins




                             24
                                                                  Clinton                                             G.W. Bush                                          Obama                                  Trump
                     40




                                                                                        2000 Election                                        2008 Election                                    2016 Election               2020 Election
Republican - Democrat (% positive response)
     0         10    -10  20         30




                                       1993q1       1994q3   1996q1   1997q3   1999q1    2000q3     2002q1   2003q3     2005q1    2006q3   2008q1    2009q3   2011q1   2012q3   2014q1   2015q3    2017q1     2018q3    2020q1    2021q3



                                                  Figure A1: Economic Outlook by Party Affiliation: the Bloomberg Consumer Comfort Index
                                              Note: Survey respondents in the Bloomberg Consumer Comfort Index are asked to rate (i) the national economy, (ii) their personal finances,
                                              and (iii) the buying climate as "Excellent," "Good," "Not so Good," or "Poor." The Index is calculated as the four-week rolling average
                                              fraction of positive responses ("Good" or "Excellent") across the three questions. The figure plots the difference between Republicans and
                                              Democrats, averaged by calendar quarter. The flat lines represent the average level of the index by Presidency. The sample is derived from
                                              1,000 landline and cellular telephone interviews (national random sample), 250 per week, weighted to adjust for probabilities of selection by
                                              household size, telephone use, age, sex, race, education, metro status, and region.
               .25




                                                                                                                              .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .25
                                           Trump presumptive nominee    Election                                                                          Trump presumptive nominee    Election                                                                            Trump presumptive nominee    Election
               .15




                                                                                                                              .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .15
 Excess fertility




                                                                                                                Excess fertility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Excess fertility
           .05




                                                                                                                          .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .05
 -.05




                                                                                                                -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.05
               -.15




                                                                                                                              -.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.15
               -.25




                                                                                                                              -.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.25
                                 2015Apr      2015Oct   2016Apr    2016Oct    2017Apr   2017Oct   2018Apr                                       2015Apr      2015Oct   2016Apr    2016Oct    2017Apr    2017Oct   2018Apr                                       2015Apr       2015Oct   2016Apr    2016Oct    2017Apr   2017Oct   2018Apr

                                                        Democratic                   Republican                                                                    Low Rep. shift                   High Rep. shift                                                         Dem. x Low Rep. shift                    Rep. x High Rep. shift


                                                   A1. By vote share                                                                                       B1. By Republican shift                                                                                   C1. By vote share × Rep. shift
                                            Trump presumptive nominee     Election                                                                         Trump presumptive nominee     Election                                                                           Trump presumptive nominee     Election
               .4




                                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
               .2




                                                                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
 Differential excess fertility




                                                                                                                Differential excess fertility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Differential excess fertility
                       0




                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
              -.2




                                                                                                                             -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.2
    -.4




                                                                                                                   -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.4
               -.6




                                                                                                                              -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.6
               -.8




                                                                                                                              -.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.8
                                 -7   -6      -5   -4   -3   -2  -1      0    1     2   3   4     5   6     7                                   -7   -6      -5   -4   -3   -2  -1      0    1     2    3   4     5   6     7                                   -7    -6      -5   -4   -3   -2  -1      0    1     2    3   4    5   6     7
                                                              Quarters from election                                                                                         Quarters from election                                                                                           Quarters from election



                                                   A2. By vote share                                                                                       B2. By Republican shift                                                                                   C2. By vote share × Rep. shift

                                      Figure A2: 2016 Presidential Election and Fertility in Democratic versus Republican Counties
                                                                            (Longer Horizon)
Note: This figure extends Figure 2 panels A1 to C1 to be between January, 2015 and September 2018, and extends panels A2 to C2 to be between
±7 quarters. The shaded areas, which account for partially treated months (see section 2.3), indicate the periods immediately surrounding the New
Hampshire primary (January-February 2016) and the Presidential election (October-November 2016). See note to Figure 2 for specifications.
                                         Trump presumptive nominee    Election                                                                        Trump presumptive nominee      Election                                                                        Trump presumptive nominee     Election
              .3




                                                                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3
              .15




                                                                                                                           .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .15
 Excess fertility




                                                                                                              Excess fertility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Excess fertility
      0




                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
              -.15




                                                                                                                           -.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.15
              -.3




                                                                                                                           -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.3
                               2015Apr      2015Oct   2016Apr    2016Oct    2017Apr   2017Oct   2018Apr                                     2015Apr      2015Oct   2016Apr      2016Oct    2017Apr   2017Oct   2018Apr                                     2015Apr      2015Oct    2016Apr    2016Oct    2017Apr   2017Oct   2018Apr

                                                      Hispanic                   Non-Hispanic                                                                           Hispanic                Rural white                                                                       Hispanic               Evangelical white


                                    A1. Hispanic vs non-Hispanic                                                                                 B1. Hispanic vs rural white                                                                               C1. Hispanic vs evangelical white
                                          Trump presumptive nominee     Election                                                                       Trump presumptive nominee       Election                                                                       Trump presumptive nominee      Election
              .6




                                                                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
              .3




                                                                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3
 Differential fertility rate




                                                                                                              Differential fertility rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Differential fertility rate
                    0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
      -.3




                                                                                                                   -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.3
              -.6




                                                                                                                           -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.6
              -.9




                                                                                                                           -.9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.9
                               -7   -6      -5   -4   -3   -2  -1      0    1     2   3   4     5   6     7                                 -7   -6      -5   -4   -3     -2  -1      0    1     2   3   4     5   6     7                                 -7   -6      -5   -4    -3   -2  -1      0    1     2   3   4     5   6     7
                                                            Quarters from election                                                                                         Quarters from election                                                                                        Quarters from election



                                    A2. Hispanic vs non-Hispanic                                                                                 B2. Hispanic vs rural white                                                                               C2. Hispanic vs evangelical white

                                            Figure A3: 2016 Presidential Election and Hispanic versus Non-Hispanic Fertility
                                                                               (Longer Horizon)
Note: This figure extends Figure 3 panels A1 to C1 to be between January, 2015 and September, 2018 and extends panels A2 to C2 to be between
±7 quarters. The shaded areas, which account for partially treated months (see section 2.3), indicate the periods immediately surrounding the New
Hampshire primary (January-February 2016) and the Presidential election (October-November 2016). See note to Figure 3 for specifications.
                                   .3             0
                       Differential fertility rate
                     -.6          -.3
                                   -.9




                                                      -3   -2     -1            0           1             2      3
                                                                       Quarters from election

                                                                More polarized                  Less polarized



  Figure A4: 2016 Presidential Election and Fertility in More versus Less
                            Polarized Counties
Note: This figure plots heterogeneous effects (and 95% confidence intervals) of the 2016 Presidential election
on the excess fertility rate among Hispanic versus non-Hispanic fertile females in more versus less polarized
counties. A county is defined as more polarized if the county experienced an above-median level of instrumented
China trade shock between 2000 and 2008 following Autor et al. (2020). The omitted quarter is -1 (July-
September 2016). Specification is described in section 3.2. Coefficients are slightly staggered for visual
clarity.




                                                                             28
                .25




                                                                                                                                            .25
                                                                      Election decided by court                                                                                                Election decided by court
                .15




                                                                                                                                            .15
 Excess fertility




                                                                                                                            Excess fertility
      .05




                                                                                                                                 .05
                -.05




                                                                                                                                            -.05
                -.15




                                                                                                                                            -.15
                                     1999Apr    1999Oct    2000Apr       2000Oct        2001Apr    2001Oct                                              1999Apr        1999Oct      2000Apr        2000Oct       2001Apr       2001Oct

                                                      Democratic                    Republican                                                                         Low evangelical                     High evangelical


                                                    A1. By vote share                                                                                             B1. By evangelical share
                                                                   Election decided by court                                                                                              Election decided by court
                .4




                                                                                                                             .4
                               .2




                                                                                                                                            .2
   Differential excess fertility




                                                                                                                Differential excess fertility
                 0




                                                                                                                              0
 -.2




                                                                                                              -.2
                -.4




                                                                                                                             -.4




                                    -7   -6    -5    -4   -3     -2     -1      0      1       2   3    4                                          -7     -6      -5     -4      -3     -2     -1      0     1        2    3      4
                                                           Quarters from election                                                                                                 Quarters from election



                                                    A2. By vote share                                                                                          B2. By evangelical share

                                                     Figure A5: 2000 Presidential Election and Fertility
Note: This figure plots effects (and 95% confidence intervals) for the 2000 Presidential election. Excess fertility
rates in panels A1 and B1 are normalized to October 2000. The election was decided in December 2000 by
the Supreme Court. As described in section 2.3, November represents a partially-treated month, so we shade
November and December to indicate the onset of treatment. Panel A1 plots the excess fertility rate in counties
with above-median versus below-median Democrat vote shares in the 1996 Presidential election; Panel B1
counties with above-median versus below-median evangelical share. Panels A2 and B2 plot the interactions
between quarters and indicators for Democratic-leaning counties or evangelical counties (equation 1). The
omitted quarter is -1 (August-October 2000). The specification mirrors that in Table 1 column (1).




                                                                                                             29
               .15




                                            Obama presumptive nominee        Election




                                                                                                                                        .15
                                                                                                                                                              Obama presumptive nominee           Election
               0




                                                                                                                                        0
 Excess fertility




                                                                                                                          Excess fertility
     -.15




                                                                                                                              -.15
               -.3




                                                                                                                                        -.3
               -.45




                                                                                                                                        -.45
                                  2007Apr       2007Oct     2008Apr        2008Oct       2009Apr   2009Oct                                          2007Apr         2007Oct      2008Apr        2008Oct          2009Apr       2009Oct

                                                      Democratic                     Republican                                                                                Black               Non-black


                                                    A1. Dem. vs Rep.                                                                                           B1. Black vs non-black
                                               Obama presumptive nominee     Election
               .6




                                                                                                                                                                Obama presumptive nominee       Election
                                                                                                                           .6
               .4




                                                                                                                           .4
 Differential excess fertility




                                                                                                              Differential fertility rate
                       .2




                                                                                                                                     .2
               0




                                                                                                                          0
    -.2




                                                                                                               -.2
               -.4




                                                                                                                           -.4
               -.6




                                                                                                                           -.6




                                 -7   -6       -5    -4    -3     -2     -1      0      1     2    3    4                                      -7     -6       -5     -4      -3     -2     -1      0        1      2      3      4
                                                            Quarters from election                                                                                             Quarters from election


                                                    A2. Dem. vs Rep.                                                                                       B2. Black vs non-black

                                                     Figure A6: 2008 Presidential Election and Fertility
Note: This figure plots effects (and 95% confidence intervals) for the 2008 Presidential election. Fertility
rates in panels A1 and B1 are normalized to November 2007. Obama became the presumptive nominee after
the Iowa Caucus. The shaded areas, which account for partially treated months (see section 2.3), indicate
the periods immediately surrounding the Iowa Caucus (December 2007-January 2008) and the Presidential
election (October-November 2008). Panel A1 plots the excess fertility rate in counties with above-median
versus below-median Democrat vote shares in the 2004 Presidential election; Panel B1 the excess fertility rate
for black versus non-black mothers (within county). Panels A2 and B2 plot the interactions between quarters
and indicators for Democratic-leaning counties (equation 1) and black mothers (equation 2). The omitted
quarter is -4 (October-December 2007). Specifications mirror those in Table 1, columns (1) and (4).




                                                                                                             30
                                      12                10
                    Differential Google searches for Trump
                    0       2       4 -2   6      8




                                                             -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3             4   5   6   7   8   9
                                                                               Weeks from 1st Trump visit



    Figure A7: Google Search Index for "Trump" around Campaign Visits
Note: This figure plots dynamic treatment effects (and 95% confidence intervals) for Trump's first campaign
visit to a Designated Market Area (DMA) on the weekly Google search index for "Trump" relative to DMAs
with later visits. The omitted period is -3.




                                                                                         31
            Table A1: Summary Statistics for 2016 Election

       Panel A: Election sample             Fertility rate      Excess fertility rate
       Race                                 Mean      SD        Mean         SD
       Total                                4.499    0.855      -0.087      0.487
       Hispanic                             5.140    1.461      -0.228      1.037
       African American                     4.612    1.569      -0.012      1.207
       Mexican                              4.701    1.796      -0.148      1.386
       Non-Hispanic                         4.287    0.889      -0.061      0.531
       Non-African American                 4.147    0.910      -0.101      0.513
       Non-Hispanic minority                4.731    1.328      -0.038      0.989
       Non-Hispanic white                   4.263    1.028      -0.067      0.624
       N counties                           2,830    2,830       2,830      2,830

       Panel B: Campaign sample
       Race                                 Mean      SD
       Hispanic                             5.159    1.064
       Non-Hispanic                         4.299    0.649
       Non-Hispanic white                   4.204    0.768
       N counties                            230      230
Notes: The fertility rate corresponds to monthly births conceived per 1,000 women who are
between 15 and 44 years old for each race/ethnicity in a county. The excess fertility rate is
calculated by subtracting the race/ethnicity × county × month-of-year mean using data from
2010 onward. Data in panels A and B cover January 2016 - September 2017 and September
2014 - September 2016, respectively.




                                             32
                               Table A2: Robustness - 2016 Presidential Election and Fertility

                            (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)             (8)           (9)        (10)
                          Dem. vs     H vs L Rep.    Share        HP vs       HP vs       HP vs      Dem. vs Rep.    H vs L Rep.    Mexican      Minority
                           Rep.          shift       x shift     non-HP     rural WH    evan. WH       p40/p60       shift 12-16   vs non-HP     vs WH

Treat-3                      -0.030      -0.055       -0.082      -0.050      -0.007      -0.061          0.011         0.031         0.019       -0.002
                            (0.061)     (0.060)      (0.094)     (0.057)     (0.086)     (0.073)         (0.071)       (0.061)       (0.088)     (0.075)
Treat-2                      -0.012      -0.065       -0.084      -0.065      -0.063      -0.106          0.003         0.000         -0.058      0.078
                            (0.054)     (0.057)      (0.088)     (0.050)     (0.082)     (0.069)         (0.061)       (0.055)       (0.067)     (0.056)
Treat0                     -0.144**    -0.169***    -0.265***   -0.195***   -0.245***   -0.258***       -0.130**      -0.177***     -0.222***     0.042
                            (0.056)     (0.058)      (0.091)     (0.049)     (0.083)     (0.067)         (0.062)       (0.057)       (0.054)     (0.053)
Treat1                       -0.091    -0.197***    -0.343***   -0.272***   -0.459***   -0.387***        -0.121*      -0.227***     -0.334***   -0.170***
                            (0.058)     (0.061)      (0.086)     (0.054)     (0.088)     (0.071)         (0.063)       (0.063)       (0.061)     (0.056)
Treat2                    -0.171***    -0.288***    -0.396***   -0.315***   -0.539***   -0.444***      -0.230***      -0.244***     -0.330***     -0.093
                            (0.064)     (0.063)      (0.092)     (0.053)     (0.085)     (0.068)         (0.069)       (0.068)       (0.063)     (0.061)
Treat3                     -0.166**    -0.307***    -0.423***   -0.316***   -0.572***   -0.487***       -0.183**      -0.314***     -0.354***     -0.042
                            (0.073)     (0.072)      (0.103)     (0.057)     (0.095)     (0.082)         (0.083)       (0.074)       (0.066)     (0.065)

Sum Treat (0 to 3)         -0.572        -0.96        -1.426      -1.099      -1.815      -1.576        -0.664          -0.963        -1.241      -0.263
p value                     0.006        0.000        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000         0.003            0.000         0.000       0.177

Observations               19,684       19,684       11,431      39,606      30,933       29,687        15,750          19,691       39,487       39,620
R-squared                   0.425       0.426         0.448       0.373       0.307        0.333         0.429          0.425        0.357        0.326
County FE                     Y            Y            Y           N           N            N             Y               Y            N            N
County × ethnicity FE         N            N            N           Y           Y            Y             N               N            Y            Y
Quarter event FE              Y            Y            Y           Y           Y            Y             Y               Y            Y            Y
Income & industry share       Y            Y            Y           Y           Y            Y             Y               Y            Y            Y
N clusters (counties)       2,812        2,812        1,633       2,829       2,829        2,829         2,250           2,813        2,830        2,830
  Note: Columns (1) through (6) parallel the specifications in Table 1 but add controls for county income, income squared, and county monthly two-digit
  NAICS employment share. Column (7) categorizes counties as Republican or Democratic-leaning by whether they are below the 40th percentile or
  above the 60th percentile in the 2012 Democrat vote share. Column (8) uses the shift in Republican vote share between 2012-2016 instead of 2008-2016.
  Column (9) replaces Hispanics (HP) as the treatment group with Mexicans, while column (10) compares non-Hispanic minorities versus non-Hispanic
  whites (WH). The omitted quarter is -1 (July-September 2016). Standard errors are clustered by county.
  *** 1%, ** 5%, * 10% significance level
         Table A3: 2016 Presidential Election and Google Searches for
                               "Pregnancy Test"

                                      (1)                     (2)                      (3)
                                  Dem. vs Rep.      High vs low Rep. shift      High vs low Hisp.

          Treat-3                      -3.587                  0.628                    3.322
                                      (3.483)                 (3.114)                 (2.851)
          Treat-2                      -2.514                  -0.226                  -0.155
                                      (2.842)                 (2.925)                 (2.648)
          Treat0                      -5.709*               -7.443***                -6.320**
                                      (2.899)                 (2.818)                 (2.813)
          Treat1                       -3.589                -6.193**                 -5.425*
                                      (3.109)                 (2.683)                 (2.834)
          Treat2                       -1.992                  -2.560                  -2.241
                                      (3.506)                 (3.253)                 (3.235)
          Treat3                       -0.424                  -5.333                  -4.427
                                      (4.146)                 (3.604)                 (3.485)

          Sum Treat (0 to 3)          -11.714                -21.529                  -18.413
          p value                      0.343                  0.048                    0.086

          Observations                 1,435                  1,435                    1,456
          R-squared                    0.490                  0.497                    0.498
          DMA FE                         Y                      Y                        Y
          Quarter event FE               Y                      Y                        Y
          N clusters (DMAs)             201                    201                      203
Note: This table reports the effects of the 2016 Presidential election on Google searches for "pregnancy test."
The dependent variable is the weekly percentage of Google searches taken from a random sample of total
searches and scaled by the highest weekly search rate in the same DMA during the entire extraction period.
Since each extraction is based on a random sample, we use the average Google search rate across 15 extractions
taken between November 2020 and January 2021 as our outcome. Columns (1) through (3) report interactions
between quarters and an indicator for DMAs having above-median Democrat vote shares in the 2012 election,
an indicator for DMAs having an above-median change in Republican vote share from the 2012 to the 2016
election, and an indicator for having above-median Hispanic population percentage, respectively. The omitted
quarter is -1 (July-September 2016). Standard errors are clustered by DMA.
*** 1%, ** 5%, * 10% significance level




                                                      34
        Table A4: Trump Campaign Visits and Relative Hispanic Fertility

                                                      Baseline     Alternative weight
                          Treat-7M                     -0.021             -0.068
                                                      (0.055)            (0.062)
                          Treat-6M                     -0.018             -0.070
                                                      (0.053)            (0.062)
                          Treat-5M                      0.031             0.047
                                                      (0.050)            (0.062)
                          Treat-4M                     -0.040             -0.018
                                                      (0.053)            (0.063)
                          Treat-2M                      0.040             0.042
                                                      (0.051)            (0.058)
                          Treat-1M                     -0.127             -0.108
                                                    (0.048)***          (0.059)*
                          Treat0M                      -0.093             -0.073
                                                      (0.065)            (0.068)
                          Treat1M                      -0.166             -0.154
                                                    (0.056)***         (0.069)**
                          Treat2M                      -0.177             -0.157
                                                     (0.077)**          (0.083)*
                          Treat3M                      -0.060             -0.029
                                                      (0.077)            (0.091)
                          Treat4M                      -0.004             0.009
                                                      (0.083)            (0.087)
                          Treat5M                       0.140             0.123
                                                      (0.100)            (0.110)

                          Avg. Treat(-1 to 5)          -0.069             -0.056
                          p value                       0.203              0.379

                          Observations                129,872             129,872
                          R-squared                    0.412               0.412
                          Outcome mean                 4.540               4.540
                          N clusters (counties)         230                 230
Note: This table presents dynamic event study coefficients that compare fertility between Hispanic and non-
Hispanic females (difference 1), in counties visited by Trump before and after his first campaign visit (difference
2), using counties he will visit later as controls (difference 3). The omitted period is -3. Column (1) uses the
Hispanic female population in treated counties as the aggregation weight, while column (2) uses the total
female population in treated counties. Specification corresponds to Figure 4.
*** 1%, ** 5%, * 10% significance level




                                                        35
