                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EFFECTS OF WELFARE REFORM ON HOUSEHOLD FOOD INSECURITY ACROSS
                            GENERATIONS

                                         Hope Corman
                                       Dhaval M. Dave
                                       Nancy Reichman
                                    Ofira Schwartz-Soicher

                                      Working Paper 29054
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29054


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




This project was supported with a grant from the University of Kentucky Center for Poverty
Research through funding by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service,
subaward number 3200000900-20-215. The opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely
those of the authors and should not be construed as representing the opinions or policies of the
UKCPR, any agency of the Federal Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, Nancy Reichman, and Ofira Schwartz-Soicher. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Welfare Reform on Household Food Insecurity Across Generations
Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, Nancy Reichman, and Ofira Schwartz-Soicher
NBER Working Paper No. 29054
July 2021
JEL No. H53,I14,I3,I38

                                          ABSTRACT

This study estimated the effects of welfare reform in the 1990s, which permanently restructured
and contracted the cash assistance system in the U.S., on food insecurity--a fundamental form of
hardship--of the next generation of households. An implicit goal underlying welfare reform was
the disruption of an assumed intergenerational transmission of disadvantage; however, little is
known about the effects of welfare reform on the well-being of the next generation. Using
intergenerational data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and a variation on a difference-
in-differences framework, this study exploits 3 sources of variation in childhood exposure to
welfare reform: (1) risk of exposure across birth cohorts;(2) variation of exposure within cohorts
because different states implemented welfare reform in different years; and (3) variation between
individuals with the same exposure who were more likely and less likely to rely on welfare. We
found that exposure to welfare reform led to decreases in food insecurity of the next generation of
households, by about 10% for a 5-year increase in exposure, with stronger effects for women,
individuals exposed for longer durations during childhood, individuals exposed in early
childhood (0-5 years), and individuals whose mothers had a high school education (versus less).


Hope Corman                                      Nancy Reichman
Department of Economics                          Rutgers University
Rider University                                 Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
2083 Lawrenceville Road                          Department of Pediatrics
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648                          Child Health Institute of New Jersey
and NBER                                         89 French St., Room 3272
corman@rider.edu                                 New Brunswick, NJ 08903
                                                 reichmne@rutgers.edu
Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University                               Ofira Schwartz-Soicher
Department of Economics                          Princeton University
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                       Donald Stokes Library
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                           Princeton, US 08544
and IZA                                          oschwart@princeton.edu
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
Introduction

        Food insecurity, which the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) defines as a lack of

consistent access to enough food for an active and healthy life (Coleman-Jensen et al., 2020), is a

common form of poverty-related deprivation in the United States and has been associated with many

adverse health outcomes. Specifically, food insecurity has been associated with diabetes, hypertension,

hyperlipidemia, depression, hospitalizations, and all-cause mortality among adults, as well as birth

defects, anemia, cognitive and behavioral problems, and acute and chronic health problems among

children (Gundersen and Ziliak, 2018; Walker et al., 2019; Thomas, Miller and Morrissey, 2019). Female-

headed households with children were almost four times more likely than married-couple households with

children to be food insecure in 2019, with a rate of over 28% for the former group (Coleman-Jensen et al.,

2020). Food insecurity has become even more prevalent since the COVID-19 pandemic, with a projected

increase of 17 million people over the 2018 figure in the U.S. overall (Gundersen et al., 2021), and a

substantial increase among households with children since 2016­2017 (Ahn and Norwood, 2021). Rates

of food insecurity also vary substantially across states, ranging from 6.6% in New Hampshire to 15.7% in

Mississippi in 2017­2019 (Coleman-Jensen, 2020) and geographic and temporal variations in household

food insecurity have been associated with state policies, including those that do not directly target food

insecurity such as the Earned Income Tax Credit, unemployment insurance, and minimum wage (Bartfeld

and Men, 2017).

        The 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) and

state-level reforms in the early 1990s that preceded it (collectively referred to as welfare reform)

represented a major policy shift in the U.S. that aimed to reduce dependence on cash assistance by

imposing work requirements, time limits on assistance, and other conditions. The PRWORA legislation

ended entitlement to welfare benefits under Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and

replaced AFDC with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) block grants to states, which

were granted considerable latitude in establishing eligibility and program rules subject to national

guidelines that mandated work requirements and a 5-year lifetime limit on the receipt of cash assistance.


                                                                                                             3
This new (and currently ongoing) focus on employment and contraction of cash assistance stands in stark

contrast to the human capital focus of the AFDC program that was established in 1960s as part of the War

on Poverty. The Biden administration recently incorporated a third approach into the 2021 American

Rescue Plan by temporarily expanding the current child tax credit for eligible families, making the credit

fully refundable and not tied to earnings from labor, and providing some of the credit through direct

monthly payments--all for year 2021 only. All three approaches have had the same overarching goal

(economic self-sufficiency) but distinctly different strategies (human capital building in the AFDC period,

strong employment incentives implemented starting in the 1990s, and temporary direct cash transfers),

but how best to achieve that goal remains an open question.

        Food security is a fundamental aspect of economic self-sufficiency. The War on Poverty, which

included the implementation of the former AFDC cash assistance program, had largely positive effects on

adults and children (Bailey and Danziger, 2013), but the effects on food insecurity--a vitally important

outcome in its own right and an excellent marker of economic self-sufficiency--are not known because

food insecurity was not defined, measured, and tracked by the USDA until 1996, and a consistent

measure was not available until 1999 (Coleman-Jensen, 2020). The reforms implemented in the 1990s

("welfare reform") have led to large declines in welfare caseloads (e.g., average monthly family welfare

caseloads in the U.S. fell from 5.05 million in 1994 to 1.10 million in 2017--a 78% decrease) (ACF,

2018) and increases in employment of low-skilled women (by as much as 27 percent) (Fang and Keane,

2004). However, large proportions of unmarried mothers, even those who were employed, had trouble

making ends meet and experienced extreme material hardships (hunger, eviction, utility shutoffs, and

homelessness) in the aftermath of welfare reform (Teitler, Reichman and Nepomnyaschy, 2004),

suggesting that the reforms did not make all families better off and may even have caused some

households to become food insecure.

        It is not known whether welfare reform had causal effects on food insecurity, either in the

aggregate or for at-risk groups such as mothers with low job skills or poor health who may be ill-

equipped to cope with the conditions of the work-first regime. A major reason for the lack of evidence


                                                                                                             4
about how welfare reform may have affected food insecurity is that because the USDA did not start

collecting consistent data on food insecurity until 1998, the datasets that could potentially be used to

answer this question only have information on food insecurity amid or after welfare reform

implementation. As such, although there was substantial variation across states in the timing of welfare

reform implementation, there was little observable variation that could help identify causal effects of

welfare reform on food insecurity of households affected by welfare reform. One study used Current

Population Survey data from 1995­1996 and 1998­1999 to estimate effects of welfare reform on food

insecurity using variations in welfare policies specifically relating to eligibility of immigrants and found

that eligibility restrictions increased food insecurity among immigrants (Borjas, 2004).

        Although the methodological barriers to identifying the effects of welfare reform on food

insecurity of households exposed to the reforms are substantial, it is now possible to investigate the

effects of welfare reform on food insecurity of the households of young adults (ages ~19 to ~40 years)

who were exposed to welfare reform as children (these households could include their own young

children), by exploiting variations in age and exposure to welfare reform during childhood. This variation

is driven by the child's birth cohort and when his or her childhood state of residence implemented the new

reforms. This line of research is important not only for understanding the effects of welfare reform on

food insecurity, but also for testing the implicit assumption underlying welfare reform that it would

disrupt the intergenerational persistence of poverty.

        Very little is known about effects of welfare reform on economic self-sufficiency of the next

generation. In this study, we address this gap by estimating the effects of welfare reform on food

insecurity--a fundamental indicator of economic hardship and human deprivation--of the next

generation of households, overall as well as by gender, at different stages of childhood, and for vulnerable

subgroups.

Background

        Aside from the direct effects of welfare reform on welfare caseloads and women's employment

highlighted earlier, quasi-experimental studies have found that welfare reform led to declines in women's


                                                                                                               5
substance abuse (Corman et al., 2013; Kaestner and Tarlov, 2006) and crime (Corman, Dave and

Reichman, 2014) and increases in women's civic participation in the form of voting (Corman, Dave and

Reichman, 2017). Effects on marriage, cohabitation, and non-marital fertility of adult women were mixed

or weak (Ziliak, 2016). Overall, the effects of welfare reform on the women's outcomes that have been

studied suggest that welfare reform increased self-sufficiency. However, the findings of high rates of

material hardship following the implementation of welfare reform (Teitler, Reichman and

Nepomnyaschy, 2004) suggest that these overall effects may mask substantial variation by women's

ability to succeed in the labor market.

        In terms of the next generation, quasi-experimental studies have found that PRWORA led to

decreased high school dropout (reviewed in Dave et al., 2012) and teen fertility (reviewed in Lopoo and

Raissian, 2012), at least in part due to specific provisions regarding school attendance and living

arrangements of minor mothers. The studies of dropout focused on girls, as did those of teen fertility,

although the latter outcome does not cleanly reflect gender-specific behavior. Another recent study found

that welfare reform led to increases in skipping school, damaging property, and fighting among teenage

boys and increases in smoking and drug use among both boys and girls, with larger effects for boys (Dave

et al., 2021); this study built on a very limited and inconclusive literature on effects of welfare reform on

adolescents (Gennetian et al., 2002) and the findings underscore the importance of considering gender-

specific second-generation effects.

        We know of only two studies that investigated the effects of welfare reform on adult economic

outcomes of the next generation because, until recently, the second generation was not old enough to

observe their adult outcomes. However, those individuals are now in their twenties and thirties. Hartley,

Lamarche and Ziliak (2017) found that welfare reform attenuated the association in welfare participation

between mothers and daughters by >50%, with no association for participation in any public assistance

(welfare, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), or Supplemental Security Income).

Vaughn (2021) found that exposure to welfare reform during ages 0­5 years was associated with better

adult outcomes (higher educational attainment, fewer out-of-wedlock pregnancies, and higher likelihood


                                                                                                                6
of marriage), with stronger estimated effects for women than men.

        Both the Hartley et al. and Vaughn studies addressed specific questions: The former focused on

adult women whose mothers had ever received welfare (not necessarily during the daughter's childhood)

and the latter focused on a specific stage of early childhood and did not consider individuals who were

exposed to welfare reform over the age 5. The findings from the Hartley et al. study suggest that welfare

reform did not increase self-sufficiency among women whose mothers had ever received welfare, while

those from the Vaughn study indicate some better human capital outcomes (higher educational

attainment, higher likelihood of marriage) among women exposed to welfare reform in early childhood

but did not assess whether those improvements translated to self-sufficiency. Another contribution of the

Vaughn study is the consideration of differential effects by gender and the focus on a specific age range,

both of which the developmental psychology literature suggests would be important.

        This study contributes to the very small literature on second-generation adult economic outcomes

of welfare reform by providing the first analysis of the intergenerational effects of the reforms on food

insecurity among individuals at risk for having relied on welfare as a child, overall and by gender, age and

duration of exposure, and specific maternal characteristics. The findings by Vaughn (2021) that exposure

to welfare reform as a young child was associated with increased educational attainment and marriage

among young adults, particularly women, suggests that welfare reform could lead to improvements in

material and financial well-being of the next generation of adults as they form their own households.

However, as the new welfare regime also led to high rates of material hardship for some mothers (Teitler,

Reichman and Nepomnyaschy, 2004), it is likely that any net average impact likely conceals

heterogeneity in terms of positive and/or adverse intergenerational effects across these groups of mothers.

In this study, we provide some of the first evidence on how welfare reform impacted a direct measure of

financial and material hardship ­ food insecurity ­ of the next generation of adults and further assess

heterogeneous treatment effects across maternal characteristics and exposure across various stages of

childhood.

Data and measures


                                                                                                             7
         We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), which began in 1968 as a

nationally representative sample of about 5,000 families and follows the original respondents and their

descendants. The study focuses on individual and family demographic and economic factors and

outcomes. Because young adults in the second generations can be linked to their parents, the PSID

includes information about young adults' circumstances both during childhood and when they became

adults. The PSID is particularly well-suited for our analysis for several reasons: (1) It spans the time

period before, during, and post-welfare reform. (2) It includes detailed information on family

circumstances when young adults were children, as well as during their adulthood. (3) State identifiers are

available at all stages of the adult's observed life cycle and for their mothers, allowing the researcher to

merge measures of economic and policy environments at all relevant time points. (4) The USDA

Household Food Security module is available for six survey waves during the post-welfare reform era.

         We focus our analyses on adults born in 1975­1999 for two reasons. 1 First, as discussed below,

some of these adults were never exposed to the new welfare policy regime as children, some were

exposed for part of their childhood, and some were exposed to the reforms over their entire childhood.

Second, these cohorts are old enough to allow us to observe their food security outcomes as adults.

Characterizing welfare reform

         Welfare reform was implemented in two general phases. The first phase consisted of pre-

PRWORA waivers to AFDC. Although not federally mandated, pre-PRWORA waivers were

implemented in most states by the time the federal PRWORA was enacted in 1996 (Schoeni and Blank,

2000). The second phase of welfare reform came with the enactment of PRWORA. States were required

to submit plans for their TANF programs to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and,

once approved as meeting federal guidelines, implement them.


1
  We show later that our estimates are not sensitive to further restricting our sample to cohorts who were exposed for
at least some of their childhood. For our main analyses, we focus on adults ages 18 and older and do not restrict to
older adults since a non-negligible fraction of young adults (ages 18­23) have formed their own separate households
(30.4% based on the March 2019 CPS; 29.4% in our PSID target sample). In supplementary analyses (reported in
the Appendix), we show that our estimates or conclusions are not materially changed if we restrict to adults ages
24+ or specifically restrict to adults who are household heads and their spouses.


                                                                                                                    8
        Appendix Table 1 presents the implementation dates for both AFDC waivers and TANF for all

states in the U.S. The waivers were introduced in 29 states over a period of 53 months, and TANF was

implemented in all states over a period of 17 months between September 1996 (Massachusetts, Michigan,

and Vermont) and January 1998 (California). Combining both waivers and TANF, states implemented

any welfare reform over a period of 64 months, spanning from October 1992 (MI and NJ being the

earliest states to implement waivers) through January 1998 (CA being the last state to implement TANF).

In our analyses, we use a single indicator for any welfare reform (AFDC waiver or TANF) in a given a

month/year in the respondent's state of residence in childhood. 2

Food insecurity

        During the survey years 1999, 2001, 2003, 2015, 2017, and 2019 the PSID included the USDA

Household Food Security module, which was developed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and

provides the official measures of food insecurity in the U.S. The module consists of 18 questions about

food hardship during the past year and the PSID categorizes the level of food security based on the

responses to those questions (Appendix Table 2 includes the module and a description of the scoring). A

score of 1 or 2 indicates marginal food security and a score of 3 or more indicates low or very low food

security. We consider two measures of food insecurity, a broad measure of marginal, low, or very low

food security (any positive numerical score) and a narrower measure of low or very low food security (a

score of 3 or more).

Sample and timeline

        Figure 1 presents a simplified timeline of maternal exposure to welfare reform, childhood

exposure to welfare reform, and adult food security outcomes for the birth cohorts studied. For simplicity

of presentation in the figure, we combined the birth cohorts into four groups: (1) Individuals born

between 1975 and 1979, who were exposed to welfare reform for only a few years or not at all when they

were children. This group reached adulthood either before any welfare reform was implemented at all or


22
  In supplementary analyses, we also separately assess effects of exposure to the early AFDC waivers and TANF,
and were not able to reject the null of similar effects across these two phases of the reforms.


                                                                                                                 9
during one of the years that AFDC waivers were implemented in some but not all states and not in the

individual's childhood state of residence. (2) Individuals born between 1980 and 1985, who were exposed

to welfare reform for up to 10 years before reaching adulthood (age 18). This group was generally

exposed to welfare reform for less than half of their childhood. (3) Individuals born between 1986 and

1992, who were generally exposed to welfare reform for at least half their childhood. (4) Individuals born

between 1993 and 1999, who were exposed to welfare reform for most (or all) of their childhood.

        The shaded area represents the rollout of welfare reform between late 1992 and 1997; "partial"

refers to the period before which every single state had implemented welfare reform (waiver or TANF)

and "full" refers to the period when all states had implemented welfare reform. For most of the

individuals in our sample, maternal (and by inference, their childhood) exposure to welfare reform started

on the date that welfare reform was implemented in their childhood state of residence. However, for those

born after welfare reform was implemented in their state, we use their date of birth as the starting point

for maternal (and by inference, childhood) exposure to welfare reform.

        Also shown are the ranges of dates that we observe each of the four cohorts as young adults and

the specific years that food insecurity outcomes are available in the PSID. For the oldest cohort (those

born between 1975 and 1979), we observe food insecurity outcomes at six timepoints (1999, 2001, 2003,

2015, 2017, and 2017), whereas for the youngest cohort (those born between 1993 and 1999), we observe

food insecurity outcomes at 2 or 3 time points depending on the individual's exact year of birth.

Methods

        Our main analyses are based on a quasi-experimental research design, a cohort-based variant on a

difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD) setup. It leverages variation in childhood exposure to

welfare reform across cohorts and compares target and comparison groups within differentially exposed

cohorts, to estimate the intergenerational effects of childhood exposure to welfare reform on household

food insecurity of young adults. Consider the following reduced-form baseline specification that directly

links food insecurity in the adult's household adult to their exposure to welfare reform during childhood:




                                                                                                             10
                                                   Equation 1

2
 = | 0-17 + | 0-17   ,<  +

2   1
  + ,<  +   + = 5-17   + ,< +  +  +  ,< 

 +  =5  ,<    +   ,< 
  + =5  ,<     ,<  + 


            The outcome, FI, captures household food insecurity measured in year t, for the ith young adult

(2nd-generation), born in year b to mother m (1st-generation) who resided in state s. Exposure to welfare

reform is defined as the number of years that adult i was exposed to the new welfare policy regime as a

child (ages 0-17). We control for vectors of characteristics of young adults (X) and their mothers (M).

Additionally, to account for potential confounding of individuals' adult and childhood exposures, we

include a rich set of time-varying state factors (Z) measured at period t (concurrent with the young adult

food insecurity outcomes) and at various points over childhood (specifically, when the young adult was

age 5, 11, and 17 years old). 3 Models further include fixed effects for the period (Year), childhood state

of residence (State), and single birth year cohort (Cohort). We estimate all models using Ordinary Least

Squares (linear probability models) and report standard errors adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the

error term () across and within individuals in their current residential state (i.e., clustered at the state

level). 4

            Identifying variation in the degree of childhood exposure to welfare reform comes from a

combination of the young adult's birth cohort and when their childhood state of residence implemented

welfare reform.


3
  States policies during childhood include the unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita,
minimum wage, refundable Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and generosity of EITC. Our estimates are fully
robust to broadening the set of these controls to additional or different ages (e.g., ages 0, 2, 7, 14). In all
specifications, we also separately control for the unemployment rate in the state of residence when the adult was
aged 18, 19, 20, 21, and 22 in order to account for the persistent adverse effects of graduating in a bad economy
(Kahn, 2010; Maclean, 2013; von Wachter, 2020). State policies and economic conditions during year of young
adult interview include: unemployment rate, personal income per capita, poverty rate, indicators for the SNAP
policy index, percent of low-income children who are uninsured, refundable EITC, EITC rate, minimum wage, log
of the number of Medicaid beneficiaries, and log population.
4
  Our estimates are not sensitive to estimation via logit or probit regression.


                                                                                                                11
         The population of interest is young adults whose mothers were at risk of relying on public

assistance, whether or not their childhood household actually relied on welfare. Traditionally, the welfare

caseload has consisted primarily of low-educated unmarried mothers (Bitler and Hoynes, 2010). This at-

risk population is the target group of mothers for whom welfare reform would be expected to have the

largest effects on employment, income, and other household conditions and potentially the largest effects

(if any exist) on their children as they transition into adulthood. While we control for a large set of

confounding childhood exposures to economic conditions and other policies, the possibility of omitted

cohort-specific influences remains. Specifically, childhood exposure to welfare reform (Exposure) may be

correlated with unobserved state-specific cohort trends.

         We address this issue by considering a comparison group ­ adults with mothers who are similar

in many ways to the target group but unlikely to participate in public cash assistance programs and

therefore not expected to be affected by welfare reform policies. In Equation 1 above, Target represents a

dichotomous indicator for young adults whose mothers were in the target group (i.e., had mothers who

were unmarried with at most a high school education and thus at risk of relying on welfare) versus young

adults whose mothers were in the comparison group (and thus not at risk of relying on welfare). As

marriage generally precludes eligibility for cash assistance, we follow the convention in the welfare

reform literature and consider adults with low-educated mothers who were married as our primary

comparison group. 5 In supplementary analyses, we assess sensitivity to an alternate comparison group

that is also used in the literature: adults whose mothers were unmarried and had more than a high school

education, as well as a third comparison group that combines the two (e.g., includes both unmarried




5
  When classifying young adults into target and comparison groups, we consider their mother's marital status when
the young adult was born if that took place after welfare reform was implemented in their mother's state of
residence, or her marital status at the time welfare reform was implemented if the young adult was born prior to the
implementation of welfare reform in the mother's state of residence. This fixed definition of marital status at
baseline levels bypasses compositional selection issues that could arise if the definition of the mother's marital
status was time-varying over the childhood exposure period. Specifically, if marital status was affected by welfare
reform (although evidence on that is mixed; see Ziliak, 2016), then treatment assignment would be endogenous
since welfare reform would affect assignment into target and comparison groups and thus bias the estimated
treatment effects.


                                                                                                                  12
mothers with more than a high school education and low-educated married mothers). 6

        The parameter of interest is , which captures the net effects of an additional year of exposure to

welfare reform during childhood on young adult food insecurity, for those growing up with an unmarried

low-educated mother (target group) relative to similar individuals from the same cohort and state who

grew up in households that were generally ineligible for welfare and thus would not be impacted by the

new policy regime (comparison group).

        We extend the baseline specification in various ways to address challenges inherent in our

methodology. First, we assess the sensitivity of our estimates to progressively more inclusive controls for

unobserved state-specific birth cohort trends. We include, in turn: parametric controls for state-specific

linear cohort trends  ,<  ; state-specific 5-year birth cohort fixed effects

 =5  ,<   ; and state-specific single-year birth cohort fixed effects

  ,<   . Note that this last specification would normally not be feasible in analyses

that rely solely on policy variation across cohorts. However, an additional source of identifying variation

­ that between target and comparison groups ­ allows us to flexibly account for all measured and

unmeasured state-specific heterogeneity across cohorts by saturating the models with fixed effects at the

level of the state by single-year birth cohort. We also gauge the sensitivity of our estimates to allowing

the state-specific-cohort trends to differ across target and comparison groups, flexibly across five-year

cohort sets, by interacting the 5-year birth cohort fixed effects with the target indicator:

 =5  ,<     ,< .

        Second, we relax the imposed linearity in Equation 1 on the marginal effects of childhood

exposure to welfare reform by assessing non-linear effects of the duration of exposure as well as

heterogeneity based on the child's age of exposure. Third, we evaluate differential treatment effects

across adult and maternal characteristics since the average effect identified above may mask important


6
  The factors (marital status, educational attainment) used to define the target and comparison groups are subsumed
in the vector of controls for maternal characteristics (vector M in Equation 1); as such, a separate indicator
differentiating the target and comparison groups is not needed in Equation 1.


                                                                                                                 13
heterogeneity in how welfare reform affected families in different situations. We assess heterogeneous

effects across gender, because there is evidence that boys and girls respond differently to changes in

household circumstances during childhood (Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Kling, Ludwig and Katz, 2005),

including welfare reform (Dave et al., 2021). We also evaluate heterogeneity based on maternal human

capital. While the target group consists of low-educated (at most possessing a high school degree)

unmarried mothers, the subgroup of mothers who did not complete high school would have been

particularly disadvantaged in the labor market and may not have been well-equipped to meet the work

requirements under the new welfare regime. Finally, we implement several additional robustness checks,

including alternate counterfactuals and a falsification check by estimating pseudo-treatment effects of

childhood exposure to welfare reform for a group for which we would not plausibly expect any

substantial impact ­ young adults whose mothers were married and relatively highly educated.

Results

Sample characteristics

          Table 1 presents weighted sample characteristics of the young adults in the sample. The full

sample (~13,300 observations) consists of person/years observations of individuals born between 1975

and 1999 who were at least 18 years old in at least one of the years food security was assessed in the

PSID (1999, 2001, 2003, 2015, 2017 and 2019) and whose mothers who were at least 18 years old and

had non-missing marital status and education just prior to WR implementation in their childhood state of

residence. 7 The target group consists of those individuals whose mothers were unmarried and had at most

a high school education. The primary comparison group consists of those individuals whose mothers were

married and had at most a high school education.

          In adulthood, about 10% of the full sample and 13% of the comparison group experienced low or

very low food security, compared to about one quarter of the target group. Less than a quarter of both the




7
 There are ~3,500 unique individuals in the full sample, and ~1,800 individuals in our main analysis sample of
~6950.


                                                                                                                 14
full sample and the comparison group experienced marginal, low, or very low food security, compared to

40% of the target group. Thus, the target group was more disadvantaged in adulthood than the comparison

group and the comparison group was somewhat more disadvantaged than the full sample. Overall, about

11% of the full sample of young adults (and about 10% of the target group) was not exposed to welfare

reform as children, about 24% was exposed between one and four years during their childhood, about

38% was exposed between five and twelve years, and over 27% was exposed for all or most of childhood

(a period of 13­18 years). Almost 78% of the young adult observations took place during the last three

survey waves--2015, 2017 and 2019. The mean age at which we observed the young adults was 29 years.

        Appendix Table 3 presents characteristics of the mothers of the young adults in our sample.

Education and marital status were measured the year prior to welfare reform implementation, and

maternal age was measured both in 1999 and when the young adult was born. By design, all of the

mothers in the target group were unmarried, while all of the comparison group mothers were married.

Mothers in the target group were more likely to be Black and less likely to have completed high school

than mothers in the comparison group and (even more so, in both cases) than mothers in the full sample,

indicating that the target group is particularly disadvantaged and thus at high risk of relying on public

assistance.

Main analyses

        We present baseline estimates from Equation 1 in Table 2, separately for the broader and

narrower measures of food insecurity, in Panels A and B respectively. Across all specifications reported

in the top panel, we find consistent evidence that childhood exposure to welfare reform significantly

reduced the likelihood of food insecurity (marginal, low, or very low food security) among adults in the

target group relative to the comparison group. Specifically, the estimate from the most parsimonious

specification (model 1) indicates that an additional year of exposure to welfare reform during childhood

lowered the probability of marginal, low, or very low food security by about 0.8 percentage points.

Controlling for state policies and economic conditions in the adult's childhood state of residence,




                                                                                                            15
measured at various ages during their childhood, does not materially alter this treatment effect (model 2). 8

         The treatment effects estimated in models (1) and (2) are identified off of two key sources of

variation, differences in ages adults were when their childhood states implemented welfare reform and

differences in trends across the target and comparison groups within equally exposed cohorts in a given

state. The next set of models progressively adds more inclusive controls for potentially confounding

trends, and in the process evaluates the identifying assumptions and assesses robustness to dampening or

completely switching off alternate sources of variation. Models (3) and (4) add parametric and non-

parametric controls for unobserved state-specific cohort trends and model (6) is fully saturated with a set

of state-cohort fixed effects, thereby controlling for all measured and unmeasured differential cohort

trends across each state. 9 These models rely less on the variation in exposure across cohorts, and more on

the variation in trends within similarly exposed cohorts across the target and comparison groups.

Alternately, model (5) allows the unobserved state-specific cohort trends, across 5-year cohort groups, to

differ between the target and comparison groups. Given that the target group is somewhat more

disadvantaged at baseline than the control group (Table 1), it is important to assess whether the treatment

effects reflect differential trends across these groups. In controlling for these differential trends in model

(5), we are relying less on the comparison group for identification and relatively more on the variation in

exposure due to age cohort and when states implemented the reforms.

         While more saturated fixed effects and trend controls restrict the identifying variation and

somewhat reduce precision (models 5 and 6), it is validating that the estimated treatment effects are not

materially altered. With the average adult in the target group exposed to the new welfare regime for

approximately eight years (mean exposure = 8.1 years) over his or her childhood, the coefficient

magnitudes across these models imply that this mean level of exposure lowered food insecurity by

between 6.2 ­ 8.4 percentage points (or 15.3 ­ 20.8 percent relative to the mean for the target group).


8
  Estimates are also not sensitive to separately controlling for fixed effects for the adult's current state of residence
(see Appendix Table 4).
9
  In the saturated model the main effect of Exposure, shown in Equation 1, would drop out since it is perfectly
collinear with the state-cohort fixed effects.


                                                                                                                        16
         Panel B reports estimates for the stricter measure of food insecurity--low or very low food

security. Though less precisely estimated (the estimates are not uniformly statistically significant), the

estimated effects are statistically significant in four out of the six specifications, similar across

specifications, and consistent with childhood exposure to welfare reform resulting in an improvement in

the adult household's circumstances, as proxied by a reduction in low or very low food security. The

effect magnitudes, evaluated at the mean level of exposure and relative to the outcome mean for the target

group, suggest an improvement on the order of 13.7 to 19.9 percent.

         Prior work has found that food insecurity is highly elastic with income. In a review of the

literature on the economics of food insecurity, Gundersen et al. (2011) found that low income is

associated with food insecurity; for example, about 35% of households with an income poverty ratio

below one experience food insecurity (low or very low), compared to 20% of households with an income

poverty ratio below two, and 10% with a ratio below three, suggesting a very steep gradient with respect

to income. It was also noted that average income over multiple years was an even better predictor of food

insecurity than current year income, and that liquid assets were protective against food insecurity. This

suggests that even small accumulating changes in household circumstances for the first generation

(mother exposed to welfare reform) can lead to meaningful changes for the next generation. 10

Duration and timing of exposure

         Estimates from Table 2, based on Equation 1, linearized the effects of each additional year of

childhood exposure to welfare reform. We relax this linearity assumption and explore effects of varying

levels of exposure duration in Panel A of Table 3. Reported estimates are relative to adults with zero


10
   Assuming a causal link, the income elasticity of food insecurity (among low-income households) implied by this
gradient is between -0.4 and -1.0. Thus, if household income is the sole channel through which welfare reform
impacts food insecurity of the next generation, extrapolating from this income effect would imply that an increase in
average household income over the childhood years of at least 15-20 percent could generate gains in food security of
the magnitudes that we observe for the average exposed adult. There are other indirect channels as well through
which maternal exposure to welfare reform could produce gains among their children; for instance, as Vaughn
(2021) finds, at-risk children exposed to welfare reform over the prenatal period and first five years of their
childhood are on average 29 percent more likely to complete college and 35 percent more likely to be married, as
well less likely to have children out of wedlock, with stronger effects realized among girls. All of these mechanisms
would be predicted to reduce food insecurity through their effects on income as well as directly through other
positive effects of human capital acquisition on health, health behaviors, and well-being.


                                                                                                                  17
years of exposure to welfare reform. For the broader measure of food insecurity (reported in models 1 and

2), significant welfare-reform associated improvements materialize for adults who were exposed longest,

for at least 13 years of their childhood ­ on average by about 13.6 to 15.5 percentage points. 11 For adults

exposed minimally between 1­4 years, or even exposed for longer amounts between 5­12 years, there are

no economically or statistically significant welfare-reform associated improvements when considering the

broader measure of food insecurity. When we turn to the stricter and narrower measure of food insecurity

in models 3 and 4, we find a similar pattern. The magnitudes are non-trivial, suggesting that those

exposed to welfare reform the longest experienced an improvement by about 6 to 8 percentage points,

though only the latter estimate is marginally significant.

         Models reported in Panel B attempt to parse out differential effects of exposure based on the age

of the child when his/her mother was initially exposed to welfare reform. Doing so allows us to

investigate the extent to which certain periods of child development are more or less sensitive to changes

in household circumstances induced by welfare reform (Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Vaughn, 2021).

Complicating this endeavor is that age of exposure and duration of exposure over the childhood period are

perfectly correlated, making it impossible to fully disentangle the separate effects of age and duration of

exposure. To address this challenge, we estimated regression splines that allowed the marginal effect of

each additional year of exposure to differ depending on the age range of the child when he/she was

exposed. These estimates suggest that children who were relatively young (ages 0­5 years) when their

mothers were exposed to welfare reform experienced the strongest declines in food insecurity as adults;

each additional year of exposure resulted in an improvement in the broader measure of food insecurity for

this group by between 0.8 and 0.9 percentage points, and an improvement in the stricter measure by

between 0.5 and 0.6 percent points. In contrast, additional years of exposure had no significant or

meaningful effects if the children were older than age 5 when their state implemented welfare reform.

         In summary, the evidence from Table 3 underscores two complementary points. First,


11
   Among this group that was exposed the longest, the effect magnitude is largely similar to that derived from Table
2, for an additional year of exposure multiplied by 15 (midpoint of exposure between 13­18 years).


                                                                                                                  18
improvements in food insecurity associated with welfare reform were strongest for adults in the target

group that had the longest childhood exposure. Second, the effects are also largest for, and largely driven

by, those who were exposed at very early ages, underscoring the importance of early life circumstances in

determining later adult outcomes.

Heterogeneity

        We further explore heterogeneity in the treatment effects across gender (Table 4) and across

maternal educational attainment (Table 5). In light of our prior discussion and work that has found some

evidence that the intergenerational effects of welfare reform (at least on adolescents; see Dave et al. 2021)

are gender-specific, it is plausible to expect that men and women may have responded differently to

changes in household circumstances due to maternal exposure to the new welfare rules. Estimates

reported in Table 4 consistently show stronger welfare reform-associated improvements in food security

for adult women relative to adult men, especially for the more intense measure of food insecurity

(low/very low food insecurity, reported in models 4-6), for which there were no significant improvements

for men (thus, all of the overall improvement was for women). These gender patterns are consistent with

previous work that found stronger unfavorable effects of welfare reform on delinquent behaviors among

male adolescents relative to female adolescents (Dave et al., 2021) and stronger effects on educational

attainment for second-generation adult females than for second-generation adult males (Vaughn, 2021).

        While adults in the target group, by definition, grew up in households with (unmarried) low-

educated mothers, it is possible that mothers who were particularly disadvantaged in the labor market due

to especially low levels of human capital may have fared quite differently under the more restrictive

welfare rules and that this could have spilled over into differential effects on their children as they

transitioned into adulthood. Estimates in Table 5 broadly indicate that exposure to welfare reform during

childhood had little beneficial effects on food security for adults whose mothers had less than a high

school education; the overall improvements in food insecurity that we found appear to accrue to the adult

children of mothers who had relatively higher levels of human capital, as proxied by having a high school

diploma.


                                                                                                          19
Robustness checks

        We conduct several additional checks to verify that our estimated treatment effects are robust to

alternate specifications and samples and to more generally assess their plausibility. Our sample for the

main analyses was limited to adults ages 18 and older. Some of these adults may still be residing with

their mothers or part of extended households headed by other family members, in which case the

estimated effects on food insecurity would be more reflective of the circumstances of other household

adult heads rather than the sample adult's own circumstances. In Appendix Table 5, we restrict our

sample specifically to adults who are household heads or partners of heads. These estimates should be

interpreted with care since household formation is potentially endogenous to childhood exposure to

welfare reform, which was why we did not restrict the sample this way for our primary analyses.

Alternately, in Appendix Table 6, we exclude the very young adults from the sample, focusing on older

adults ages 24+, a group more likely to have formed their own households. 12 It is validating that we find

effect magnitudes were very similar to those in our main analyses across both of these sample restrictions.

        Our main analyses were based on cohorts born between 1975 and 1999, which include adults who

were never exposed partially exposed, and fully exposed to welfare reform during childhood. Including

the earlier never-exposed cohorts can be important for fitting cohort-specific trends. In Appendix Table 7,

we assess the robustness of the estimates to relying on variation in exposure only among ever-exposed

cohorts ­ those born between 1980­1999; every adult in these birth cohorts had some exposure to welfare

reform during childhood. Our results and conclusions are not materially changed from excluding the

never-exposed adults.

        We present estimates based on an alternate comparison group (unmarried mothers with more than

a high school education), as well as a combination of that comparison and our original comparison group

(which was low-educated married mothers) in Appendix Table 8. That is, the third comparison group


12
  Using data from the March 2019 Current Population Survey, we found that 64% of adults aged 24 were living in
households without adult relatives. This percentage is similar to that in our PSID analysis sample in which about
62% of 24-year-old adults whose mothers had a high school degree or less were living in households without adult
relatives.


                                                                                                                20
includes both unmarried mothers with more than a high school education and low-educated married

mothers. Our estimates are insensitive to these alternative comparison groups.

        We also estimated effects for adults whose mothers were married and had higher educational

attainment as a placebo check, as it would not be plausible to expect substantive or significant effects of

childhood exposure to welfare reform for this group. If there were significant effects, it would point to

spurious time-varying cohort trends. The treatment effects in these models are statistically insignificant,

with magnitudes that are small and close to zero (shown in Table 6), instilling a degree of confidence in

our research design.

        Finally, potential biases have been recently recognized in the standard two-way fixed effects

(TWFE) model in the presence of staggered treatment adoption and treatment effect heterogeneity

(Goodman-Bacon, 2021; Sun and Abraham, 2020; Callaway and Sant'Anna, 2020). We note that our

research design is not the standard TWFE approach and that we are not identifying the dynamic effects of

policy in calendar or relative time ­ two issues which are at the center of this emerging literature. Our

interest is in identifying the intergenerational life cycle effects of mothers' exposure, when their children

were young, on their children (at a point in time) as young adults. Nevertheless, we draw on this literature

to ensure that our estimates are not contaminated by similar biases. Specifically, the bias in the TWFE

model largely arises due to a problematic use of earlier-treated units as a counterfactual for later-treated

units when there is treatment effect heterogeneity. Comparison of the treated units (earlier-treated or later-

treated) with "never-treated" is not problematic (Goodman-Bacon, 2021), even with dynamic treatment

effects. Drawing on this insight and applying it to our approach, we assess robustness to using only the

never-exposed individuals as a counterfactual for each separate treatment block of cohorts defined

according to the duration of their exposure (see Appendix Table 9). For example, the first column

presents estimates from Equation 1, but for young adults who were exposed to welfare reform as children

for 1­3 years versus those adults who were never exposed to welfare reform as children. Each subsequent

column varies the treatment group, but keeps the counterfactual fixed to the never-exposed young adults.

All of these models bypass counterfactual comparisons within ever-exposed adults (for example, they do


                                                                                                               21
not compare more vs. less exposed young adults, which could be problematic). Sample sizes drop

considerably as expected. Nevertheless, it is reassuring that our earlier results and patterns continue to be

reflected in these models. Similar to the estimates presented in Table 3, young adults who were exposed

to welfare reform during most of their childhood (13­18 years) experienced significant reductions in their

households' food insecurity. For adults who were minimally exposed, the estimates suggest some

improvement in food security, but the magnitudes are much smaller and not statistically significant.

Conclusion

        This study estimated the effects of welfare reform in the 1990s, which permanently restructured

and contracted the cash assistance system in the U.S., on food insecurity--a fundamental form of

hardship--of the next generation of young adults. We found that longer exposure to welfare reform led to

decreases in food insecurity of the next generation of households, by about 10% for a 5-year increase in

exposure, with stronger effects for women, individuals exposed at least 13 years, individuals exposed in

early childhood (0­5 years), and individuals whose mothers had completed high school (versus less than

high school). These results are consistent with, and complement, those of Vaughn (2021), who found that

early childhood exposure to welfare reform led to higher educational attainment and a higher likelihood

of being married in young adults up to age 28, particularly for women. That study, which also used data

from the PSID, suggests potential mechanisms underlying our findings for food insecurity--education

and marriage. Future research should explicitly model these aspects of human capital as potential

mediators.

        While welfare reform led to an overall improvement in food security of the next generation of

adults, it is important to place the findings in context. We investigated one key indicator of material

hardship (or conversely, well-being), but the findings may not translate to other forms of hardship such as

housing instability and inadequate medical care. In addition, the findings highlight that the improvements

in food security associated with welfare reform were not uniform across the relevant population. Notably,

men did not fare as well as women and young adults with very low educated mothers (less than high

school) did not experience improvements in food security as a result of welfare reform. It is important to


                                                                                                           22
take such heterogeneity into account when making policy decisions to continue or modify the cash

assistance system in the U.S.




                                                                                                   23
References

Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2018.
       Compiled by authors from annual caseload reports available at:
       https://www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/programs/tanf/data-reports

Ahn, S., Norwood, F. B. 2021. Measuring food insecurity during the Covid19 pandemic of spring
        2020. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 43(1), 162­168.

Bartfeld, J., Men, F. 2017. Food insecurity among households with children: the role of the state
        economic and policy context. Social Service Review, 91(4), 691­732.

Bailey, M., Danziger, S. 2013. Legacies of the War on Poverty. The National Poverty Center Series on
        Poverty and Public Policy. Published by the Russell Sage Foundation.
        https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7758/9781610448147

Bertrand, M., Pan, J. 2013. The trouble with boys: Social influences and the gender gap in disruptive
        behavior. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), 2013, 32­64.

Bitler, M.P., Hoynes, H.W. 2010. The state of social safety net in the post-welfare reform era. Brookings
         Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Program, The Brookings Institution, 41(2), 71­
         147.

Borjas, G.J. 2004. Food insecurity and public assistance. Journal of Public Economics, 88(7­8), 1421­
        1443.

Callaway, B., Sant'Anna, P. H. 2020. Difference-in-differences with multiple time periods. Journal of
       Econometrics. Available online ahead of press:
       https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304407620303948

Coleman-Jensen, A., Rabbitt, M.P., Gregory, C.A., Singh, A. 2020. Household Food Security in the
      United States in 2019, ERR-275, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.

Corman, H., Dave, D.M., Reichman, N.E., 2014. Effects of welfare reform on women's
      crime. International Review of Law and Economics, 40, 1­14.

Corman, H., Dave, D.M., Reichman, N.E. 2017. Effects of welfare reform on women's voting
      participation. Economic Inquiry, 55(3), 1430­1451.

Corman, H., Dave, D.M., Reichman, N.E., Das, D. 2013. Effects of welfare reform on illicit drug use of
      adult women. Economic Inquiry, 51, 653­674.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. 2007. The technology of skill formation. American Economic Review, 97(2), 31­
       47.

Dave, D. M., Reichman, N. E., Corman, H., 2012. Effects of welfare reform on education acquisition on
       young adult women. Journal of Labor Research, 33(2), 251­282.

Dave, D., Corman, H., Kalil, A., Schwartz-Soicher, O., Reichman, N.E. 2021. Intergenerational effects of
       welfare reform: adolescent delinquent and risky behaviors. Economic Inquiry 59(1), 199­216.


                                                                                                        24
Fang, H., Keane, M. 2004. Assessing the impact of welfare reform on single mothers. Brookings Papers
       on Economic Activity. The Brookings Institution: Washington DC. Accessed on July 15, 2021 at:
       https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/assessing-the-impact-of-welfare-reform-on-single-
       mothers/

Gennetian, L.A., Duncan, G.J., Knox, V.W., Vargas, W.G., Clark-Kauffman, E., London, A.S. 2002.
       How Welfare and Work Policies for Parents Affect Adolescents: A Synthesis of Research.
       Accessed on July 15, 2021 at: http://www.mdrc.org/publication/how-welfare-and-work-policies-
       parents-affect-adolescents.

Goodman-Bacon, A. 2021. Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing. Journal of
      Econometrics. Available online ahead of press:
      https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0304407621001445

Gundersen, C., Hake, M., Dewey, A., Engelhard, E. 2021. Food insecurity during COVID19. Applied
       Economic Perspectives and Policy, 43(1), 153­161.

Gundersen, C., Kreider, B., Pepper, J. 2011. The economics of food insecurity in the United
       States. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 33(3), 281­303.

Gundersen, C., Ziliak, J.P. 2018. Food insecurity research in the United States: Where we have been and
       where we need to go. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 40(1), 119­135.

Hartley, R.P., Lamarche, C., Ziliak, J.P. 2017. Welfare reform and the intergenerational transmission of
        dependence. Revised. University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research Discussion Paper
        Series, DP2016-01. University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research.

Kahn, L.B., 2010. The long­term labor market consequences of graduating from college in a bad
       economy. Labour Economics, 17(2), 303­316.

Kaestner, R., Tarlov, E. 2006. Changes in the welfare caseload and the health of low-educated
       Mothers. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25(3), 623­643.

Kling, J.R., Ludwig, J., Katz, L.F. 2005. Neighborhood effects on crime for female and male youth:
        Evidence from a randomized housing voucher experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        120(1), 87­130.

Lopoo, L.M, Raissian, K.M. 2012. Natalist policies in the United States. Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management, 31(4), 905­946.

Maclean, J.C., 2013. The health effects of leaving school in a bad economy. Journal of Health
       Economics, 32(5), 951­964.

Schoeni, R.F., Blank, RM. 2000. What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on welfare
       participation, employment, income, poverty, and family structure. National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper #7627




                                                                                                           25
Sun, L., Abraham, S. 2020. Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies with heterogeneous
        treatment effects. Journal of Econometrics. Available online ahead of press:
        https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S030440762030378X

Teitler, J., Reichman, N.E., Nepomnyaschy, L. 2004. Sources of support, child care, and hardship among
         unwed mothers, 1999­2001. Social Service Review, 78(1), 125­148.

Thomas, M.M., Miller, D.P., Morrissey, T.W. 2019. Food insecurity and child health. Pediatrics, 144(4),
      e20190397.

U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service. 2021. Accessed 4/5/21 from:
       (https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program).

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1999. "State Implementation of Major Changes to
       Welfare Policies, 1992­1998." Washington, D.C.: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
       and Evaluation. Accessed 2/29/12 from: http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/waiver-policies99/Table_A.htm.

University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research. (2021, Feb.). UKCPR National Welfare Data, 1980-
       2019. Lexington, KY. Available at http://ukcpr.org/resources/national-welfare-data (accessed
       July 15, 2021).
Vaughn, C. 2021. Long-run impact of welfare reform on educational attainment and family structure.
      Working paper. Retrieved 7/14/21 from
      https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5a2eadc632601e8b000755a9/t/6011d763c806d25060371db
      4/1611781988114/LR_Welfare_Reform_JHR_20210118.pdf

Von Wachter, T. 2020. The persistent effects of initial labor market conditions for young adults and their
      sources. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 34(4), 168­194.

Walker, R.J., Chawla, A., Garacci, E., Williams, J.S., Mendez, C., Ozieh, M.N., Egede, L.E. 2019.
       Assessing the relationship between food insecurity and mortality among US adults. Annals of
       Epidemiology, 32, 43­48.

Ziliak, J.P. 2013. Why are so many Americans on food stamps? the role of economy, policy, and
         demographics. University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research Discussion Paper Series,
         DP2013-01. Retrieved 11/1/19 from http://www.ukcpr.org/Publications/DP2013-01.pdf

Ziliak, J.P. 2016. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. Pp. 303­393 in Robert A. Moffitt, (ed.),
         Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1. University of
         Chicago Press.




                                                                                                        26
Figure 1




           27
Table 1: Weighted Sample Characteristics of Young Adults (second generation), PSID
                                                         Full Sample              Primary                   Target Group
                                                                              Comparison Group
 Food insecurity
 Marginal, low, or very low food security                     .194                      .235                       .406

 Low or very low food security                                .104                      .127                       .237

 Food Stamp receipt*
 Past year                                                    .102                      .133                       .307

 Past month                                                   .086                      .108                       .278

 Exposure to welfare reform
 0 years                                                      .109                      .118                       .094

 1-4 years                                                    .237                      .269                       .265

 5-12 years                                                   .381                      .391                       .382

 13-18 years                                                  .273                      .222                       .259

 Year food insecurity outcomes assessed
 1999                                                         .052                      .058                       .053
 2001                                                         .072                      .078                       .076

 2003                                                         .098                      .106                       .097

 2015                                                         .249                      .246                       .251
 2017                                                         .259                      .250                       .255
 2019                                                         .271                      .262                       .268

 Other characteristics
 Age, mean years (s.d.)                                       28.8                      29.3                      28.9
                                                              (7.0)                     (7.0)                     (6.9)
 Year of birth, mean                                          1984                      1983                      1984

 Male                                                         .506                      .501                       .546

 N                                                           13,303                    6,161                      1,896
Notes: Figures are proportions unless indicated otherwise. Full sample consists of young adults at least 18 years of age who were
born in 1975 or later and whose mothers were age 18+ years when the young adult was born and had known marital status and
education when the young adult was first exposed to welfare reform as a child. Target group consists of young adults in the full
sample whose mothers had at most a high school education and were unmarried when the young adults was first exposed to
welfare reform as a child. *Food stamp receipt is based on a slightly smaller sample: Full sample: 9,123; comparison group:
3,610; target group: 1,263.




                                                                                                                              28
                                                                Table 2
                   Estimated Effects of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity, PSID
                       Model                                   1                 2              3              4             5                              6
                       Cohorts                             1975-1999         1975-1999     1975-1999       1975-1999     1975-1999                      1975-1999
 Panel A                                                                            Marginal, Low, or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                       -0.02265**          -0.02007*         -0.02164*          -0.02463*           -0.01720              _
 Reform as Child                                           (0.01070)          (0.01160)         (0.01127)          (0.01443)          (0.01575)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                       -0.00777***       -0.00779***        -0.00883***        -0.00841***       -0.01055***         -0.00833**
 Reform as Child * Target                                   (0.00239)         (0.00252)          (0.00269)          (0.00288)         (0.00355)          (0.00391)

 Outcome mean for target group                                0.404             0.404              0.404              0.404             0.404              0.404

 Panel B                                                                                     Low or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                       -0.02273**          -0.01989*         -0.02178*          -0.02557*           -0.01721              _
 Reform as Child                                           (0.01119)          (0.01173)         (0.01258)          (0.01461)          (0.01632)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                        -0.00431*          -0.00489*         -0.00584**        -0.00564**           -0.00401           -0.00501
 Reform as Child * Target                                  (0.00250)          (0.00243)          (0.00241)         (0.00257)          (0.00410)          (0.00356)

 Outcome mean for target group                                0.235             0.235              0.235              0.235             0.235              0.235

 Cohort & period fixed effects                                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
 State policies during childhood                               No                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
 Cohort-specific linear trends                                 No                 No               Yes                 No                 No                No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                       No                 No                No                Yes                Yes                No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects*Target                No                 No                No                 No                Yes                No
 State*Cohort fixed effects                                    No                 No                No                 No                 No               Yes
 Sample Size                                                  6946               6946              6946               6946               6946              6946
Notes: Each column in Panel A and Panel B presents results from separate regression model. Coefficients from fixed effects OLS estimation are reported, with
robust standard errors, allowing for correlation of observations within current state of residence, reported in parentheses. All specifications control for childhood
state of residence, sociodemographic characteristics of young adults and their mothers (indicators for ages 18-22, 23-27, 28-32, 33-37, and 38-42, gender, and the
mother's race/ethnicity, education and marital status (timing described in text), and age when the young adult was born), state policies and economic conditions
during year of interview (unemployment rate, personal income per capita, poverty rate, indicators for the SNAP policy index, percent of low-income children who
are uninsured, refundable EITC, EITC rate, minimum wage, log of the number of Medicaid beneficiaries, and log population), and the state unemployment rate
separately at ages 18-22. All specifications further control for fixed effects for the child's state of residence, cohort, and year of interview (when food security
outcome was assessed). States policies during childhood include the unemployment rate, poverty rate, personal income per capita, minimum wage, refundable
EITC, and generosity of EITC, all measured when the adult was age 5, 11, and 17. In Model 6, the main effect of exposure is captured by the State*Cohort fixed
effects. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *** p-value  0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value  0.05; * 0.05 < p-value  0.10.
                                                                                                                                                                    29
                                            Table 3
Estimated Effects of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity,
              Non-Linear Effects of Duration of Exposure and by Age of Exposure
Model                                                        1               2                   3               4
Outcome                                                 Marginal, Low, or Very Low               Low or Very Low
                                                               Food Security                       Food Security

Panel A                                                                       Cohorts 1975 - 1999

Exposed 1-4 Years*Target                                   -0.02178         -0.04310          -0.01377         -0.02846
                                                          (0.06673)        (0.07431)         (0.05750)        (0.06516)

Exposed 5-12 Years*Target                                  -0.03230         -0.03219          -0.01127         -0.01982
                                                          (0.04849)        (0.05408)         (0.04722)        (0.05251)

Exposed 13-18 Years*Target                               -0.13635**       -0.15508***         -0.06189        -0.08042*
                                                          (0.05105)         (0.05725)        (0.04486)        (0.04726)

Outcome mean for target group                               0.404             0.404            0.235             0.235

Panel B                                                                       Cohorts 1975 - 1999

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                       -0.00784**        -0.00885**       -0.00548**        -0.00637**
Reform as Child * Target * Age Exposed 0-5                (0.00301)         (0.00348)        (0.00254)         (0.00263)

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                         -0.00273         -0.00221          -0.00531         -0.00577
Reform as Child * Target*Age Exposed 6-13                 (0.00532)        (0.00606)         (0.00414)        (0.00460)

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                         -0.00611         -0.00945          -0.01586         -0.01727
Reform as Child * Target * Age Exposed 14-17              (0.02174)        (0.02562)         (0.01443)        (0.01635)

Outcome mean for target group                               0.404             0.404            0.235             0.235

Cohort fixed effects                                        Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
Period fixed effects                                        Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
State policies during childhood                             Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                      No               Yes                No              Yes
Sample Size                                                 6946              6946              6946             6946
Notes: Each column in Panel A and Panel B represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes. In Panel
A, "Exposed Zero Years*Target" is the reference group.




                                                                                                                     30
                                              Table 4
 Estimated Effects of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity,
                                   Heterogeneity across Gender
                Model                           1               2              3             4               5                6

               Outcome                          Marginal, Low, or Very Low                            Low or Very Low
                                                      Food Security                                    Food Security
                                                                            Cohorts 1975 - 1999

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare          -0.00563*      -0.00650**       -0.00623       -0.00165        -0.00272      -0.00149
Reform as Child * Target * Male             (0.00298)       (0.00316)      (0.00424)      (0.00298)       (0.00315)     (0.00399)

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare        -0.00953***     -0.00993***     -0.00969**     -0.00754***     -0.00797***    -0.00753*
Reform as Child * Target * Female           (0.00288)       (0.00338)      (0.00426)       (0.00248)       (0.00263)    (0.00378)

Gender Difference (Target) [p-value]         [0.185]         [0.269]        [0.307]      [0.010]***       [0.024]**     [0.010]***

Outcome mean for target group                 0.404          0.404           0.404          0.235           0.235         0.235

Cohort & period fixed effects                 Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
State policies during childhood               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
State*5-year cohort group fixed effects        No            Yes             No              No             Yes            No
State*Cohort fixed effects                     No             No             Yes             No              No           Yes
Sample Size                                   6946           6946           6946            6946            6946          6946
Notes: Each column represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                         31
                                                Table 5
      Estimated Effects of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity,
                          Heterogeneity across Maternal Educational Attainment
               Model                         1               2               3              4             5                6

              Outcome                            Marginal, Low, or Very Low                         Low or Very Low
                                                       Food Security                                 Food Security
                                                                           Cohorts 1975 - 1999
              Panel A

Number of Years Exposed*Target*          -0.00079        -0.00161       -0.00568        -0.00072       -0.00253       -0.00547
Less than High School                    (0.00501)       (0.00538)      (0.00630)       (0.00550)      (0.00576)      (0.00667)

Number of Years Exposed*Target*        -0.00892***      -0.00965***     -0.00745       -0.00547**      -0.00583*      -0.00377
High School                              (0.00299)        (0.00357)     (0.00477)       (0.00269)      (0.00308)      (0.00375)

Educ. Difference (Target) [p-value]       [0.171]         [0.226]         [0.830]        [0.439]        [0.630]        [0.815]

Outcome mean for target group              0.404           0.404          0.404           0.235          0.235         0.235

Cohort & period fixed effects               Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes         Yes            Yes
State policies during childhood             Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes         Yes            Yes
State*5-yr. cohort group fixed effects      No              Yes            No                No          Yes             No
State*Cohort fixed effects                  No               No            Yes               No           No            Yes
Sample Size                                6946            6946           6946              6946         6946           6946
         Notes: Each column represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                      32
                                                            Table 6
                      Estimates of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity,
                   Using Placebo Group: Higher Educated (More than High School Graduate) Married Mothers
                Model                             1            2            3                  4            5          6           7           8
               Outcome                                   Marginal, Low, or Very Low                                   Low or Very Low
                                                               Food Security                                           Food Security
                                                                                             Cohorts 1975 - 1999

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare            -0.00174       -0.00365      -0.00422          0.00792     0.00369     0.00195     0.00222     0.01018
Reform as Child                              (0.01117)      (0.01145)     (0.01306)         (0.01671)   (0.00988)   (0.01061)   (0.01141)   (0.01400)

Outcome mean                                   0.119          0.119         0.119            0.119        0.061      0.061       0.061       0.061

Childhood state fixed effects                   Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Cohort fixed effects                            Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Period fixed effects                            Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Current state policies                           No           Yes            Yes              Yes          No         Yes         Yes         Yes
State policies during childhood                  No            No            Yes              Yes          No          No         Yes         Yes
State*5-year cohort group fixed effects          No            No             No              Yes          No          No          No         Yes
Sample Size                                     4945          4945           4945             4945        4945        4945        4945        4945
   Notes: Each column represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                                                     33
                                                            Appendix Table 1
                                              Implementation Dates of Welfare Reform by State
                     10/92 to
                       2/97       9/96 to 1/98      10/92 to 1/98                       10/92 to 2/97   9/96 to 1/98   10/92 to 1/98
                      AFDC                          Any Welfare                            AFDC                        Any Welfare
                     Waiver          TANF             Reform                              Waiver          TANF           Reform
 Alabama                            Nov-96             Nov-96          Montana             Feb-96         Feb-97          Feb-96
 Alaska                              Jul-97            Jul-97          Nebraska            Oct-95         Dec-96          Oct-95
 Arizona             Nov-95         Oct-96             Nov-95          Nevada                             Dec-96         Dec-96
 Arkansas             Jul-94         Jul-97            Jul-94          New Hampshire                      Oct-96          Oct-96
 California          Dec-92          Jan-98            Dec-92          New Jersey          Oct-92         Jul-97          Oct-92
 Colorado                            Jul-97            Jul-97          New Mexico                         Jul-97          Jul-97
 Connecticut          Jan-96        Oct-96             Jan-96          New York                           Nov-97         Nov-97
 DC                                 Mar-97             Mar-97          North Carolina      Jul-96         Jan-97          Jul-96
 Delaware             Oct-95        Mar-97             Oct-95          North Dakota                       Jul-97          Jul-97
 Florida                                               Oct-96          Ohio                Jul-96         Oct-96          Jul-96
 Georgia              Jan-94         Jan-97            Jan-94          Oklahoma                           Oct-96          Oct-96
 Hawaii               Feb-97         Jul-97            Feb-97          Oregon              Feb-93         Oct-96          Feb-93
 Idaho                               Jul-97            Jul-97          Pennsylvania                       Mar-97         Mar-97
 Illinois            Nov-93          Jul-97            Nov-93          Rhode Island                       May-97         May-97
 Indiana             May-95         Oct-96             May-95          South Carolina                     Oct-96          Oct-96
 Iowa                 Oct-93         Jan-97            Oct-93          South Dakota        Jun-94         Dec-96          Jun-94
 Kansas                             Oct-96             Oct-96          Tennessee           Sep-96         Oct-96          Sep-96
 Kentucky                           Oct-96             Oct-96          Texas               Jun-96         Nov-96          Jun-96
 Louisiana                           Jan-97            Jan-97          Utah                Jan-93         Oct-96          Jan-93
 Maine                              Nov-96             Nov-96          Vermont             Jul-94         Sep-96          Jul-94
 Maryland            Mar-96         Dec-96             Mar-96          Virginia            Jul-95         Feb-97          Jul-95
 Massachusetts       Nov-95         Sep-96             Nov-95          Washington          Jan-96         Jan-97          Jan-96
 Michigan             Oct-92        Sep-96             Oct-92          West Virginia                      Jan-97          Jan-97
 Minnesota                           Jul-97            Jul-97          Wisconsin           Jan-96         Sep-97          Jan-96
 Mississippi         Oct-95           Jul-97            Oct-95         Wyoming                            Jan-97          Jan-97
 Missouri            Jun-95          Dec-96             Jun-95
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999)




                                                                                                                                       34
                    Appendix Table 2: Core Food Security Module Questions




Source: Coleman-Jensen, 2020, p. 5



                                                                            35
                                        Appendix Table 3
                              Weighted Maternal Characteristics, PSID
                                                                     1                   2                   3
                                                               Full Sample        Comparison          Target Group
                                                                                    Group
              Maternal Characteristics


 Age in years in 1999, mean (s.d.)                                42.55               41.75               40.08
                                                                  (5.14)              (5.68)              (4.82)


 Age in years when young adult was born, mean                     26.95               25.52               24.50
 (s.d.)                                                           (5.08)              (5.04)              (5.55)


 Race
 White                                                             .804                .821                .330
 Black                                                             .153                .122                .639
 Other                                                             .043                .057                .031


 Educational attainment year before welfare
 reform implementation (or at time of birth of
 child if child was born after welfare reform)
 Less than high school                                             .095                .156                .371
 High school education                                             .401                .844                .629
 More than high school education                                   .504                 n/a                 n/a


 Married                                                            .87                1.00                 .00


 N                                                                13,303              3,925               1,375
Notes: Figures are proportions unless indicated otherwise. Full sample consists of mothers (of young adults who were at
least 18 years of age and born in 1975 or later) who were age 18+ years when the young adult was born and had known
marital status and education when the young adult was first exposed to welfare reform as a child. Target group consists
mothers of young adults in the full sample who had at most a high school education and were unmarried when the young
adult was first exposed to welfare reform as a child. Comparison group consists of mothers of young adults in the full
sample who had at most a high school education and were married when the young adult was first exposed to welfare
reform as a child.




                                                                                                                          36
                                                          Appendix Table 4
                         Estimates of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity
                                        Controlling for Current Residential State Fixed Effects
                    Model                                  1                 2              3              4             5                 6
                    Cohorts                            1975-1999         1975-1999     1975-1999       1975-1999     1975-1999         1975-1999
Panel A                                                                         Marginal, Low, or Very Low Food Security

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                     -0.02386**         -0.02050*         -0.02134*       -0.02483*      -0.01777       _
Reform as Child                                         (0.01078)         (0.01179)         (0.01173)       (0.01468)     (0.01586)

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                    -0.00768***       -0.00767***        -0.00855***     -0.00806***   -0.01052***   -0.00790*
Reform as Child * Target                                (0.00230)         (0.00248)          (0.00266)       (0.00288)     (0.00356)   (0.00399)

Outcome mean for target group                             0.404             0.404            0.404         0.404            0.404        0.404
Panel B                                                                                  Low or Very Low Food Security

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                     -0.02463**         -0.02103*          -0.02214       -0.02649*      -0.01822       _
Reform as Child                                         (0.01165)         (0.01223)         (0.01331)       (0.01510)     (0.01667)

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                      -0.00423*         -0.00474*        -0.00553**       -0.00521*      -0.00363     -0.00466
Reform as Child * Target                                (0.00247)         (0.00245)         (0.00241)       (0.00261)     (0.00429)    (0.00368)

Outcome mean for target group                             0.235             0.235             0.235           0.235         0.235        0.235
Childhood state of residence fixed effects                 Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
Current state of residence fixed effects                   Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
Cohort & period fixed effects                              Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
State policies during childhood                            No                Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
Cohort-specific linear trends                              No                No                Yes             No            No           No
State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                    No                No                No              Yes           Yes          No
State*5-year cohort group fixed effects*Target             No                No                No              No            Yes          No
State*Cohort fixed effects                                 No                No                No              No            No           Yes
Sample Size                                               6946              6946              6946            6946          6946         6946
Notes: Each column within each panel represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                                                 37
                                                            Appendix Table 5
                           Estimates of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity
                                  Sample: Adult is household head or spouse/partner of household head
                       Model                                 1                  2              3              4             5              6
                       Cohorts                           1975-1999          1975-1999     1975-1999       1975-1999     1975-1999      1975-1999
 Panel A                                                                           Marginal, Low, or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                        -0.01259          -0.00987          -0.01785      -0.01139       0.00048       _
 Reform as Child                                          (0.01285)         (0.01269)         (0.01373)     (0.01832)      (0.01931)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                      -0.00692**        -0.00771**         -0.00739**   -0.00918**       -0.01063    -0.00756
 Reform as Child * Target                                 (0.00325)         (0.00351)          (0.00363)    (0.00413)      (0.00981)   (0.00476)

 Outcome mean for target group                              0.429             0.429              0.429        0.429         0.429        0.429

 Panel B                                                                                   Low or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                        -0.01902          -0.01873          -0.01970      -0.01663       0.00058       _
 Reform as Child                                          (0.01308)         (0.01242)         (0.01393)     (0.01675)      (0.01841)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                      -0.00548**        -0.00715***       -0.00709***   -0.00781***      -0.01290   -0.00722*
 Reform as Child * Target                                 (0.00252)          (0.00234)         (0.00254)     (0.00259)     (0.00927)   (0.00371)

 Outcome mean for target group                              0.243             0.243              0.243        0.243         0.243        0.243

 Childhood state of residence fixed effects                  Yes               Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
 Cohort & period fixed effects                               Yes               Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
 State policies during childhood                              No               Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
 Cohort-specific linear trends                                No                No               Yes           No             No          No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                      No                No                No          Yes            Yes          No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects*Target               No                No                No           No            Yes          No
 State*Cohort fixed effects                                   No                No                No           No             No         Yes
 Sample Size                                                 4601              4601              4601         4601           4601        4601
Notes: Each column within each panel represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                                                 38
                                                            Appendix Table 6
                           Estimates of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity
                                                            Sample: Ages 24+
                       Model                                 1                  2              3              4             5              6
                       Cohorts                           1975-1999          1975-1999     1975-1999       1975-1999     1975-1999      1975-1999
 Panel A                                                                           Marginal, Low, or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                        -0.01508          -0.01062          -0.01818      -0.02254       -0.00890      _
 Reform as Child                                          (0.01529)         (0.01611)         (0.01729)     (0.01637)      (0.01753)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                      -0.00930**        -0.00910**         -0.00927**    -0.00958*       -0.02086   -0.00975*
 Reform as Child * Target                                 (0.00384)         (0.00409)          (0.00439)    (0.00484)      (0.01480)   (0.00563)

 Outcome mean for target group                              0.396             0.396              0.396        0.396         0.396        0.396

 Panel B                                                                                   Low or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                        -0.02382          -0.02257          -0.02367      -0.02792       -0.01519      _
 Reform as Child                                          (0.01505)         (0.01500)         (0.01681)     (0.01715)      (0.01930)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                     -0.00815***        -0.00892***       -0.00926***   -0.00815**       -0.01452   -0.00809*
 Reform as Child * Target                                 (0.00286)          (0.00283)         (0.00294)    (0.00327)      (0.01144)   (0.00424)

 Outcome mean for target group                              0.228             0.228              0.228        0.228         0.228        0.228

 Childhood state of residence fixed effects                  Yes               Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
 Cohort & period fixed effects                               Yes               Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
 State policies during childhood                              No               Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
 Cohort-specific linear trends                                No                No               Yes           No             No          No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                      No                No                No          Yes            Yes          No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects*Target               No                No                No           No            Yes          No
 State*Cohort fixed effects                                   No                No                No           No             No         Yes
 Sample Size                                                 4758              4758              4758         4758           4758        4758
Notes: Each column within each panel represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                                                 39
                                                      Appendix Table 7
       Estimates of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity ­ Exposed Cohorts 1980-1999
                  Model                         1           2             3             4              5          6
                  Cohorts                   1980-1999   1980-1999     1980-1999     1980-1999    1980-1999    1980-1999
 Panel A                                                      Marginal, Low, or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                     -0.02750**         -0.02596*         -0.03557**      -0.02655      -0.01737       _
 Reform as Child                                         (0.01323)         (0.01415)          (0.01728)     (0.02114)     (0.02445)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                     -0.00973***        -0.00893**       -0.01172***    -0.01173***   -0.01081***   -0.00950*
 Reform as Child * Target                                 (0.00311)         (0.00337)         (0.00338)      (0.00347)     (0.00398)   (0.00483)

 Outcome mean for target group                              0.439             0.439             0.439         0.439         0.439        0.439

 Panel B                                                                                 Low or Very Low Food Security

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                      -0.02315*           -0.01802         -0.03039*      -0.02632      -0.01667       _
 Reform as Child                                         (0.01180)          (0.01350)         (0.01530)     (0.01788)     (0.02124)

 Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                       -0.00398           -0.00395         -0.00590*     -0.00569*      -0.00370     -0.00407
 Reform as Child * Target                                (0.00295)          (0.00294)         (0.00307)     (0.00328)     (0.00437)    (0.00419)

 Outcome mean for target group                              0.253             0.253             0.253         0.253         0.253        0.253

 Cohort & period fixed effects                              Yes                Yes               Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 State policies during childhood                             No                Yes               Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
 Cohort-specific linear trends                               No                 No               Yes           No            No           No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                     No                 No                No          Yes           Yes           No
 State*5-year cohort group fixed effects*Target              No                 No                No           No           Yes           No
 State*Cohort fixed effects                                  No                 No                No           No            No          Yes
 Sample Size                                                4980               4980              4980         4980          4980         4980
Notes: Each column within each panel represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                          Appendix Table 8
                         Estimates of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity
                                                   Alternate Comparison Groups
                Model                                 1                2                        3                4              5                6
            Comparison Group                      Low-educated married mothers               Higher-educated unmarried    Low-educated married mothers or
                                                        (From Table 2)                                mothers                higher-educated unmarried
                                                                                                                                      mothers
Panel A                                                                             Marginal, Low, or Very Low Food Security

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                  -0.02007*           -0.02463*           -0.04185*         -0.04318       -0.01306         -0.01546
Reform as Child                                      (0.01160)           (0.01443)          (0.02135)         (0.02842)      (0.01103)        (0.01403)
Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                 -0.00779***         -0.00841***          -0.00807*       -0.01144***    -0.00830***      -0.00837***
Reform as Child * Target                             (0.00252)           (0.00288)          (0.00469)         (0.00401)      (0.00244)        (0.00277)

Outcome mean for target group                         0.404                0.404               0.404           0.404          0.404            0.404

Panel B                                                                                   Low or Very Low Food Security

Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                  -0.01989*           -0.02557*           -0.03607*        -0.03122       -0.01437         -0.01748
Reform as Child                                     (0.01173)           (0.01461)           (0.02049)        (0.02884)      (0.01097)        (0.01421)
Number of Years Exposed to Welfare                  -0.00489*          -0.00564**           -0.00765*        -0.00619      -0.00522**       -0.00513**
Reform as Child * Target                            (0.00243)           (0.00257)           (0.00438)        (0.00406)      (0.00231)        (0.00249)

Outcome mean for target group                         0.235                0.235               0.235           0.235          0.235            0.235

Childhood state of residence fixed effects             Yes                 Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
Cohort & period fixed effects                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
State policies during childhood                        Yes                 Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                 No                 Yes                  No             Yes             No              Yes
Sample Size                                            6946                6946                2595            2595           7689             7689
Notes: Each column within each panel represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                                                 41
                                                          Appendix Table 9
                         Estimates of Exposure to Welfare Reform during Childhood on Adult Food Insecurity
                         Comparisons of Specific Groups of Treated Individuals to Never-exposed Individuals
                   Model                                 1                   2               3                4             5                  6
Panel A                                                                           Marginal, Low, or Very Low Food Security
Treatment (Exposed)                                Exposed 1-3         Exposed 4-6     Exposed 7-9      Exposed 10-12 Exposed 13-15       Exposed 16-18
                                                     Years               Years             Years           Years           Years             Years

Exposed * Target                                    -0.00051            -0.06293            -0.15686         0.04013        -0.16812*      -0.14926**
                                                    (0.09792)           (0.10023)           (0.10163)       (0.08456)       (0.09134)       (0.07347)

Outcome mean for target group                         0.368                0.375               0.382         0.387            0.415           0.411

Panel B                                                                                   Low or Very Low Food Security
Treatment (Exposed)                                Exposed 1-3         Exposed 4-6         Exposed 7-9   Exposed 10-12    Exposed 13-15   Exposed 16-18
                                                     Years               Years               Years           Years           Years           Years

Exposed * Target                                    -0.03595            -0.04613            -0.13313*       -0.04098        -0.12640*       -0.10231
                                                    (0.08492)           (0.07434)           (0.07301)       (0.06799)       (0.07477)       (0.08049)

Outcome mean for target group                         0.227                0.234               0.216         0.236            0.258           0.257

Childhood state of residence fixed effects             Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Cohort & period fixed effects                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
State policies during childhood                        Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
State*5-year cohort group fixed effects                Yes                 Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Sample Size                                            2012                2074                1785           1595            1474            1851
Notes: Each column within each panel represents a separate regression model. See Table 2 for full notes.




                                                                                                                                                42
