                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    REGULATING CONGLOMERATES IN CHINA:
              EVIDENCE FROM AN ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAM

                                        Qiaoyi Chen
                                         Zhao Chen
                                         Zhikuo Liu
                                  Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                         Daniel Xu

                                     Working Paper 29066
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29066


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021

We are very grateful for discussions from Stefan Lamp, Mar Reguant, Nick Ryan, and Shaoda
Wang and for comments from Hunt Allcott, Soren Anderson, Prabhat Barnwal, Raj Chetty, Julie
Cullen, David Cutler, Michael Davidson, Michael Dinerstein, Matt Gentzkow, Ed Glaeser, Ken
Gillingham, Josh Gottlieb, Michael Greenstone, Caroline Hoxby, Kelly Jones, Matthew
Kahn, Louis Kaplow, Lawrence Katz, Stephanie Kestelman, Justin Kirkpatrick, Thibaut
Lamadon, Ashley Langer, Shanjun Li, Neale Mahoney, Justin Marion, Leslie Martin, Magne
Mogstad, Ben Olken, Edson Severnini, Joe Shapiro, Felix Soliman, Michael Song, Stefanie
Stantcheva, Chris Timmins, Reed Walker, Heidi Williams, Xiaodong Zhu, and seminar
participants at American University, ASSA, Barcelona Summer Forum, Cowles Foundation
Summer Conference, Fudan University, FRB of Atlanta, Harvard, Helsinki GSE, Michigan
State University, NBER Public, NBER China, Paris School of Economics, Peking University,
SHUFE, Stanford University, University of Chicago, University of Toronto, UCSC, UCSD,
University du Quebec a Montreal, University of Oxford, University of Michigan, and the 9th
Mannheim Conference on Energy and the Environment. We thank IntSig Information for
providing China's Administrative Registration Data (CARD). All errors remain our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Qiaoyi Chen, Zhao Chen, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Xu. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Regulating Conglomerates in China: Evidence from an Energy Conservation Program
Qiaoyi Chen, Zhao Chen, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 29066
July 2021
JEL No. H23,L51,O44,Q48

                                         ABSTRACT

We study a prominent energy regulation affecting large Chinese manufacturers that are part of
broader conglomerates. Using detailed firm-level data and difference-in-differences research
designs, we show that regulated firms cut output and shifted production to unregulated firms in
the same conglomerate instead of improving their energy efficiency. Conglomerate spillovers
account for 40% of the output loss of regulated firms and substantially reduce aggregate energy
savings. Using a structural model, we show that alternative polices that use public information on
business networks could lower the shadow cost of the regulation by more than 40% and increase
aggregate energy savings by 10%.

Qiaoyi Chen                                     Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Fudan University                                Department of Economics
600 Guoquan Rd                                  Duke University
Shanghai                                        213 Social Sciences Building
China                                           Box 90097
17110680004@fudan.edu.cn                        Durham, NC 27708
                                                and NBER
Zhao Chen                                       jc@jcsuarez.com
China Center for Economic Studies
Fudan University                                Daniel Xu
Shanghai, 200433                                Department of Economics
China                                           Duke University
zhaochen@fudan.edu.cn                           213 Social Science Bldg
                                                419 Chapel Drive
Zhikuo Liu                                      Box 90097
China Center for Economic Studies               Durham, NC 27708-0097
School of Economics                             and NBER
Fudan University                                daniel.xu@duke.edu
600 Guoquan Rd, Shanghai China
liuzhikuo@fudan.edu.cn




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29066
   Balancing economic growth with the negative side effects of industrialization--such as carbon
emissions and pollution--is a central problem of governments in emerging economies. Nowhere
is this problem more important or consequential than in China. As Figure 1 shows, energy
regulation is of national and global importance given that the industrial energy use of China
overshadowed that of other leading economies in the early years of the 21st century.
   This paper studies the effects of a large program aimed at curbing the energy use of Chinese
industrial firms. The regulation that we study--the "Top 1,000" program--targeted the largest
energy-consuming firms in the most energy-intensive industries. The regulation was designed
following examples of "voluntary agreement" programs in developed countries that relied on the
belief that firms could significantly reduce their energy use by improving their energy efficiency.
The implementation of the program was adjusted to Chinese institutions and constraints, with
the result that in practice, lowering energy consumption became the main regulatory objective.
Understanding the effects of this regulation is central to broader questions of energy conservation
in China. This is both because the firms regulated by this program accounted for 47% of total
industrial energy use in China in 2004 and because the perceived success of the regulation led
the government to significantly expand the program in later years.
   This paper asks four questions that characterize the effectiveness of the Top 1,000 program.
Importantly, these questions account for the fact that, as in several developing countries, in-
dustrial firms in China are often part of much larger business networks.1 First, how does the
regulation impact the production and energy use of regulated firms and firms that are related
through ownership networks? Second, what are the distortionary effects of the regulation and
how does the ability to shift production within a conglomerate lower the cost of the program
for regulated firms? Third, how do conglomerate and market spillovers alter the effects of the
policy on industrial energy use and welfare? Finally, can the government use information on
conglomerate networks to improve energy regulation?
   We answer these questions by combining difference-in-differences research designs with an
industry equilibrium model featuring conglomerate production. First, using a difference-in-
differences strategy, we estimate that regulated firms reduced their energy use by 12%­16%.
Regulated firms achieved these reductions by lowering output; we find no impact on their energy
efficiency. Second, we use detailed data on business networks to study whether conglomerates
reallocated production across related firms. Using a second difference-in-differences design, we
find that unregulated firms in the same conglomerate as regulated firms increased both output
and energy use. This result uncovers an important margin of adjustment that allowed Chinese
conglomerates to shift 40% of the output decline in regulated firms to unregulated affiliates.

   1
   Ramachandran et al. (2013) describe the growing importance of conglomerates in India, China, and Latin
America.

                                                   1
Third, we specify and estimate a model of conglomerate production that matches our setting
and the estimated impacts of the policy. We quantify that the ability of conglomerates to shift
production lowered the shadow cost of the regulation from 11.2% of input costs to 8.7%. We also
evaluate the welfare effects of the program and quantify that the Top 1,000 program improves
welfare when the social cost of carbon exceeds $160.2 Finally, we show that the government can
use public information on conglomerate networks to design a conglomerate-level regulation that
would increase energy savings by 10% for the same welfare cost.
    Overall, we find that while the regulation reduced the energy consumption of large firms,
the promise of achieving these savings through improved energy efficiency failed to materialize.
Instead, regulated firms reduced their energy use by decreasing their output and by reallocating
part of the lost economic activity across business networks, which significantly lowered the pol-
icy's impact on energy reduction. While the ability to shift production lowered the shadow cost
for regulated conglomerates, the Top 1,000 program distorted the within-conglomerate allocation
of production. The government can alleviate this distortion by using publicly available data on
business networks to improve the design of energy regulation.
    We develop these results in three steps. First, we implement a difference-in-differences strat-
egy using firms in similar industries that were regulated in later years as controls. We use an
event-study specification to show that Top 1,000 firms and unregulated firms had similar trends
prior to the regulation. We estimate that regulated firms reduced their energy use by about
12%­16%. These estimates are robust to inclusion of industry-by-year and province-by-year
fixed effects and of controls for firm characteristics. Since the regulated firms consumed 670
million tons of coal equivalent (tce) in 2004, taking these results at face value would imply a
direct reduction in energy use amounting to close to 100 million tce annually. However, we also
document that these firms saw a decline in output of between 10% and 23%, and we do not find
meaningful or statistically significant changes in energy efficiency. The lack of gains in energy
efficiency suggest two hypotheses. The first is that firms had limited potential to increase energy
efficiency from a technological perspective--i.e., that there was no "low-hanging fruit" (e.g., All-
cott and Greenstone, 2012). A second hypothesis is that firms were able to escape the regulatory
burden by shifting production to related parties.
    Our second set of analyses leverages detailed business registration data to map the conglom-
erate networks of regulated firms. If regulated firms were able to escape the regulation by shifting
production to related parties, we would expect to see an increase in both the output and energy
use of firms linked to regulated firms through ownership networks. We test this hypothesis using

   2
     The Top 1,000 program had the stated goal of reducing industrial energy use to lower emissions that con-
tribute to global warming. While energy use reductions also lower local pollution, pollution reduction was not a
stated goal of the program (Price et al., 2010). Our welfare analyses evaluate the program's objective to reduce
aggregate energy use.

                                                       2
a difference-in-differences strategy that compares unregulated but related firms to unregulated
and unrelated firms. To ensure that these two groups of firms are similar, we use a matching
procedure based on pre-regulation characteristics to find a suitable set of control firms. These
analyses show that after the reform, regulated conglomerates shifted production to affiliates that
were not subject to the regulation. Specifically, we find an increase in firm output of 13% and
similar increases in other measures such as profits, sales, capital, labor, and energy use.3 Impor-
tantly, we find increases in the economic activity of related firms only when their line of business
coincides with the narrowly defined (4-digit) industry classification of the regulated firm. As a
placebo test, we show that related firms in other industries did not see an increase in economic
activity. Because related firms are smaller than regulated firms, we calculate that conglomerates
were able to shift 40% of the output decline in regulated firms to related parties. We corroborate
the finding that conglomerates were not able to fully shift the production decline in Top 1,000
firms to affiliates by showing that unregulated and unrelated firms also increase output as a
result of the regulation. These results show that a complete assessment of the effects of the Top
1,000 program must take into account both within-conglomerate and market-level leakage.
    Our last set of analyses use an industry equilibrium model of conglomerate production that
accounts for within-conglomerate spillovers to related firms as well as for market spillovers. The
model clarifies the interpretation of our difference-in-differences estimates, computes the shadow
cost of the regulation at the conglomerate level, and quantifies the aggregate and welfare effects
of the Top 1,000 program. We estimate the model parameters by matching moments of the
firm size distribution and patterns of within-conglomerate allocation of production prior to the
regulation. We then use our reduced-form estimates as out-of-sample validations of the model,
which show that our estimated model is able to replicate the estimated effects of the policy.
    Our estimated model quantifies the shadow cost of the Top 1,000 program at 8.7% of input
costs. The ability of conglomerates to shift production across related firms decreased the shadow
cost of the program. The shadow cost of the program would have been 11.2% in a hypothetical
case where the government prevented conglomerate-level leakage. The shadow cost of the pro-
gram would have been 40% smaller had the government instead regulated the total energy use
of the conglomerate.
    We then use the model to quantify the aggregate and welfare effects of the Top 1,000 pro-
gram. Accounting for market and conglomerate leakage, we calculate that the program reduced
aggregate energy use by 4%, an annual decrease of about 48 million tce. A calibration of the
social cost of energy-related emissions shows that the program raises welfare as long as the social
cost of carbon exceeds $160 per ton of carbon. Using the model, we show that expanding the

   3
     In Appendix C we show that the program did not significantly shift production to more polluted or populated
areas. For this reason, our model and welfare analyses abstract from spatial implications of the policy.

                                                       3
program by increasing the number of regulated firms or by tightening energy saving targets leads
to similar trade-offs. A government facing administrative constraints would thus prefer to tighten
the stringency of the regulation rather than increase the number of regulated firms.
    The model allows us to compare the aggregate and welfare effects of incomplete regulations,
such as the Top 1,000 program, to policies that would be preferable absent political or administra-
tive constraints, such as a universal energy tax. First, we show that the government can increase
aggregate energy savings by 10% for the same welfare cost by leveraging publicly available data
on the ownership networks of regulated conglomerates. By targeting conglomerates instead of
firms, such a regulation would avoid distorting the within-conglomerate allocation of production.
Second, the model shows that a conglomerate-level regulation closely approximates the effects of
a size-dependent energy tax that applies to all affiliates in conglomerates with Top 1,000 firms.
Finally, we find that this size-dependent tax is only slightly inferior to a universal energy tax.
These results highlight the promise of using information on the conglomerate networks of large
Chinese manufacturers to improve the design of energy regulations.
    Finally, we show that our model results are robust to using a wide range of alternative model
specifications and parameter values. First, we extend the model to consider the possibility that
firms responded to the regulating by improving their energy efficiency. Consistent with our
empirical results, we find that firms faced significant costs of improving their energy efficiency.
Second, we extend the model to allow for preexisting differences in energy efficiency between
regulated and unregulated firms. Finally, we show that our results are robust to alternative as-
sumptions of parameter values and model specifications. Across these wide-ranging assumptions,
we estimate that the SCC that rationalizes the policy is between $112 and $196.
    This paper contributes to our understanding of whether energy regulations and interventions
aimed at improving energy efficiency are effective in developing countries (e.g., Duflo et al., 2013,
2018; Greenstone and Jack, 2015; Ryan, 2018; Ito and Zhang, 2020).4 In the Chinese context,
the government's use of high-powered incentives that tie environmental performance to cadre
promotion has been shown to provide a strong mechanism to enforce environmental policies
(Kahn et al., 2015; Jia, 2017; He et al., 2020). In their discussion of recent efforts to curb energy
use in China, Auffhammer and Gong (2015) note that the Top 1,000 program along with its
expanded version in later years are the "most significant national programs" focusing on energy
efficiency and energy conservation. Using industry-level data, Ke et al. (2012) argue that the

   4
      See Gillingham et al. (2018) for a review of this literature in the context of developed countries. While this
literature mostly focuses on non-industrial energy use, some of the rationales explaining the under-investment
in energy efficiency--such as imperfect information or behavioral biases--may also apply to firms. For instance,
Anderson and Newell (2004) show that, while some US firms adopt energy conservation projects in response to
energy audits, economic considerations play an important role in explaining why not all firms adopt these projects.
In our setting, the ability of firms to escape the burden of the regulation by shifting production to related firms
adds to the potential explanations for under-investment in energy efficiency.

                                                         4
Top 1,000 program led to significant declines in the energy intensity of regulated sectors. By
using detailed firm-level data and tracing the effects of the regulation along business ownership
networks, our results provide a fundamental reassessment of the effectiveness of the Top 1,000
program.
   The result that the Top 1,000 program impacted economic activity in regulated and unreg-
ulated firms contributes to the literature studying the economic costs of environmental regula-
tions. In the US, researchers have documented significant effects of environmental regulations on
emissions and economic activity (e.g., Greenstone, 2002; Greenstone et al., 2012; Walker, 2013;
Shapiro and Walker, 2018; Curtis, 2018). Colmer et al. (2020) find that French firms that are
subject to the European Union's emissions trading scheme do not experience significant declines
in production and that their declines in energy do not spill over to unregulated firms. He et
al. (2020) show that Chinese firms that face more stringent regulations experience significant
decreases in productivity. Our paper contributes to our understanding of the economic cost of
energy regulation in China, which consumes the lion's share of global industrial energy.
   Researchers have also documented that regulations can have spillover effects along firm net-
works. For instance, Hanna (2010) finds that multinational firms respond to domestic environ-
mental regulations by increasing their investment in foreign countries, and Gibson (2019) and
Soliman (2020) find that firms may also shift economic activity to unregulated plants in counties
that are subject to less stringent regulations. Conglomerate spillovers are particularly important
in our setting since the Top 1,000 program targeted very large firms with elaborate ownership
networks. Our detailed business registration data provide a unique view into how this regulation
affected the production decisions of large Chinese conglomerates and how conglomerate spillovers
impacted the effectiveness of the regulation. Our model leverages these spillovers to quantify the
marginal cost of the regulation, using the fact that conglomerates incur a loss when they distort
the within-conglomerate allocation of production (see, e.g., Anderson and Sallee, 2011).
   Our paper also takes into account the roles of leakage and market competition in environmen-
tal regulation. Research has shown that emissions leakage to unregulated firms can significantly
alter the effects and design of environmental policies (e.g., Fowlie, 2009; Holland, 2012; Fischer
and Fox, 2012; Bushnell et al., 2014; Baylis et al., 2014; Fowlie and Reguant, 2021). We abstract
from strategic interactions between firms in a setting with monopolistic competition since we
study manufacturing industries with a large number of firms that compete in national markets.5
This paper quantifies the aggregate and welfare effects of the Top 1,000 program by combining
microdata on the operations of Chinese industrial firms, transparent research designs that iden-
tify direct and spillover effects of a prominent energy regulation, and an industry equilibrium

   5
   Studies of energy regulation with strategic interaction often focus on concentrated industries (see, e.g.,
Mansur, 2007; Ryan, 2012; Fowlie et al., 2016).

                                                     5
model that is consistent with the estimated effects of the program. The combination of these
approaches accounts for market competition and leakage effects and shows that conglomerate
spillovers are a distinct force that plays a quantitatively important role in the context of China
and that feasible conglomerate-level regulations can improve the regulation of energy.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the policy context and the data that we
use to measure firm responses to the regulation and the ownership networks of regulated firms.
Section 2 estimates direct effects of the Top 1,000 program on regulated firms, and Section 3
estimates indirect effects on unregulated firms that belong to the business networks of regulated
firms. Section 4 describes our model of conglomerate regulation, and Section 5 estimates the
model parameters. Section 6 uses the model to quantify the shadow cost of the policy and to
analyze the aggregate and welfare effects of the regulation. Section 7 explores extensions of the
model, and Section 8 concludes.


1     Policy Background and Data
This section describes the Top 1,000 energy savings program. We also describe the different
datasets that we use to measure economic activity and energy use as well as our strategy to map
the ownership networks of Chinese conglomerates.

1.1    The Top 1,000 Program
To save energy and reduce related carbon emissions, the Chinese government's 11th Five-Year
Plan (11FYP) set an ambitious goal of reducing the country's energy intensity--defined as energy
consumption per unit of GDP--by 20% between 2006 and 2011 (Price et al., 2010). Since
the industrial sector accounts for 70% of total energy consumption, the government designed
policies that focused on nine energy-intensive industries, which accounted for 80% of the country's
industrial energy use. One of these key initiatives was the Top 1,000 Energy Saving Program,
which targeted the firms with the highest energy consumption in the most energy-intensive
industries.
    The Top 1,000 program was first announced by the National Development and Reform Com-
mission in April 2006, and the corresponding monitoring and assessment measures were released
in 2007. The name "Top 1,000" refers to the 1, 008 industrial firms in the nine energy-intensive in-
dustries with energy consumption above 180 thousand tce in 2004. The total energy consumption
of these 1,008 super-firms was 670 million tce in 2004, accounting for 47% of China's industrial
energy consumption and 33% of its total energy consumption. Importantly, since the policy was
announced in 2006 and selected firms based on their retrospective 2004 energy consumption,
it was not possible to manipulate the list of program participants. Moreover, the list of firms


                                                 6
regulated by the program did not change during the five-year period. Table 1 reports the number
of firms and their share of energy consumption in each of the regulated industries. Among Top
1,000 firms, those in the iron and steel, chemical, and electric power industries accounted for
around 63% of the firms and 68% of the regulated energy consumption in 2005.
    The Top 1,000 program was designed based on the belief that Chinese industries could sig-
nificantly increase energy efficiency at a low cost (e.g., McKinsey & Co., 2009). The program
was influenced by voluntary agreement programs in developed countries and had two stated
goals: to significantly increase the energy efficiency of these super-firms and to save 100 million
tce in energy consumption by 2011. Given the program's quick implementation, many aspects
of voluntary agreement programs (such as providing technological expertise or financing energy
efficiency improvements) played a relatively minor role (Price et al., 2010). In practice, firms
were regulated based on energy use only and not on energy efficiency.
    To implement the policy, the central government assigned a target reduction in energy use to
each provincial government. In turn, local officials assigned individual quotas to each of the Top
1,000 firms. These firms were subject to annual energy audits carried out by a third party and
also faced potential additional audits from the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
and the National Energy Administration. Leaders of provincial governments and state-owned
enterprises were then evaluated on whether these energy saving targets were met. As a result,
local government officials monitored and enforced the energy saving targets of Top 1,000 firms
very closely.6 The effect of this strict supervision is evident in Table A.1, where we report the
results of the government's annual assessment. This table shows a very high compliance rate. In
fact, the total energy saving target was achieved in 2008, two years ahead of schedule. At the
end of the 11FYP, the government estimated energy savings of 165.49 million tce, far beyond
the original target of 100 million tons.7
    Due to this perceived success under the 11FYP, the Top 1,000 program was expanded into
the "Top 10,000" Energy Savings Program during the 12th Five-Year Plan (12FYP) in 2012. In
this case, "Top 10,000" refers to 16,078 energy-intensive firms with energy consumption above
10 thousand tce in 2010. These firms account for 60% of China's total energy consumption. As
in the Top 1,000 program, firms among the Top 10,000 were required to improve their energy
efficiency with a goal of saving a total of 250 million tce during the 12FYP. Our primary analysis

   6
      Under the "one-vote veto" criteria, officials would not be considered for promotions or awards if the province
or any of the local Top 1,000 firms did not achieve their targets. Similarly, the leaders of state-owned enterprises
that did not meet the target did not receive annual bonuses. In interviews with executives of Top 1,000 firms,
we confirmed that local officials had the power to stop production at regulated firms if the firm did not meet its
energy target. In this way, the Chinese setting contrasts with other developing country settings where the design
of incentives for energy auditors plays a key role (e.g., Duflo et al., 2013, 2018).
    7
      While government estimates of compliance may be subject to misreporting (Karplus et al., 2020), our analyses
rely on multiple measures of output and energy use from survey and administrative data that are unrelated to
the government's evaluation of the program.

                                                         7
focuses on Top 1,000 firms between 2001 and 2011. Since the industrial firms in the Top 10,000
(but not in the Top 1,000) were also energy intensive but were not regulated during the 11FYP,
they serve as useful controls for our empirical analysis.8

1.2     Firm Data
Our empirical analyses combine several rich datasets that describe production and energy use at
these firms. The first dataset that we use is the list of firms in the Top 1,000 and Top 10,000
programs from the National Development and Reform Commission. We merge these lists with
the Annual Survey of Industrial Firms (ASIF) from the National Bureau of Statistics (2001­2009
and 2011).9 This dataset provides detailed information on a firm's industry, address, ownership,
output, and financial information and covers all industrial firms with annual revenue above 5
million RMB (approximately 800,000 USD).
    We complement these data with two additional datasets. First, we collect detailed information
on firm energy consumption from 2001 to 2010 from China's Environmental Statistics Database
(CESD) provided by China's Ministry of Environmental Protection. The CESD data are subject
to audits by environmental protection agencies at both local and national levels. Second, we
merge data from the Annual Tax Survey (ATS) for 2009 and 2010. One advantage of using
multiple datasets is that we can cross-check our data to ensure our results are not driven by
misreporting or other data quality issues. In Figure A.1, we show that firms report similar
output and coal consumption in the CESD and tax data, which are collected independently and
are not used to evaluate compliance with energy and environmental policies.
    Panel A of Table 2 reports summary statistics for the Top 1,000 and Top 10,000 firms in
our sample. This sample includes about 8,700 observations for Top 1,000 firms and 81,000
observations for Top 10,000 firms over a period of 10 years. Our combined datasets therefore
capture the majority of the economic activity in the Top 1,000 and Top 10,000 firms. Because the
CESD reports energy consumption only from primary sources (e.g., coal, oil, gas), our analyses
of energy use and energy efficiency exclude firms in industries that rely mainly on electricity.10
For this reason, the sample of firms with energy consumption data is smaller.
    As we show in Panel A of Table 2, Top 1,000 firms are larger, older, more likely to be state
owned, and more export oriented than Top 10,000 firms. This table also shows that Top 1,000
   8
      An important consideration is whether firms that were later part of the Top 10,000 expected that the Top
1,000 program would be expanded. This is unlikely to be the case since the details of the program were developed
after the 12FYP by the National Development and Reform Commission, which did not announce the Top 10,000
program until 2012.
    9
      Appendix A describes our merged data. As is well known in the literature, data for the 2010 ASIF display
a number of irregularities and are often excluded from statistical analyses. As we show below, our results are
robust to using administrative tax data on production and energy use for 2009 and 2010.
   10
      In practice, we exclude industries where electricity consumption accounts for more than 30% of total energy
consumption. As we show below, our results are robust to setting this threshold to between 15% and 50%.

                                                       8
firms are slightly less energy efficient (defined as the ratio of output to energy use) than Top
10,000 firms. However, this difference is driven mostly by industry differences, since Top 1,000
firms are more likely to be in energy-intensive heavy industries. As we show below, our empirical
analyses are robust to controlling for these firm-level characteristics.11

1.3     Mapping Conglomerate Networks
We identify firms' ownership networks using data from China's Administrative Registration
Database (CARD). These data are collected by the State Administration of Industry and Com-
merce and list the registration information of all firms in China starting in 1980, including firm
name, registration number, date of establishment, address, ownership, registered capital and re-
lated legal persons. Importantly, the data provide detailed shareholder information, which allows
us to construct firm ownership networks at multiple levels.
    We construct ownership networks using the four types of linkages displayed in Figure 2. First,
we include wholly owned subsidiaries of regulated firms as related parties. Second, we include
firms that are at least partially owned by regulated firms. We consider firms to be related if they
are owned by a regulated firm by up to two levels of investment relations. Although in practice
most related firms are fully owned, we require that the regulated firm own at least 25% of the
related firm at each level of investment. Third, we include shareholders of regulated firms, and
we allow up to two levels of shareholder links. Finally, we also include firms that are fully or
partly owned by the shareholders of a regulated firm.12 We exclude firms that are related only
through the state-owned management committee.
    Panel B of Table 2 shows that we can identify 46,178 related parties of Top 1,000 firms in
the CARD. Since a large number of related parties are service firms or small firms not recorded
in the ASIF, we match 7,329 firms in the ASIF. In our baseline regressions, we require related
firms to be in the same 4-digit industry as a related Top 1,000 firm. Our main sample of related
firms includes 2,466 industrial firms.13 Since it is likely very hard to shift production to firms in
other narrowly defined industries, we analyze firms within the same 2-digit industry but outside
4-digit industries in a placebo test. A potential concern with CARD data is that some of the
related firms may not be engaged in production and may, in fact, be holding companies. By
merging the CARD data with the ASIF and the CESD, we ensure that our results are driven by
real economic activity in industrial firms.
    Panel B of Table 2 also examines the robustness of our network definitions to alternative
   11
       Section 4 shows that we can also identify the effects of the policy using a within-conglomerate difference-in-
differences research strategy that compares firms with similar conglomerate-level characteristics.
    12
       We again allow two levels of investment, and we require ownership to be at least 25% at each level. Figure
A.2 depicts all the possible links that we consider.
    13
       Omitting firms in unrelated industries is unlikely to affect our results since super-firms like Top 1,000 firms
would not be able to shift production to service firms or very small firms.

                                                          9
assumptions. Allowing for up to six levels of relations does not have a large effect on our sample
of related firms in the same 4-digit industry. Decreasing the ownership requirements to 20%
has a small effect on the number of related firms, and the number of related parties is similar
when we increase the ownership ratio to 51%. These results suggest that within narrowly defined
industries, firm ownership networks are very compact. Importantly, our measure of firm networks
uses data from 2018, after the policy was implemented. Therefore, our business networks include
any firms that may have been acquired by regulated conglomerates as a result of the regulation.14
Moreover, it is important to note that regulated firms could not escape the regulation by splitting
into smaller firms. Since local policymakers face regional energy use targets, they have strong
incentives to ensure that any initially regulated firm meets its energy target. If firms split, the
energy use targets would accompany the firms after any such separation.
    The merged CARD and ASIF data reveal some interesting patterns. First, we find that
Top 1,000 firms have an average of 2.45 related parties in narrowly defined industries. Second,
since Top 1,000 firms are, in most cases, the largest firms in each industry, their related parties
are smaller. On average, the output of related firms is 19.3% of the output of regulated firms.
These facts imply that conglomerates may have had significant scope to substitute production
across related firms.15 However, it is also unlikely that related parties could fully make up for
production declines in Top 1,000 firms. Third, firms within conglomerates have an interesting
relative size distribution. To produce Panel A of Figure 3, we compute each firm's size relative
to the largest firm in the group; we then plot the average relative size by firm rank. A striking
fact of this graph is that the average relative size within a conglomerate declines sharply with
firm rank: the second-largest firm in a conglomerate is only 29% as large as the largest firm, on
average. Interestingly, the decline in relative firm size is almost geometric, a fact that we use in
our structural model. Finally, Panel B of Figure 3 shows the relation between the output of the
largest firm and the number of firms in a conglomerate. The fact that conglomerates with more
firms also have larger leading firms suggests that the number of firms in a conglomerate might
depend on technological efficiencies shared by all firms in a conglomerate.




   14
      Using the ownership change information in the CARD, we estimate that between 2007 and 2018, less than
4% of related firms experienced significant ownership changes--defined as an ownership transfer of more than
25% to or from firms that are not in the same conglomerate.
   15
      In Chen et al. (2021), we show that most related parties of regulated firms are located in the same province
as the regulated firm. For this reason, we do not expect substitution of production across related parties to
significantly affect the provincial distribution of energy use or related pollution. In Section 2, we also show that
the program did not significantly alter the allocation of production across cities with different levels of emissions
and population density.

                                                         10
2        Effects of the Policy on Regulated Firms
As detailed in Section 1, the Top 1,000 program mandated that firms reduce their energy use.
To study the effects of the policy, we compare the activities of regulated firms relative to those of
other large firms operating in energy-intensive industries. Specifically, we use firms that became
regulated after 2011 as part of the Top 10,000 program as controls. Because related firms in the
same conglomerate as a regulated Top 1,000 firm may be indirectly affected by the policy, we
remove these firms from the set of control firms.
     The identifying assumption of this difference-in-differences analysis is that absent the Top
1,000 regulation, the energy use and output of Top 10,000 firms would have trended similarly to
those of Top 1,000 firms. To provide evidence that these firms had similar trends prior to the
implementation of this regulation, we use firm data from the CESD to estimate an event-study
analysis of the form:
                                  2010
                       Yijkt =             × T reati × Y ear + i + jt + kt + ijkt ,                             (1)
                                  =2006


where Yijkt is a dependent variable for firm i in industry j , province k and year t. T reati is a
treatment group indicator that equals 1 for Top 1,000 firms and 0 for Top 10,000 firms. The
coefficients  from this specification represent differences in the dependent variable between
Top 1,000 and Top 10,000 firms in each year. Given that the policy evaluation began in 2007,
we identify the effects of the policy relative to performance before 2006. We include firm-level
fixed effects i and year fixed effects in all regressions, and we show that our result are robust
to inclusion of (2-digit) industry-by-year fixed effects jt and province-by-year fixed effects kt .
We cluster standard errors at the firm level.16
     Figure 4 presents a visual implementation of our difference-in-differences estimation strategy.
Panel A in Figure 4 displays the  coefficients when the outcome variable is firm-level energy use
(total coal consumption equivalent). This figure shows that prior to the implementation of the
regulation, our treatment and control firms had similar trends. Additionally, this figure makes
clear that the policy did indeed succeed in lowering the energy use of regulated firms relative
to that of unregulated firms.17 Panel B of this figure compares these year-by-year effects to the


    16
      While the setting of the Top 1,000 program may seem amenable to a regression discontinuity design, in
practice, there are few treated and control firms at the energy use threshold, which makes such an approach
unfeasible.
   17
      One potential concern is that our results may be contaminated by mean reversion. Because firms were
regulated based on their 2004 energy use, one possibility is that regulated firms had idiosyncratically large levels
of energy use in 2004 that reverted to lower levels in later years. As this and other similar graphs show, the
outcomes for 2004 are not significantly different from those for 2001­2003, nor do we see large differences from
the outcomes for 2005­2006.

                                                        11
overall trend in energy consumption.18 As this figure shows, the program successfully arrested
the explosive growth in the energy use of regulated firms.
    We quantify the effects of the policy by estimating difference-in-differences specifications of
the form:
                         Yijkt = T reati × P ostt + Xit  + i + jt + kt + ijkt ,                                 (2)

where P ostt is an indicator that equals one after 2006. In addition to different fixed effects, some
specifications control for firm characteristics Xit , which include indicators for state-owned firms
and exporting firms, measures of profitability (e.g., return on assets), and firm age. Panel A of
Table 3 shows that on average, the total energy consumption of regulated firms decreased by
12%­16%. These estimates are stable across specifications that include different levels of fixed
effects and firm controls. To interpret the magnitude of this effect, recall that regulated firms
consumed 670 million tce in 2004. The coefficients in Table 3 therefore imply annual reductions
in energy use of close to 100 million tce, or about 20% of the total industrial energy use of the
European Union.
    To discern whether this reduction in energy use was driven by changes in economic activity
or in energy efficiency, we now estimate the effects of the program on firm output (i.e., revenue).
Panels C­D of Figure 4 show that after the reform, firm output in regulated firms also decreased
significantly. Indeed, Panel B of Table 3 reports declines in output of between 10% and 23%,
depending on the specification. Accounting for the declines in output implies that the policy
had limited impacts on energy efficiency. Panels E­F of Figure 4 show that we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that the policy had no impact on energy efficiency. Based on the specifi-
cation with both industry- and province-by-year fixed effects of Panel C of Table 3, the 95%
confidence interval rules out that the policy increased energy efficiency by more than 4%, which
is significantly below the government's goal of improving energy efficiency by 20%. Contrary to
the hypothesis that there was "low-hanging fruit" to be harvested in terms of energy efficiency,
our results show that over a period of five years, regulated firms were not able to significantly
improve their energy efficiency.
    We now explore the robustness of the effects of the Top 1,000 program on regulated firms.
First, as we discuss in Section 1, these analyses exclude industries that rely primarily on elec-
tricity. Table A.3 shows that our results are robust to excluding more or fewer industries based
on their electricity use. Second, our results are robust to the sample of firms in our regression
and to the exclusion of new firms and those that exit during our sample period.19 Third, one

  18
      For visual clarity, Panels B, D, and F in Figure 4 follow Ohrn (2018) by plotting trends for the control group
that have the same average level in the preperiod as the treated group.
   19
      Table A.4 shows that the effects of the program on regulated firms are robust to narrowing the sample to
include only firms that existed before 2006 and after 2010. Table A.5 shows that our results are also robust to
using an almost-balanced panel where we require that firms have no more than one missing year in the data. Note

                                                        12
potential concern is that our results may be influenced by other, concurrent policies. Appendix
B clarifies that this is not the case by showing that our estimates are independent of the effects of
other pollution monitoring policies. As we show in Table A.6, these policies did not significantly
impact the operations of Top 1,000 firms, and our results are robust to excluding firms that are
part of these other programs. Finally, we explore the potential for heterogeneous effects across
industries. Given the small number of regulated firms in each industry, we estimate heteroge-
neous effects across broad industry groups. Table A.7 shows similar effects of the program across
different industry groups.20
    The effects of the policy on regulated firms paint a picture of mixed success. On the one
hand, the regulation succeeded in achieving a meaningful reduction in the energy use of energy-
intensive firms. However, this reduction did not come about through a significant increase in
energy efficiency, which--while not directly targeted--was one of the underlying intents of the
policy. The next section studies whether conglomerates avoided the burden of the regulation by
shifting economic activity to related parties.


3      Spillover Effects of the Policy through Ownership
       Networks
Regulated firms have strong incentives to shift production to related parties. By shifting pro-
duction, conglomerates can partially offset declines in economic activity in regulated firms. Such
shifting also allows conglomerates to comply with the letter of the regulation--if not with its
intent--without having to invest in potentially costly improvements to energy efficiency.
    To measure the empirical importance of conglomerate spillovers, we use CARD data on the
ownership networks of regulated firms to identify firms that may have indirectly expanded as a
consequence of the Top 1,000 regulation. We then use matching methods to identify control firms
that were (1) not part of the Top 1,000 program, (2) not related to a regulated firm, and (3) in the
same industry and of similar size (measured in output) in the years prior to the regulation. Using
these firms as controls, we then conduct event-study and difference-in-differences analyses using
specifications similar to those in Equations (1) and (2).21 In this setting, the T reati variable is
now an indicator of whether a firm is related to a Top 1,000 firm. As we discuss in Section 1,

that due to the survey nature of the CESD data, our sample is substantially smaller in this case. Nonetheless,
these results show that our estimates are not driven by firms entering the sample or ceasing operations.
   20
      We also explore the effects of the program on other outcomes. In Table A.8 and Figure A.3, we show that
regulated firms experienced a decline in the probability of investing after the regulation was enacted. Additionally,
we test the Porter and van der Linde (1995) hypothesis by examining whether firms became more innovative after
the regulation. Figure A.4 shows no increase in the filing of patents related to energy efficiency in regulated firms.
   21
      Specifically, we use one-to-one matching within 4-digit industries based on the Euclidean distance in output
levels before the policy. To ensure that matches are comparable to related firms, we drop 5% of observations with
the least comparable matches. As we show below, our results are robust to using alternative matching methods.

                                                         13
we focus our study of spillovers on related firms in the same 4-digit industry as the regulated
firm. This restriction follows from the logic that only firms selling products similar to those of
the regulated firms may be able to make up for the production decline in Top 1,000 firms.
    Figure 5 plots the results of these event-study analyses using ASIF data. Panel A shows that
prior to the regulation, related firms had output trends similar to those of unrelated firms. After
the regulation, firms related to Top 1,000 firms saw significant increases in output that persisted
for several years. The last column of Panel A of Table 4 shows that related firms expanded by
13%, on average, after the regulation. This table also shows that we obtain very similar results
across specifications with different levels of fixed effects and with firm-level controls.
    To gauge the magnitude of these spillover effects, it is important to account for the number
of related parties of each regulated firm and for their relative size. On average, Top 1,000 firms
have 2.45 related parties. However, since the average related firm is only 19.3% as large as
its regulated counterpart, we calculate that conglomerates could only shift close to 41% of the
output decline in regulated firms.22 This result is informative for a couple of reasons. First,
this result shows that conglomerates were not able to fully circumvent the regulation. Second,
combined with the null effect of the program on the energy efficiency of regulated firms, this
result shows that firms were unable or unwilling to increase their energy efficiency in production
processes even if this meant losing profits to competitors.
    The result that related firms display an increase in economic activity is robust to a number
of checks. First, we show that we obtain similar results when we use the entropy balancing
method of Hainmueller (2012) to find controls for related firms (see Figure A.5 and Tables
A.9­A.10).23 Second, we show that only those related firms operating in regulated firms' own
narrowly defined industries--and that could thus possibly produce substitute output--increased
their economic activity. Indeed, Panel B of Figure 5 and Panel B of Table 4 show no impact
on the output of related firms operating outside the 4-digit industry of the regulated firm (but
still in the same 2-digit industry). This placebo test rules out the possibility that firms related
to large conglomerates saw increases in economic activity after 2007, say, in response to the
financial crisis or other shocks or trends. Third, these results are robust to alternative definitions
of ownership networks. Table A.11 shows similar spillover effects when we drop related firms

  22
      Using the estimate on related firms from column (4) of Panel A of Table 4 of 12.7%, we calculate that the
overall increase in related firms amounted to 6%( 2.45 × 19.3% × 12.7%) of the output of regulated firms. This
increase is 41% of the comparable 14.5% decrease from column (4) of Panel B of Table 3. Using estimates from
the specifications in columns (3), we obtain an estimate of 27%. (i.e., 27%  2.45 × 19.3% × 11.8%/20.4%). We
can also gauge the sensitivity of this estimate to the measurement of business networks. Supposing that regulated
firms had an average of 3 related firms, spillovers would account for 51% of the output decline in regulated firms.
   23
      Our estimates of spillover effects are also not driven by the entry and exit of related firms. To find a
suitable control, our matching analysis requires firms to have existed prior to 2006. Moreover, because we map
business networks in 2018, our estimates include the effects on firms that joined regulated business groups after
the program.

                                                        14
with ownership changes between 2007 and 2018, when we restrict the sample by requiring 51%
ownership at each link, and when we expand the sample to include 6 levels of relations and 20%
ownership stakes. Fourth, these results are robust to dropping firms in power generation (see
Table A.12 and Figure A.6). Finally, we assuage concerns that our results may be affected by
data quality issues by showing similar effects when we rely on tax data to measure the output
of related firms (see Figure A.7 and Table A.13).24
    We now explore the potential for heterogeneous spillovers across related firms. Panel C of
Table 4 shows that related firms in higher terciles of the size distribution display larger increases in
output. This result suggests that larger related firms were more able to expand or, alternatively,
that these firms had larger installed production capacity. As in our analysis of regulated firms,
we explore potential heterogeneous effects across industries. Table A.15 shows no significant
differences in how related firms in different industries responded to the program. Finally, we
explore the possibility that the regulation shifted economic production and related emissions to
more populated or more polluted areas. As we show in Appendix C, the spillover effects of the
regulation do not disproportionately shift production to areas with higher population density or
with higher preexisting levels of industrial emissions.
    Having established that conglomerates shifted output across related parties, we now explore
whether these firms also saw changes in energy use and energy efficiency. Panels C and D of
Figure 5 report these results using data from the CESD. Panel C shows that related firms saw
an increase in energy use after the regulation. Panel A of Table 5 shows that energy use in
related firms increased by 30%­32% after the regulation. Note that the number of observations
in this panel is smaller than that in Panel A of Table 4. This is because related firms are overall
smaller and only the larger related firms are included in the CESD. These larger effects are
consistent with our results in Panel C of Table 4 showing larger spillover effects on larger related
firms. While the available data include firms across all affected industries, caution is warranted
in ascribing these increases in energy use to all related firms. Panel D of Figure 5 and Panel
B of Table 5 show that these firms did not experience statistically significant changes in energy
efficiency.
    Overall, we find robust evidence that conglomerates shifted production across related parties.
On average, this shifting behavior allowed conglomerates to recover about 40% of the output
reduction in regulated firms. As we show in Section 6, the ability to shift production to related
firms diminishes the aggregate energy savings and lowers the shadow cost of the regulation.




  24
     We also find positive spillover effects on other measures of economic activity. Table A.14 shows estimates of
positive spillover effects on sales, profits, capital and labor (see Figure A.8 for corresponding event studies).

                                                       15
Market-level Spillovers
Since related parties could not make up the entire output loss of Top 1,000 firms, other firms
in regulated industries may have been indirectly affected by the energy saving program due to
reduced competition. To examine this indirect effect of the regulation, we estimate the following
difference-in-differences specification:

                            Yijt = spilloverj × P ostt + Xit  + i + t + ijt ,                                    (3)

where spilloverj is the proportion of the total energy saving targets of Top 1,000 firms for industry
j in total energy consumption of industry j in 2004. To interpret the coefficient  as the average
spillover effect, we normalize the spilloverj variable by the average exposure across regulated
industries. Since the variation in the independent variable is at the industry-year level, we do
not include industry-by-year fixed effects in this regression. We instead use firm fixed effects
and year fixed effects only and we additionally control for overall output and energy use at the
industry-year level.25 Finally, to ensure that market-level spillovers are not contaminated by
ownership-network spillovers, we exclude firms related to Top 1,000 firms from this specification.
    Figure 6 shows that unregulated firms in industries with stricter regulation increased their
output significantly after the policy was implemented. Table 6 shows that across all industries,
the average market-level spillover led to a 7%­8% increase in the output of unregulated firms.
The regressions in the first two columns of this table include both regulated and unregulated
industries. We find similar increases (8%) when we include only firms in regulated industries.
In this case, the identifying variation is driven solely by differences in regulation intensity across
industries.26
    These results yield a couple of insights. First, the findings further confirm our previous
estimates that related parties were not able to make up for the full output loss of Top 1,000 firms.
Second, a full accounting of the spillover effects of the regulation needs to include both within-
conglomerate spillovers and market-level spillovers. Third, a potential limitation of the difference-
in-differences analyses is that their interpretation depends on the strength of conglomerate and
market spillovers. The next section builds on these insights by proposing a model of conglomerate
production. The model clarifies the interpretation of our reduced-form estimates in the presence
of market and conglomerate spillovers, computes the aggregate effects of the Top 1,000 program,
and allows us to consider the effects of alternative policies.

   25
      Note that the variation in spilloverj is absorbed in our previous specifications that include industry-by-year
fixed effects. By controlling for industry-level aggregates, the coefficient  in Equation 3 captures the impact of
the regulation on the market share of unregulated firms.
   26
      As with our previous analyses, we confirm that our results are not driven by firm entry. Specifically, in Table
A.16, we report similar estimates of market-level spillovers when we restrict the sample to firms in operation prior
to 2006.

                                                         16
4        A Model of Conglomerates with Regulation
This section presents an industry equilibrium model of conglomerate production that is consis-
tent with the cross-sectional data patterns and reduced-form responses to the policy of energy
regulation. Appendix D provides detailed derivations of the model results.

4.1      Demand and Technology
Our industry equilibrium model draws the structure of product differentiation and monopolistic
competition from Melitz (2003). We consider an individual sector with an exogenous aggregate
expenditure R. The representative consumer has CES preferences over a continuum of varieties
  :
                                                                  1/
                                                            
                                          U=           q ( ) d         ,
                                                    

where q ( ) represents the consumption level of variety  and  = 1/(1 - ) > 1 denotes the
elasticity of substitution between varieties.27
     Utility maximization by the representative consumer yields the following residual demand
curve for each variety  :
                                           q ( ) = RP -1 p( )- ,
                                  1
where P = [     
                    p( )1- d ] 1- is the aggregate price index.28
     We define a conglomerate in our model by the presence of a variety  that can be manu-
factured by multiple affiliates.29 Each conglomerate starts with a central producer--the model
counterpart of a Top 1,000 firm. Conglomerates have heterogeneous production efficiencies ,
which are drawn from the distribution G() with density g ().
   Production at each affiliate i requires capital ki , energy ei , and variable inputs li . Energy and
variable inputs are combined using Leontief technology ~   li = min{li , ei i }, where i is the affiliate's
energy efficiency. The assumption that energy and variable inputs are perfect complements
follows recent work in this area (e.g., van Biesebroeck, 2003; Fabrizio et al., 2007; Gao and
Van Biesebroeck, 2014; Ryan, 2018).30 Production at affiliate i is then qi = i ~ll k k , which is
                                                                                               i   i


    27
      Since the regulated firms produce raw and intermediate materials, one can view the representative consumer
as a stand-in for the downstream industry.
   28
      This market structure implicitly assumes that this industry is not characterized by dominant firms that may
act strategically. This is a reasonable assumption in our setting since we study manufacturing industries that,
even when narrowly defined, feature a large number of firms and that serve a national market.
   29
      This assumption implies that the outputs of related firms are perfect substitutes. We relax this assumption
in Section 7.4, where we allow the outputs of related firms to be imperfect substitutes.
   30
      Fabrizio et al. (2007); Gao and Van Biesebroeck (2014) adopt this assumption from van Biesebroeck (2003)
in the context of energy generation. Gao and Van Biesebroeck (2014) study the case of China. Ryan (2018)
estimates a production function with energy using data from India and finds that energy and unskilled labor are
close to being perfect complements.

                                                       17
subject to decreasing returns to scale, i.e.,  = k + l < 1. The decreasing-returns-to-scale
assumption is consistent with the literature on span of control. Intuitively, conglomerates may
operate more firms as a way to escape decreasing returns to scale and as a way to share production
knowledge  across firms. However, as we show in Panel A of Figure 3, conglomerates are not
able to replicate the same scale across related firms. To match this fact, we assume that the
productivity of the ith affiliated firm is  i-1 . This assumption can be interpreted as either a
limit on the span of managerial control or as a measure of imperfect knowledge-sharing across
firms. Finally, each manufacturing establishment incurs a fixed outlay of capital denoted by f .
This assumption is motivated by the fact that conglomerates have a finite number of affiliates.
   We consider the conglomerate's problem in two stages. Prior to the regulation, conglomerates
observe their productivity  and optimally choose the number of affiliated firms n and the amount
of capital {ki }n                            n
                i=1 and variable inputs {li }i=1 for each affiliate.
                                                                     31
                                                                        After the regulation, since capital
is quasifixed, the conglomerate adjusts its variable inputs to maximize profits. We initially assume
energy efficiency is constant and fixed (i.e., i = 1 for all firms) but consider costly investments
to improve energy efficiency and heterogeneous efficiencies in Sections 7.1 and 7.2.

4.2       Profit Maximization
The conglomerate takes the prices of energy pe , capital r, and the variable input bundle w as
given. Given the Leontief technology, the conglomerate sets li = ei so that the cost of intermediate
inputs is w + pe . Holding the number of affiliates n constant, the conglomerate maximizes
                                                            n                                   n               n
                                                1-                      k l
            (, n) =         max             R        P   
                                                                   i-1 ki li      - (w + pe )         li - r         ki   .   (4)
                       {li }i=1 ,{ki }n
                           n
                                      i=1
                                                            i=1                                 i=1            i=1

                                                                                           l   r
For a firm i, the first-order conditions for li and ki imply that li =                              k.
                                                                                           k (w+pe ) i
                                                                                                               Substituting this
expression and comparing the first-order conditions for k1 and ki , we obtain the following result.

Proposition 1 (Within-Conglomerate Distribution). Absent regulation, the inputs and the out-
put of producers in a conglomerate follow a decreasing geometric sequence given by
                                                qi   ki  li ei    i-1
                                                   =    = =    =  1- .                                                        (5)
                                                q1   k1  l1 e1

   The within-conglomerate distribution described in Proposition 1 is broadly consistent with
the empirical pattern in Panel A of Figure 3, where the average output of the second-largest
affiliate in a conglomerate is less than 30% of that of the largest one and where the output of
other affiliated producers in the conglomerate decreases exponentially with their rank i. Equation
5 links this distribution to two model parameters. First, the size gap among affiliates is larger if
  31
       Conglomerates can choose n = 0, which we interpret as an exit decision.

                                                                   18
within-group knowledge depreciation is more severe (lower  ). Second, if firms are closer to having
constant-returns-to-scale production ( is closer to one), the conglomerate concentrates more
activity in its top producer, which increases the dispersion of the within-group size distribution.
                                                                  n
   To consider the choice of total capital Kn =                   i   ki , define the conglomerate's total produc-
                                                                                                                 1
                                      1                                                       l 
                       n     i-1                                                        l             k k      1-
tivity n = [           i=1 (     )   1-   ]1- and the constant C = (1 - )              w+pe           r
                                                                                                                     . We
reformulate Equation 4 using the results of Proposition 1 so the optimal choice of capital Kn
solves
                                          R1- P  C1-
                                                            k     -                           
               (, n) = max                                             (n ) Kn
                                                                             
                                                                               -r                    Kn .
                              Kn          (1 - )1-          r                                 k
The optimal capital Kn and the firm profits for a conglomerate of size n are then
                  1-          
              R 1- P 1- C k                                                       1-                        
         Kn =               (n ) 1-                         and  (, n) = R 1- P 1- C (n ) 1- .
                 (1 - )   r
   Consider now the optimal number of affiliates. The conglomerate adds an affiliate if
                                                 1-                                               
       (, n + 1) -  (, n) - f r = R 1- P 1- C × (n+1 ) 1- - (n ) 1- - f r > 0.                                        (6)

Adding a new affiliate can improve the conglomerate's revenue and profit by lowering its overall
marginal cost curve. On the other hand, the conglomerate incurs a fixed cost of f r when adding
a new affiliate. While the marginal benefit of adding a new affiliate is increasing in , it is also
decreasing in the number of existing affiliates n. Since the fixed cost is the same for all affiliates,
Equation 6 guarantees the existence of a cutoff value n , where conglomerates with efficiency
 > n operate at least n affiliated producers.

Proposition 2 (Optimal Conglomerate Size). Without regulation, the optimal number of firms
in a conglomerate n is nondecreasing in its fundamental efficiency . For n > 1, a conglomerate
chooses to have n affiliated producers when n   < n+1 , where
                                                                     1-
                                                             (f r)     
                                 n+1 =                  1-                    
                                                                                  1-   .                              (7)
                                                 1-                                 
                                                                  1-        1-
                                             R        P C     n+1 - n

   Let  () = maxn  (, n) - nf r be the profit for a conglomerate of efficiency  at the optimal
number of affiliates. The prediction from Proposition 2 is consistent with the observation in
Panel B of Figure 3 that conglomerates with higher efficiency have, on average, a larger number
of affiliated firms.

4.3      Equilibrium and Welfare
The unique equilibrium of the model is characterized by product-market clearing, the zero cut-off
profit condition, and the free entry condition.

                                                             19
    With M denoting the mass of active firms, the aggregate price index is given by
                                                                                  1
                                               
                                                        1-     g ()M             1-
                                   P =            p()                  d              .                         (8)
                                            1                1 - G(1 )

    Conglomerates operate whenever
                                                                             1-
                                                                     (f r)     
                                    ()  0    1 =                     1-          1-   .                         (9)
                                                                                   
                                                                 R        P C
Equation 9 shows that only firms with  > 1 choose to participate in the market.32
    To enter the market, an entrepreneur pays an entry cost rfe . Upon entry, the efficiency of
the conglomerate  is realized. Since the conglomerate operates only if  > 1 , the free entry
condition is given by
                                            
                                                 ()g ()d - rfe = 0.                                            (10)
                                           1

    An equilibrium is given by the exit threshold 1 and the mass of active conglomerates M
such that (1) conglomerates make optimal allocation and size decisions, (2) the product market
clears, and (3) the zero profit and free entry conditions (Equations 9­10) are satisfied.
    Welfare depends on consumption utility and on the utility costs of carbon emissions from
energy use. The CES preferences of the representative consumer imply that indirect utility is
           R
given by   P
             ,   where R is total expenditure. Utility is decreasing in total emissions E, where E
denotes aggregate energy use and  captures the carbon dioxide emitted per unit of energy. We
assume that welfare takes the form
                                                         1-               
                                                    R            1
                                           W =                               ,                                 (11)
                                                    P            E

where the parameter  captures the social welfare losses from emissions.33

4.4     Effects of the Top 1,000 Program
We denote outcomes in the unregulated equilibrium with an asterisk to differentiate them from
those in the regulated equilibrium. Since the Top 1,000 program targeted very large firms, we
assume that only conglomerates with  above an efficiency level ~ are subject to the regulation.
The regulation sets a proportional input quota for the largest firm in each conglomerate, which is
the model counterpart of a Top 1,000 firm. Specifically, the energy use of regulated firms cannot
       ¯1 () = e
exceed e                              
                1 (), where  < 1 and e1 is the unregulated optimal energy use. At the time of

  32
     1 is the minimum efficiency for a single-firm conglomerate, so that  (1 ) = 0.
  33
     See Shapiro (2021) for a similar formulation of social welfare. Since we find that the regulation does not
significantly shift the geographic distribution of energy use, our welfare measure does not account for the location
of emissions (e.g., as in Shapiro, 2016).

                                                         20
                                                           n
 the regulation, the conglomerate's capital allocations {ki }i=1 are quasifixed, but it can respond
 by adjusting its use of inputs {li , ei }n
                                          i=1 . Our model characterizes firm-level, conglomerate-level,
 and industry-wide effects of the program.
       We first study how the regulation impacts firm-level production decisions. To do so, we
                                                                               i-1
 substitute the result from Proposition 1 that ki =  1- k1 into Equation 4, define  = (k1
                                                                                         k
                                                                                          ) ,
 and let  be the Lagrange multiplier associated with the regulatory constraint.34 The first-order
 conditions for li (1  i  n) are then
                                 n                           -1
              1-              
                                          (i-1)(1-l )
                                                         l
                                                                      (i-1)(1-l )
   =      R        P   
                                              1-        li                1-        l (li )l -1 = w + pe + ()I[i = 1] . (12)
li                               i=1
       Market Demand                                                  Marginal Product
                                                                                                              Shadow Cost
                                 Residual Revenue
                                                                                                              of Regulation


 An important insight of this expression is that conglomerates internalize the marginal product of
 inputs across firms through the residual revenue term, which is common to all firms in the con-
 glomerate. The impact of energy regulations on the residual revenue term is key to understanding
 the difference between within-conglomerate and market-level spillovers.
       This equation shows that the regulation distorts the allocation of inputs within a conglomerate
 by adding a shadow cost () to the input of the regulated firm. Because conglomerates with
 more affiliates can shift more production to related parties, conditional on being regulated, more
 efficient conglomerates (those with a higher ) are subject to a smaller shadow cost (). Since
 only conglomerates with  >     ~ are part of the Top 1,000 program, the regulation also distorts
 input use across conglomerates.
       The following proposition shows that the regulation leads conglomerates to allocate more
 inputs to the unregulated firms than in the case without the regulation.

 Proposition 3 (Within-Conglomerate Distribution under Regulation). Under the Top 1,000
 regulation, the inputs and the output of producers follow the sequences given by
                                                         ej  lj qj    j -2
                                                            = =    =  1- for j > 2,
                                                         e2  l2 q2
                                                           1                                             l
         ei  li  i-1       ()                            1-l          qi    i-1       ()                1-l
            = =  1- × 1 +                                         and    =  1- × 1 +                            for i > 1.
         e1  l1           w + pe                                      q1             w + pe

       Even though conglomerates substitute production across firms, the regulation leads to an over-
 all reduction in the conglomerate's output. The following proposition describes the conglomerate-
 level effects of the regulation on output and energy use.



                                       -1
   34                   
        Note that k1 = Kn (n ) 1- .

                                                                       21
Proposition 4 (Conglomerate-level Distortions from the Regulation). Under the Top 1,000
regulation, the energy use e(, n) and the output q (, n) of regulated conglomerates are given by
                                                1                                                         l
                           1                                                         1
                                       ()     1-l                                                 ()     1-l
                    1-
               1 + (n  - 1) 1 +        w+pe
                                                                             l 1 + (n
                                                                                    1-
                                                                                       - 1) 1 +   w+pe
e(, n)                                                         q (, n)
        =                         1                     and             =                   1                  ,
e (, n)                        n 1-                            q  (, n)                  n 1-


                               =e ()                                                     =q ()

where e (, n) and q  (, n) are the unregulated counterparts of energy use and output and where
e () and q () describe the effective input and output wedges.

   The term e () captures the net effect on energy use by combining the reduction in energy
use at the regulated firm ( ) with the increase in related firms, which is governed by ().
The denominator follows from the insight of Proposition 1 that in the unregulated case, the
                                                    1
                                        1-
conglomerate-level input and output are n  times the input and output of the largest firm.
The term q () has a similar intuition, and it translates the effects of input changes on output
through the exponent l .
   We now characterize the equilibrium effects of the regulation.

Proposition 5 (Equilibrium under Regulation). The equilibrium price level under the Top 1,000
regulation solves the following system of nonlinear equations:
                                                             l 2
                               -
                          P                     P 1-l                  ~
                                 = (1 - s ~ )          + s ~Ee q ()  >                              (13)
                          P                    P
                                                  
                           ()         l -1    P
                       1+        = ( )          
                                                   q ()-1 ,                                         (14)
                          w + pe              P
where s~ is the share of energy in regulated conglomerates prior to the regulation and Ee de-

notes the expectation with respect to the energy-use distribution from the unregulated equilibrium.
Additionally, the aggregate change in energy use is given by
                                                  
                          E               P     1-l 
                                                                       ~
                            = (1 - s~)                  + s~Ee e ()  >  .                           (15)
                          E               P
   Equation 13 shows that the equilibrium price depends on two forces. First, prices increase
as regulated firms reduce their output by q (). Second, unregulated firms respond to this price
increase by increasing their output. The relative importance of these forces depends on the share
of energy in regulated conglomerates s~.

   Equation 14 describes the shadow cost of the regulation in terms of the equilibrium price
         P
effect   P
             and the conglomerate-level output wedge q (). This equation follows from the first-
order conditions of both the regulated and unregulated cases and from the results of Proposition
             P
3. Given     P
               ,   Equation 14 and Proposition 4 define an implicit function for (). Interestingly,

                                                        22
the shadow cost () and the conglomerate-level wedge q () are step functions of . While
these functions depend on the number of affiliates in a conglomerate n, they are constant across
conglomerates of the same size but with different values of .35 Intuitively, this result is a
consequence of the fact that the energy cap in the regulation is proportional to the firm's prior
energy use, which itself depends on .
     The equilibrium under the regulation is then determined by a single shadow cost for every
                                                  P
value of n along with the equilibrium price       P
                                                    ,   which greatly facilitates the computation of the
new equilibrium. Equation 15 then shows that the equilibrium effect on energy depends on the
net change in conglomerate energy use e () and the market leakage to unregulated firms.
     These results characterize the welfare effects of the program since Equation 11 implies that

                                d ln W            P                    E
                                       = - ln             -      ln          .                           (16)
                                1-                P           1-       E

Propositions 4 and 5 show that the equilibrium effects of the regulation on the industry-level price
P                                   E
P
    and on aggregate energy use     E
                                        are closely related to the conglomerate-level distortions (q ()
and e ()), which themselves depend on the shadow cost to regulated firms (). As we show
in Section 6, these model quantities are closely related to our empirical estimates from Section
2­3. This framework also allows us to study the effects of alternative policies. For instance, a
universal energy tax would have s~ = 1 and a constant q for all firms. In Section 6, we compare

the Top 1,000 program to a universal energy tax, a size-dependent energy tax (i.e., s~ < 1), and

alternative forms or regulations, including ones that mirror the Top 10,000 program.


5        Model Estimation
This section estimates the key parameters of the model to quantitatively match the data patterns
for the period prior to the regulation. We validate our estimated model by showing that it
matches the untargeted difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of the Top 1,000 program.

5.1      Parameterization and Estimation
We briefly describe the set of structural parameters of the model and how they are identified by
the data. We start by setting the values of two parameters based on previous estimates. We
follow the literature by calibrating the elasticity of substitution  = 4 (Melitz and Redding, 2015,
i.e.,  = 0.75). We use the estimate of returns to scale of  = 0.9 from Burnside et al. (1995),
who use energy data to proxy for utilized capital, and set l = 0.8 to match the cost share of


    35
     As we show in Appendix D.2, this result follows by substituting q () into the expression for () in Propo-
sition 5 and noting that this expression varies across firms depending on the term n only.

                                                     23
variable inputs in the data.36 Finally, we parameterize the conglomerate efficiency distribution
G() with a log-normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation m .
    The model is characterized by the three parameters that we estimate: (, 1 , m ) , which
include the within-conglomerate size depreciation , the conglomerate-level survival threshold
1 , and the dispersion of the efficiency distribution m . Given values of 1 and the market
expenditure R, Equations 8 and 9 pin down f. The entry cost fe is then determined by the
conglomerate free-entry condition.37
    We estimate the parameters  = (, 1 , m ) using the method of moments. For a candidate
value of , we solve the model and compute the following moments: (1) the share of firms
in three bins of firm revenue (5­20 million RMB, 20­100 million RMB, and greater than 100
million RMB); (2) the share of firm output in the same three bins; (3) the average output of
the second, third, and fourth largest affiliates relative to the top firm in the conglomerate; and
(4) the fraction of firms with revenue below 1 million RMB. Our data moments describe the
equilibrium prior to the regulation using the ASIF and manufacturing census data for 2004.
Intuitively, the parameter m is pinned down by the moments (1) and (2) describing the firm
size and firm output distribution. The parameter  is determined by the within-conglomerate
output distribution moments (3). The last moment (4) helps pin down 1 . Our estimate of  is
given by
                                    ^ = arg min[md - m()] W [md - m()],
                                    
                                            

where md are the data moments, m() are the moments generated by the model, and W is the
identity matrix.38
    Table 7 reports the results of the estimation. We estimate that  = 0.90, which means that
the productivity of the second largest firm in the conglomerate is close to 90% of that in the
largest firm. Recall that Equation 5 shows that the output of affiliates depreciates in rank by
                1
the factor  1- . This relation implies that the output of the second largest firm is close to 35%
of the largest firm (cf., 29% in the data) and that of the third largest is close to 13% (cf. 20% in
the data), which matches the pattern in Panel A of Figure 3. We also estimate that m = 1.24
and 1 = 0.61. To interpret these estimates, note that they imply a conglomerate entry cost

   36
      Conventional estimates of returns to scale range from 0.85 to 0.95, depending on aggregation and time period.
In Section 7.3, we show that the aggregate and welfare effects of the program are robust to reestimating the model
based on different values of  and .
                                                                                                       1-
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                         
  37                                                                           1-     1-
       To pin down fe , first note that Equations 7 and 9 imply that n+1 = 1 / n +1 - n                     and that
                                                                                                    
           n        1-                                                                       n    1-
 () =      1             - n rf. The conglomerate free-entry condition is then fe =   1      1         - n f g ()d,
which is determined by our fixed and estimated parameters.
   38
      We use the identity matrix since the sample size for the moments describing the size and output distribution
is much larger than the sample size for the moments describing the relative size of firms within conglomerates. We
calculate standard errors using a bootstrap covariance matrix of the moments that incorporates this information.

                                                         24
of fe = 8.9 million RMB (or about 1.1 million USD), which is reasonably commensurate with
average profit in the economy. The per-firm operating fixed cost is determined by the average
sales per conglomerate in the data, which implies that f = 44, 000 RMB. Panel A of Figure 7
shows that our model does a good job of fitting both the observed firm-size distribution and the
concentration of output prior to the regulation.

5.2    Model Response to the Top 1,000 Program
We need two additional parameters to implement the Top 1,000 program in our model. As
discussed in Section 4, our version of the regulation targets conglomerates with efficiency level 
above  ~. We choose the threshold    ~ to match the share of total energy consumed by regulated
firms within energy-intensive industries. Given our estimated parameters, the model implies
a value of ~ = 9.29, which reproduces the fact that regulated firms account for 56% of total
energy consumption in energy-intensive industries. Finally, we take the policy intensity  from
the 11FYP, which targeted an energy reduction of 20%. For this reason, we set  = 0.8. Table 7
collects the model parameters.
   We now use our estimated model to compute the effects of the Top 1,000 program. As in
Section 4.4, we assume conglomerates take the number of affiliates and capital allocation as
given. The new industry equilibrium ensures that (1) regulated conglomerates allocate variable
inputs optimally (as in Equation 12), (2) unregulated firms increase output to respond to the
increase in market prices, and (3) the product market clears (as in Equation 8).
   Panel B of Figure 7 compares our difference-in-differences estimates to simulated model ana-
logues. The model does a remarkable job of matching the estimated effects on firm output. This
is true for regulated firms, related firms, and market-level spillovers. The model prediction of
the change in input use of regulated firms is within the 95% confidence interval of our empirical
estimate, but the model has a hard time fitting the effect on the energy use of related firms. This
may reflect the fact that, as we discuss in Section 3, this estimate is based on a smaller sample
of larger firms and may not be representative of the overall response. However, the model does
a good job of matching the effects of the program on the energy efficiency of both regulated
and related firms. Overall, these results show that our model can reproduce the effects of the
regulation on the output of regulated, related, and unrelated firms, which is remarkable since
these are all out-of-sample predictions of the model.

5.3    Using the Model to Interpret Difference-in-Differences Estimates
An important force in the model is that unregulated firms are impacted by the regulation through
the market spillover. This force contributes to the effects of the program on the equilibrium price



                                                25
and aggregate energy use. We now use our model to understand how this market spillover impacts
our difference-in-differences estimates.
    To see how the regulation in our model connects to our difference-in-differences analysis, note
that we can write conglomerate j 's revenue from affiliate i as follows:


                ln Revenueij = ln(Production Shareij ) +  ln                 qij    + ln(R1- P  ) ,          (17)
                                                                        ij
                                        Allocation Effect                             Market Demand
                                                                 Residual Revenue

where Production Shareij = qij /            qij .39 Equation 17 clarifies the three ways in which the Top
                                       ij
1,000 program impacts the revenue of regulated firms. First, when firm i is regulated, the
conglomerate is forced to reallocate inputs to other firms, which lowers the production share
in regulated firms. Panel A of Table 8 reports that in our model, the share of production in
regulated firms within a conglomerate decreases by 12.9%. Second, since the marginal cost goes
up at the conglomerate level, the market share of the conglomerate's variety decreases, which
lowers the group's residual revenue. Table 8 shows that regulated conglomerates see their residual
revenue decrease by 3.7%. Finally, the Top 1,000 program impacts the industry-level price P.
This price increase has a countervailing effect on the revenue of the regulated firm and lessens
the overall decline by 2.6%. Combining these three forces, our model implies that regulated firms
decreased their output by 14%.
    Equation 17 also characterizes the impact of the regulation on the control firms in our
difference-in-differences analyses. Since these firms are not regulated or related to Top 1,000
firms, the regulation does not impact the within-conglomerate allocation of production. Control
firms see an increase in their residual and firm-level revenue as the market reallocates demand.
Table 8 shows that the residual revenue of control firms increases by 3.9%. As in the case of
regulated firms, unregulated firms also benefit from the equilibrium impact on market demand.
    This discussion clarifies that our difference-in-differences estimates differ from the total effect
on Top 1,000 firms along two margins. First, the difference-in-differences estimator captures both
the within- and across-conglomerate reallocation of production. This leads to an overestimate of
the effect of the program on regulated firms of 3.9%. Second, since the market effect cancels out,
the difference-in-differences estimator does not capture the countervailing effect on the industry-
level price, which further overestimates the effect of the program by 2.6%.40
    Similarly, our model allows us to decompose the estimates of the spillover effects of the
regulation through ownership networks. Panel B of Table 8 shows that related firms share the
residual revenue and market effect terms but have a positive allocation effect as their share of
  39
     Equation 17 follows by multiplying conglomerate j 's inverse residual demand by affiliate i's production.
  40
     Note that the first channel arises from the impact of the regulation on the control firms. The second channel
is an aggregate effect that is not identified by a difference-in-differences research design.

                                                            26
production within the conglomerate increases. The total effect on related firms is an output
increase of 19.3%. The effects on control firms is the same as that in Panel A. By ignoring the
positive market effect and subtracting the residual revenue effect on control firms, the difference-
in-differences estimator understates the spillover effect on related firms by 6.5%.
    In addition to clarifying the interpretation of our reduced-form estimates, our model also
motivates an alternative approach that does not the depend on the residual revenue or market
effects. Specifically, consider a within-conglomerate difference-in-differences estimator where
treated firms are the regulated Top 1,000 firms and the control firms are unregulated firms in
the same conglomerate. Because Equation 17 shows that the residual revenue and market effect
are common to a given conglomerate, this estimator captures only the allocation effects of the
program. Figure 8 implements this within-conglomerate difference-in-differences approach. This
figure plots the results from an event-study specification similar to Equation 1 but where we
additionally include conglomerate-by-year fixed effects. Consistent with our previous results, we
find a significant decline in the output of Top 1,000 firms relative to that of other firms in their
same conglomerates. Table 9 reports estimates of these relative declines of between -31.5% and
-36.7%. As with our previous reduced-form effects, Panel B of Figure 7 shows that the model
matches this within-conglomerate effect very well. Moreover, Panel C of Table 8 confirms that
this effect is a combination of the allocation effects on regulated and related firms.
    These insights highlight the importance of interpreting quasirandom estimates through the
lens of a model that accounts for within- and across-conglomerate reallocation of production as
well as equilibrium impacts on industry-level prices.


6     Policy Analysis
This section uses our estimated model to capture the effects of the Top 1,000 program by quan-
tifying the shadow cost to regulated firms, the aggregate effects on prices and energy use, and
the implied welfare trade-off of the program. We then consider the effects of alternative poli-
cies including program expansions (e.g., the Top 10,000 program) and the possibility that the
government can use information on business networks to improve energy regulation.

6.1    Effects of the Top 1,000 Program
Given that the shadow cost is the fundamental building block of our model outcomes, we first
quantify this cost of the policy.




                                                27
6.1.1    Shadow Cost of the Policy

To compute the shadow cost of the policy, we solve for the regulated equilibrium as in Proposition
5. Panel A of Figure 9 plots the implied shadow cost as a function of efficiency . The blue line
plots the shadow cost of our computed Top 1,000 program. This shadow cost is zero for firms
with  <    ~ and jumps to an average of 8.7% for regulated firms. Since the shadow cost has
the same scale as the cost of variable inputs, we can interpret this value as an equivalent tax
on variable inputs. While 8.7% might seem like a small number, recall that inputs constitute a
large tax base, especially relative to profits.41
    A somewhat surprising feature of Panel A of Figure 9 is that the shadow cost appears to be
constant with respect to conglomerate productivity . Panel B of Figure 9 zooms in to show the
different shadow costs for regulated firms (i.e.,  > ~). As we discuss in Section 4, the shadow
cost is constant for conglomerates with the same number of related firms. This result follows
from the fact that the regulation is based on previous energy use, which is proportional to firm
productivity. When  crosses the thresholds that define conglomerate size (Proposition 2), we
see that the shadow cost drops as conglomerates with more affiliates are more able to escape the
burden of the regulation. However, the differences in shadow costs are very small in comparison
to the overall difference between regulated and unregulated conglomerates. This small impact is
driven by the decay in within-conglomerate size, which implies that the marginal (nth ) affiliate
may not be able to supplant a large fraction of the combined activity of all the other affiliates
(1 through n - 1) in the conglomerate.
    We now validate the magnitude of the shadow cost using an additional implication of the
model. Recall the insight from Proposition 3 that the shadow cost is related to the within-
conglomerate output distribution after the regulation. Based on this insight, we can write the
output difference between the Top 1,000 firm and related firms as follows:


    ln RevenueTop1000,jt - ln RevenueRelated,jt = ln (qTop1000,j ) - ln                        qij
                                                                                 i=Top1000,j

                                                              l           ()         1-
                                                                                       1
                                                     = -          ln 1 +        - ln n   -1 .
                                                            1 - l        w + pe

By definition, () = 0 prior to the regulation, and n is constant over time. Therefore, taking
a time difference of this expression shows that the within-conglomerate difference-in-differences
                                  l                  ()
estimation identifies the term - 1- l
                                      ln 1 +         w+pe
                                                            . Using the estimate in the first column of
Table 9 of -34.3% and our value of l = 0.80, we estimate a shadow cost of 8.95%.42 Given that
   41
      Indeed, in models with constant marginal cost and with a similar value of , inputs are ( - 1) = 3-times
as large as profits. An equivalent profit tax would then be 26.1%.
   42                                  ()             1-l               1-0.8
      This calculation follows from 1+ w +pe = exp{- l } = exp{0.343 .8 } = 1.0895. In principle, we identify
the average value of this quantity across firms. However, as we show in Figure 9, there is little variation in ().

                                                       28
the shadow cost plays an important role in our quantification exercises of the aggregate effects of
the program, it is reassuring that our estimated magnitude is consistent with the reduced-form
pattern of within-conglomerate reallocation of production.
    Our model allows us to consider how different mechanisms impact the shadow cost of the
program. The top line of Panel A of Figure 9 shows that shutting down the market and con-
glomerate spillovers would increase the shadow cost to 15.6%. That is, the equilibrium price
increase and the ability to shift production to related firms lowered this mechanical effect by
almost 50%. The model also allows us to isolate how the ability of conglomerates to shift pro-
duction to related firms lowered the shadow cost of the regulation. The second line from the top
in Panel A of Figure 9 plots the shadow cost under the assumption that market prices adjust but
that regulated firms are not able to shift production to related parties. In this case, the shadow
cost of the regulation would be 11.2% of input costs, which is about 30% larger than the level in
the baseline case.43 These calculations showcase the importance of accounting for both market
and conglomerate spillovers in the measurement of the shadow cost of the regulation.

6.1.2    Aggregate and Welfare Effects of the Program

The analysis so far has focused on the distortionary aspects of the regulation. We now evaluate
the aggregate and welfare effects of the policy by considering the social welfare function of a
government concerned with both decreases in energy-use-related emissions and the impact of
distortions to production on consumption.44
    We compute the aggregate effects of the program by solving the equilibrium conditions in
Proposition 5. Panel A of Figure 10 plots the effects of the Top 1,000 program in the space of
price increase and energy reduction. The red diamond in this figure shows that the Top 1,000
program led to a price increase of about 3.5% and an aggregate energy use reduction of close
to 4%. Equation 15 helps us understand how we obtain a 4% aggregate reduction in energy
use. First, we find that--including within-conglomerate reallocation--regulated conglomerates
reduced their energy use by 1 - Ee e ()  >   ~ = 5.8%. Second, the unregulated conglomerates
increased their energy use by close to 6.5%. Finally, we obtain the aggregate 4% decline by using
                                                                          45
the fact that the share of energy in regulated conglomerates is s~ = 86%.    Thus, even though
we find in Section 2 that Top 1,000 firms reduced their energy use by close to 100 million tce,
   43
      This counterfactual assumes that, similar to unregulated firms, the production of related firms responds to
equilibrium price increases. Restricting production in related firms to pre-regulation levels further increases the
shadow cost to 14%.
   44
      To match the short-run nature of our empirical analysis, we focus our discussion on the short-run effects of
the policy, ignoring the entry of new conglomerates. Later changes to regulations and the overall environment
also complicate the simulation of long-run impacts.
                                                                                      0.75
  45                                                          P 1-l 
     The energy increase for unregulated firms is given by P             = (1.035) 1-0.80.75  1.065. Recall that
regulated firms account for 56% of energy use; accounting for related firms in the same conglomerate raises this
fraction to 86%. The aggregate effect is then -4% = ln(1.06  0.14 + 0.942  0.86).

                                                        29
the annual aggregate reduction--including conglomerate and market leakage--was closer to 48
million tce.46
   While reducing energy use improves welfare by lowering related carbon emissions, the over-
all effects of the program on welfare also depend on how the program impacts consumption.
According to Equation 16, welfare increases when the aggregate price-to-energy use elasticity
              P
        - ln( P )                  
  i.e., ln E      is smaller than 1-  . Given our aggregate estimates of the effects of the Top 1,000
           ( E )                     
                                                                   
program, we find that the program raises welfare as long as 1-      
                                                                       < 34.5
                                                                              = 0.875. That is, the
Top 1,000 program raises welfare as long as the government is willing to accept a 0.875% price
increase for every 1% reduction in energy use.
   To obtain a more concrete interpretation of this condition, we calibrate  by building on the
Cobb-Douglas intuition that exponents are related to expenditure shares. This intuition implies
that we can approximate  as follows:
                                Social Cost of Carbon × Carbon Emissions
                           =                                             .
                                         Aggregate Income × 0.8
The adjustment factor 0.8 comes from the fact that the Chinese government declared in the
11FYP that relative to its policy goals, the government was underspending on reducing emissions
by 20%. We implement this equation with 2006 data on overall emissions in China (6.38 billion
tons of carbon) and national income (2.752 trillion USD). We can then compute a value of
 that corresponds to an estimate of the social cost of carbon (SCC). In the US, the Biden
administration has recently proposed using an SCC of $51 (IWG, 2021), although researchers
have recently argued for a higher value of $125 (Carleton and Greenstone, 2021). In contrast,
Germany has proposed an SCC value of $218.
   Figure 10 implements this calibration by plotting black indifference curves where  varies
according to different values of the SCC. That is, for a given SCC value, these lines plot combi-
nations of price and energy use changes that yield the same effect on welfare. The red diamond
in this figure shows that the Top 1,000 program lies on the indifference curve that corresponds
to an SCC of $160. This implies that this policy is desirable from a welfare perspective only if
policymakers use relatively higher values of the SCC.

6.2     Alternative Policies
We now use the model to consider alternative policies. We first explore different ways in which
the Top 1,000 program could be expanded or contracted. This exercise is motivated by the fact
that the Chinese government expanded the program to include more than 14,000 firms in the
  46
      In Appendix D.2.3, we connect the model solution to our reduced-form estimates by showing that we can
solve an approximate version of the equilibrium using the value of  that is implied by the within-conglomerate
difference-in-differences results.

                                                     30
Top 10,000 program in 2012. We then explore the effects of alternative regulations and energy
taxes to examine the degree to which the government can improve the regulation of energy.
    We explore two ways to change the scope of the Top 1,000 program. First, we consider the
effect of varying the regulation threshold ~, which changes the number of firms affected by the
program. The blue dots in Panel A of Figure 10 show the effects of changing the size threshold,
~ The first blue dot (left of the red diamond) considers the effect of decreasing the number
.
of regulated firms to cover only 50% of the energy use in the regulated industry (relative to
the current 56%). The second blue dot lowers  ~ so that the regulation instead covers 60% of
the industry's energy use. As would be expected, we find larger energy decreases when the
program covers a larger fraction of overall energy use. However, Figure 10 shows that expanding
or contracting the number of firms in the program does not alter the fundamental trade-off that
the government faces between price increases and reductions in energy use.
    An alternative way to change the scope of the Top 1,000 program is to increase or decrease the
energy use quota . The maroon squares in Panel A of Figure 10 plot the effects of policies where
1 -  varies in 5% increments between 5% and 30%. Larger values of 1 -  lead to both larger
price increases and larger energy reductions. Taking both changes into account, we find that the
implied SCC increases with the required energy reduction and equals $165 when 1 -  = 30%.
This result is valuable since the government may be concerned about the administrative costs of
regulating a larger number of firms. Since increasing  and lowering ~ have similar welfare effects,
it may therefore be desirable to place stricter energy use limits on fewer firms if the government
lacks the capacity or the funds to conduct additional energy audits.
    We now consider the effects of an alternative policy that targets the energy use of all firms in
a given conglomerate.47 The orange crosses in Panel B of Figure 10 plot the effects of this type
of regulation for different values of . These policies have the benefit that they do not distort
the within-conglomerate distribution of production. Panel A of Figure 9 shows that regulating
conglomerates has a lower shadow cost of 4.9% (instead of 8.7%). Such a policy is preferable
to the Top 1,000 program from a welfare perspective since it can achieve larger energy use
reductions for a given price increase. As we show in Panel B of Figure 10, this type of regulation
can yield a 4.36% reduction in aggregate energy use for the same price increase as the Top 1,000
program. This is a 10% increase from the energy reduction of the Top 1,000 program, which
corresponds to additional energy savings of 5 million tce. This policy improves welfare as long
as the SCC $152. While this program would involve monitoring additional firms, the number
of firms related to Top 1,000 firms is less than 20% of the number of firms in the Top 10,000
program. These results show that the government can improve the regulation of energy by using
  47
     We derive equilibrium conditions under these alternative regulations in Appendix E. To make this case
comparable, we model the effects of a regulation that limits the conglomerate-level use of energy to the levels of
the Top 1,000 program. That is, we set  to values corresponding to e () in the Top 1,000 program.

                                                       31
publicly available data on business networks to target conglomerates and that doing so would be
more effective than regulating additional unrelated firms, as with the Top 10,000 program.
    Finally, we consider the effects of energy taxes. We first model the effects of a tax that
affects only firms in conglomerates with Top 1,000 firms (i.e., with  > ~). Panel A of Figure 9
shows that we would obtain the same energy reduction as that under the Top 1,000 program by
taxing inputs at 4.9%.48 The green circles in Panel B of Figure 10 show that the effects of this
energy tax are very close to those of the conglomerate-level regulation.49 We further consider
the effects of a universal energy tax such that s~ = 100% instead of 86%. Panel B of Figure 10

shows that while a universal energy tax yields a slight improvement over the size-dependent tax
(SCC= $151), both the size-dependent tax and the conglomerate-level regulations imply very
similar welfare trade-offs.
     The preferred policy solution for most economists on the regulation of carbon emissions related
to energy use is a universal carbon tax. In practice, this policy may not be feasible given legal,
administrative, or political constraints. The results in this section inform the efficacy and design
of a prominent real-world policy that regulates quantities and has incomplete coverage. We
find that the government can achieve similar aggregate effects by either expanding the program
through stricter regulations for current firms or increasing the number of firms in the program.
While the former has narrower coverage and generates larger inequities between regulated and
unregulated firms, the latter may require an increase in administration costs. We also find
that the government can improve the regulation of energy by targeting the ownership networks
of regulated firms. This policy increases aggregate energy savings by 10% without increasing
welfare costs. Moreover, this policy can be implemented with publicly available data, has a
lower administrative cost than the Top 10,000 program, and implies a welfare trade-off close to
that under a universal energy tax.


7        Extensions and Robustness
This section explores four extensions of our model. First, we consider the possibility of firms
responding to the regulation by investing in energy efficiency. Second, we consider how preex-
isting differences in energy efficiency across firms may alter the overall energy savings from the
program. Third, we study the robustness of our welfare calculations to alternative parameter-
    48
      As with the Top 1,000 regulation, the shadow cost of the conglomerate-level regulation decreases slightly as
the number of related firms increases. In contrast, the shadow cost of the size-dependent energy tax is constant
for all firms affected by it. Since energy costs are close to 15% of variable input costs for Top 1,000 firms, the
equivalent energy tax would be closer to 32.7%( 4     .9%
                                                     15% ).
   49
      It is worth noting that our quantification lacks two features that often motivate the use of taxes over
regulation. First, in our calculations, the revenue from the tax is not rebated to consumers; this calculation
ignores potential "double dividend" effects. Second, firms in our setting have homogeneous abatement costs; in a
setting with heterogeneous abatement costs, a tax would additionally reallocate production to "cleaner" firms.

                                                       32
   izations of the model. Finally, we extend our model to allow imperfect substitution between
   products produced by firms in a given conglomerate.

   7.1            Endogenous Energy Efficiency
   Our baseline analysis assumes that in the short run, firms do not make any investments to improve
   their energy efficiency. This assumption is consistent with our empirical results in Sections 2­
   3. Following the intent of the Top 1,000 program, we now extend our model to allow firms to
   respond by adjusting their energy efficiency. Appendix G.1 provides additional details of this
   model extension.
        We assume that the conglomerate can improve energy efficiency at firm i, i , by spending
   li c(i ), where c (i ) > 0 and c (i )  0. We can then restate the regulated conglomerate's problem
   as
                                                                                   n                                   n
                                                               1-               
                                                                                            (i-1)(1-l )
                                                                                                           l                             pe
                   (, n) =               max               R        P                           1-        li      -         li w +          + c(i )          ,
                                   {li }i=1 ,{i }n
                                        n
                                                 i=1
                                                                                   i=1                                i=1
                                                                                                                                         i

   where we omit the cost of fixed capital. Absent the regulation, the conglomerate sets c (  ) 2 =
   pe for all firms. This result implies that Propositions 1­2 continue to describe the equilibrium
                                                                                                                                                
   prior to the regulation. To simplify the exposition, we assume that c( ) =                                                                  1+
                                                                                                                                                  ,   where   1.
   This implies that the effective price of energy inclusive of investments in energy efficiency is
   pe
   
        + c(  ) = c (  )  + c(  ) = (  ) .
        Consider now the effects of the regulation. First, note that the Top 1,000 regulation does not
                                                                                                                                                                  li
   impact the choice of i for unregulated firms. We then use these results and the fact that i =                                                                  ei
   to restate the conglomerate problem as
                                                           n                                                          n                                   
                                         1-             
                                                                    (i-1)(1-l )
                                                                                    l                                                    1         l1
    (, n) = max                      R        P   
                                                                        1-         li        - (w + ( ) )                   li -l1                           - (  )    ,
             n      {li }i=1
                                                           i=1                                                        i=1
                                                                                                                                        1+         e 1


   where we substitute the regulatory constraint into the cost of energy efficiency and where we
   abstract away from the cost of the regulated energy, pe e1 , since it is a constant.
                                                                                                                                
        The conglomerate's first-order conditions for li (1  i  n), i.e.,                                                       li
                                                                                                                                   ,   are then

                               n                            -1                                                                                  
      1-                
                                        (i-1)(1-l )
                                                       l              
                                                                            (i-1)(1-l )
                                                                                                    l -1                                 l1
  R        P   
                                            1-        li                        1-        l (li )          = w + ( ) +                             - (  ) I[i = 1].
                           i=1
                                                                                                                                         e 1
Market Demand                                                               Marginal Product
                               Residual Revenue                                                                                           Shadow Cost
                                                                                                                                          of Regulation


   Interestingly, this extension of the model yields very similar results to those in Equation 12. For
   the case of unregulated firms (i.e, li for i > 1), we simply substitute pe with the effective price


                                                                                          33
of energy: (  ) . The first-order condition for the regulated firm implies that the shadow cost of
the regulation is given by
                                         ()                 1    
                                                = se                -1 ,
                                       w + (  )             
where se is the share of variable input costs accounted for by energy and where energy efficiency
                                          1
at the Top 1,000 firm improves by         
                                              relative to that in the unregulated case.50 The results of
Proposition 3 continue to hold using this definition of the shadow cost of the regulation, which
captures the incremental cost of improving energy efficiency in the regulated firm.
    This framework allows us to infer how costly it would have been for regulated firms to have
improved their energy efficiency. We implement this calculation using our estimated model
parameters. Our estimated model fundamentals remain valid since Propositions 1­2 continue
to describe the unregulated equilibrium and since we estimated the model with data from prior
to the regulation. To implement this model extension, we set se = 15% based on our data and
solve for the new equilibrium for different assumed values of . To find a lower bound for the
value of  , we compare the improvement in the revenue-to-energy ratio that is predicted by the
model with our estimates from Section 2. Since we do not find a statistically significant effect,
we use the confidence intervals to guide our calibration of .51 In Appendix G.1, we show that
when  = 7.4, the improvement in the revenue-to-energy ratio of Top 1,000 firms in our model
equals 11.6%, which matches the 95% confidence interval of column (1) in Panel C of Table 3.52
The ability to improve the energy efficiency of the regulated firm lowers the shadow cost of the
regulation, as it loosens the energy use restriction on the Top 1,000 firm. In this case, the shadow
cost is 6.5% instead of the 8.7% in our baseline scenario.
    This model extension also allows to quantify the aggregate effects of the policy under different
assumptions of the costs of improving energy efficiency. Panel A of Figure 11 plots the aggregate
effects of the regulation for different values of . This model nests our baseline model under
the assumption that   . In this case, firms do not improve their energy efficiency, which
is consistent with our empirical results. When the cost of improving energy efficiency decreases
(lower values of  ), the Top 1,000 program achieves greater energy reductions and results in
smaller price increases. Both of these forces imply that the SCC that rationalizes the program
also increases with . For our calibrated value of  = 7.4, the Top 1,000 program reduces
aggregate energy use by 5.6% for a price increase of 2.8%. This calculation also yields a bound

  50
      The functional form assumption for c( ) only simplifies the derivation. Absent this assumption, one can
replace pe in Equation 12 with the effective cost of energy   c (  ) + c(  ). Similarly, the shadow cost would be
() = [1 c (1 ) + c(1 )] - (  c (  ) + c(  )).
   51
      We also show in the appendix that the Top 1,000 program did not lead to improvements in the variable
costs-to-energy ratio. Figure A.9 and Table A.18 show a null effect on this measure of energy efficiency for
regulated firms, and Figure A.10 and Table A.19 find the same result for related firms.
   52
      Alternatively, our model implies a value of  = 12.8 if we target the 99% confidence interval of column (4)
of Panel C of Table 3.

                                                       34
on the SCC since as we show in Panel B of Figure 11, the program raises welfare for this value
of  as long as the SCC $112.53
    We can also use our model to calculate the value of  that would have allowed regulated firms
to improve their revenue-to-energy ratio by 20%. We find that firms would have met this energy
efficiency improvement target if  = 0.55. In this case, the shadow cost of the regulation would
have been 1.6%. This scenario represents the "low-hanging fruit" perspective according to which
small investments can lead to large gains in energy efficiency. While it is possible that firms may
find ways to improve their energy efficiency over the long run, our results suggest that firms did
not expect to recoup the costs of improving energy efficiency over a five-year period.54

7.2     Heterogeneous Energy Efficiency
The previous section showed that allowing endogenous investments in energy efficiency does
not significantly alter our results. We now explore the possibility that--even prior to the Top
1,000 program--regulated, related, and unrelated firms operated under heterogeneous energy
efficiencies.
    One possibility is that the government targeted Top 1,000 firms because they were particularly
energy inefficient. Similarly, the production increase in unrelated firms may have smaller effects
on overall energy use if these firms are more energy efficient. In both of these cases, the regulation
may be more effective to the extent that it shifts production to more energy-efficient firms.
Alternatively, the Top 1,000 program may lead to smaller reductions in energy use if Top 1,000
firms are more energy efficient than other firms.
    Appendix G.2 generalizes our analysis to allow the energy efficiency of related firms to differ
from that of Top 1,000 firms by a factor of R . Differences in energy efficiency would alter the
pattern of production within a conglomerate even prior to the regulation. This is because energy
efficiency influences the unit cost of related firms. Differences in energy efficiency would then
influence the allocation of production within the conglomerate. We can additionally assume
that other unrelated firms have an energy efficiency that differs from that of Top 1,000 firms
by a factor of O . These differences impact both the response of related and other firms to the
regulation and overall energy use. To explore the sensitivity of our results to differences in energy
efficiency, we solve the model under different values of R and O . We allow for O and R to be
up to 20% lower (which would exacerbate energy leakage) or to be 20% greater than that of the


   53
      The result that the conglomerate-level regulation would increase energy savings by 10% for the same welfare
cost is robust to allowing firms to improve their energy efficiency.
   54
      The fact that conglomerates were able to shift production to related affiliates lowered the incentive for
regulated firms to invest in energy efficiency. Using our baseline calibration of  = 7.4, we calculate that regulated
firms would have increased their revenue-to-energy ratio by 13.8% if they had not been able to shift production
to related firms.

                                                         35
Top 1,000 firms (leading to negative leakage, e.g., Baylis et al., 2014).55
    Panel B of Figure 11 shows the effect of heterogeneous energy efficiency on our welfare calcu-
lations. We first assume that firms related to Top 1,000 firms are 20% less energy efficient, i.e.
R = 0.80. This case implies a larger welfare loss due to a larger price increase as well as smaller
energy savings. Under this assumption, the SCC that rationalizes the program increases to $191.
Further assuming that other firms are also 20% less energy efficient, i.e. O = 0.80, also increases
prices, decreases energy savings, and is rationalized by an SCC of $196. These calculations show
that the within-conglomerate energy leakage is an important contributor to the overall energy
effects of the program. If we alternatively assume that Top 1,000 firms are particularly energy
inefficient, i.e. R = O = 1.2, the program can be rationalized with SCC values as low as $133.
To the best of our knowledge, Top 1,000 firms are not relatively inefficient in comparison to their
related firms. Nonetheless, this calculation provides an interesting bound for the welfare effects
of the program.

7.3     Robustness to Alternative Parameters
The structural model in Section 4 used calibrated values for the decreasing-returns-to-scale pa-
                                                                                              1
rameter  and for , which determines the elasticity of substitution  =                        1-
                                                                                                .   This section
discusses how our results are affected by changing the values of these parameters. To do so, we
first vary the values of these parameters. We then reestimate the structural parameters following
the same procedure as in Section 4. Finally, we solve for the regulated equilibrium that is implied
by every pair of values of  and .56
    Panel C of Figure 11 shows how varying these parameters affects the estimated aggregate
effects of the Top 1,000 program and the implied SCC. The red diamond plots the effects of the
program under our baseline parameterization that sets  = 0.90 and  = 0.75. Consider first
the effects of fixing  = 0.90 and setting  at either 0.70 (so that  = 3.33) or at 0.90 (so that
 = 10). These two cases are denoted in Panel C of Figure 11 by the green circles, which show
that the aggregate effects of the policy are barely altered by changing  . This result is driven by
the fact that when  is larger, the distributions of firm size and output imply a smaller variance
of firm productivity . Thus, even though we would expect a larger market spillover for a larger
value of , this effect is offset by the decrease in the dispersion in firm productivity.
    Consider now the effect of fixing  = 0.75 and setting  to either 0.85 or 0.95. These two
cases are denoted in Panel C of Figure 11 by the blue triangles. In this case, we find that lower

  55
      Unfortunately, since the CESD surveys larger firms, our data are not able to precisely measure differences
in energy efficiency between regulated, related, and other competing firms in the market.
   56
      The value of l is determined by the value of  and the cost share of variable inputs. Additionally, we solve
for a new regulation threshold ~ to match the share of energy in regulated firms. Table A.17 reports the estimated
model parameters across different specifications.

                                                       36
values of  lead to both larger energy use reductions and larger price increases. The intuition
for this result is that when production faces more decreasing returns to scale, conglomerates are
less able to substitute production across related firms. Similarly, unregulated firms are less able
to respond to the price increase by increasing their own production. Both of these forces lead to
larger energy use reductions and price increases.
    Across these cases, the reduction in aggregate energy use ranges between 2.9% ( = 0.95)
and 4.9% ( = 0.85). In terms of the total reduction in energy use, these values imply annual
aggregate energy savings of between 37 and 57 million tce. Since the parameter  governs the
extent of energy leakage to related and unregulated firms, it is reasonable that uncertainty in this
parameter should generate uncertainty in the aggregate energy use reduction. Interestingly, the
change in the aggregate price covaries with the reduction in energy use. As a result, the ratio of
the price change to the energy change varies very little. We denote this in the graph by plotting
gray lines that correspond to the implied values of the SCC for each case. These lines show that
across all these different parameterizations, the implied SCC that rationalizes the policy varies
only between $154 and $165.
    Overall, the values of  and  do not significantly affect our quantitative assessment of the
fundamental trade-off faced by the government.

7.4        Imperfect Substitution within Conglomerates
The previous section shows that the welfare effects of the Top 1,000 program are robust to the
use of a range of values for the parameters  and . This section explores the robustness of our
results to allowing the outputs of firms within a conglomerate to be imperfect substitutes. We now
assume that conglomerates produce a composite good q ( ) = (                     i   q (, i)c )1/c , where 0 <  <
c < 1. This assumption implies that consumers have a larger elasticity of substitution between
products of firms in a given conglomerate than across goods produced by different conglomerates,
         1        1
i.e.,   1-
             <   1-c
                     .   As we show in Appendix G.3, many of the results of our baseline model extend
to this case after slight modifications.57 For instance, we redefine the total productivity of a
                                                               1-c
                                                      (i-1)c     c
                                                n
conglomerate as C         C
                n , where n =                   i=1    1-c           .
    To operationalize this extension, we first reestimate the model assuming that c = 0.90. To
gain intuition into how this extension impacts our model parameters,
                                                             
                                                                     note that the share of
                                                                                  c
                                               th                         i-1   1-c
the conglomerate's revenue from the i               affiliate is now     C
                                                                                      . Since c < 1, the within-
                                                                           n

conglomerate distribution of output in Panel A of Figure 3 implies a lower value of . Intuitively,
since firms related to Top 1,000 firms are now less productive, the firm faces a greater productivity
loss when shifting output to related firms. As a result, we estimate that  = 0.80 when we
reestimate the model, which implies a larger shadow cost of the regulation of about 11%.
   57
        Indeed, we obtain our baseline when c = 1. Table A.17 reports the estimated model under this extension.

                                                         37
    The black square in Panel C of Figure 11 plots the aggregate effects of the program under
the assumption that c = 0.90. Two features of the model lead to larger decreases in energy use.
First, the imperfect substitution of output within the conglomerate limits the extent to which
regulated conglomerates can shift production to related firms. Second, the lower value of  limits
the extent of these spillovers. Both of these forces limit within-conglomerate leakage of energy
use. However, these forces also lead to a larger price increase, which exacerbates market leakage
by shifting production to unrelated firms. On the whole, we find larger price effects and energy
savings. As the black square in Panel C of Figure 11 shows, these effects imply an SCC that is
quite close to our baseline estimate.


8     Conclusion
This paper studies the effects of a prominent energy conservation program in China. We combine
detailed data on energy use and business networks to study the effects of the regulation on both
regulated firms and unregulated firms within the same conglomerate. While the program led
regulated firms to decrease their energy use, this decrease was driven by a decline in production
output and not by an increase in energy efficiency. We show that the program led to large
increases in the output and energy use of unregulated firms in the same conglomerate. By shifting
production to related firms, regulated conglomerates escaped close to 40% of the regulation-driven
output reduction. The facts that regulated conglomerates were unable to fully shift lost output
to related firms and that we find no impacts on the energy efficiency of regulated firms imply
that regulated firms found it costly to increase their energy efficiency.
    We calculate the shadow cost of the regulation using a model of conglomerate production
that matches our setting and the reduced-form effects of the regulation. The model shows that
even with the ability to shift some production to related firms, the regulation increased the cost
of conglomerate production by 8.7%.
    A welfare analysis of the aggregate effects of the policy on consumption and energy use
characterizes the social cost of carbon that would be required for the Top 1,000 program to
raise welfare. Our results suggest that the program increases welfare as long as the social cost
of carbon exceeds $160. We characterize uncertainty in this estimate by exploring a number of
alternative model specifications and parameter values. Across these wide-ranging assumptions,
we find that the SCC value that rationalizes the policy lies between $112 and $196. We also
show that the government can improve the regulation of energy by targeting the energy use of
conglomerates. These policies have lower shadow costs and are more effective from a welfare
perspective.
    Overall, this paper shows that the economic effects and the efficacy of policies that target


                                                38
large firms are modulated by substitution along ownership networks. Since ownership networks
are public information, the results of our paper reveal a potential avenue for improvement of
existing energy regulations.




                                             39
References
Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone, "Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?," Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, February 2012, 26 (1), 3­28.
Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee, "Using Loopholes to Reveal the Marginal Cost of
 Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards," American Economic Review, June 2011,
 101 (4), 1375­1409.
   and Richard G Newell, "Information programs for technology adoption: the case of energy-
  efficiency audits," Resource and Energy Economics, 2004, 26 (1), 27­50.
Auffhammer, Maximilian and Yazhen Gong, "China's Carbon Emissions from Fossil Fuels
 and Market-Based Opportunities for Control," Annual Review of Resource Economics, 2015,
 7 (1), 11­34.
Baylis, Kathy, Don Fullerton, and Daniel H. Karney, "Negative Leakage," Journal of the
 Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2014, 1 (1/2), 51­73.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, "Capacity Utilization and
 Returns to Scale," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1995, 10, 67­110.
Bushnell, James, Yihsu Chen, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins, "Downstream regula-
 tion of CO2 emissions in California's electricity sector," Energy Policy, 2014, 64, 313­323.
Carleton, Tamma and Michael Greenstone, "Updating the United States Government's
 Social Cost of Carbon," Working Paper 2021-04, EPIC 2021.
Chen, Qiaoyi, Zhao Chen, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Su´     arez Serrato, and Daniel Yi
 Xu, "Industrial Energy Regulation: The Role of Business Conglomerates in China," AEA
 Papers and Proceedings, May 2021.
Colmer, Jonathan, Ralf Martin, Mirabelle Mu^     uls, and Ulrich J. Wagner, "Does pricing
 carbon mitigate climate change? Firm-level evidence from the European Union emissions
 trading scheme," Discussion Paper, Center for Economic Performance 2020.
Curtis, E. Mark, "Who Loses under Cap-and-Trade Programs? The Labor Market Effects of
 the NOx Budget Trading Program," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 03 2018, 100
 (1), 151­166.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan, "Truth-telling
 by Third-party Auditors and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental Evidence from
 India," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (4), 1499­1545.
  , , , and , "The Value of Regulatory Discretion: Estimates from Environmental In-
  spections in India," Econometrica, 2018, 86 (6), 2123­2160.
Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram, "Do Markets Reduce
  Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric Generation Effi-
  ciency," American Economic Review, September 2007, 97 (4), 1250­1277.




                                             40
Fischer, Carolyn and Alan K. Fox, "Comparing policies to combat emissions leakage: Border
  carbon adjustments versus rebates," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
  2012, 64 (2), 199­216.
Fowlie, Meredith L., "Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition, and
  Emissions Leakage," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, August 2009, 1 (2), 72­
  112.
   and Mar Reguant, "Mitigating Emissions Leakage in Incomplete Carbon Markets," Journal
  of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economics, 2021, forthcoming.
  , , and Stephen P. Ryan, "Market-Based Emissions Regulation and Industry Dynamics,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (1), 249­302.
Gao, Hang and Johannes Van Biesebroeck, "Effects of Deregulation and Vertical Un-
 bundling on the Performance of China's Electricity Generation Sector," The Journal of Indus-
 trial Economics, 2014, 62 (1), 41­76.
Gibson, Matthew, "Regulation-Induced Pollution Substitution," The Review of Economics
 and Statistics, December 2019, 101 (5), 827­840.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Amelia Keyes, and Karen Palmer, "Advances in Evaluating En-
 ergy Efficiency Policies and Programs," Annual Review of Resource Economics, 2018, 10 (1),
 511­532.
Greenstone, Michael, "The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial Activity: Ev-
 idence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census of Manufactures,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (6), 1175­1219.
   and B. Kelsey Jack, "Envirodevonomics: A Research Agenda for an Emerging Field,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, March 2015, 53 (1), 5­42.
  , John A List, and Chad Syverson, "The Effects of Environmental Regulation on the
  Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing," Working Paper 18392, National Bureau of Economic
  Research September 2012.
Hainmueller, Jens, "Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate Reweighting
 Method to Produce Balanced Samples in Observational Studies," Political Analysis, 2012,
 20 (1), 25­46.
Hanna, Rema, "US Environmental Regulation and FDI: Evidence from a Panel of US-Based
 Multinational Firms," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2010, 2 (3),
 158­89.
He, Guojun, Shaoda Wang, and Bing Zhang, "Watering Down Environmental Regulation
 in China," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 06 2020, 135 (4), 2135­2185.
Holland, Stephen P., "Emissions taxes versus intensity standards: Second-best environmental
 policies with incomplete regulation," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
 2012, 63 (3), 375­387.
Ito, Koichiro and Shuang Zhang, "Reforming Inefficient Energy Pricing: Evidence from
  China," Working Paper 26853, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2020.

                                             41
IWG, "Technical Support Document: Social Cost of Carbon, Methane, and Nitrous Oxide
 Interim Estimates under Executive Order 13990," United States Government, Interagency
 Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases February 2021.
Jia, Ruixue, "Pollution for Promotion," 21st Century China Center Research Paper No. 2017-
  05, 2017, (March 21, 2017).
Kahn, Matthew E., Pei Li, and Daxuan Zhao, "Water Pollution Progress at Borders:
 The Role of Changes in China's Political Promotion Incentives," American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy, November 2015, 7 (4), 223­42.
Karplus, Valerie J., Xingyao Shen, and Da Zhang, "Herding Cats: Firm Non-Compliance
 in China's Industrial Energy Efficiency Program," The Energy Journal, October 2020, 41 (1),
 1944­9089.
Ke, Jing, Lynn Price, Stephanie Ohshita, David Fridley, Nina Zheng Khanna, Nan
 Zhou, and Mark Levine, "China's Industrial Energy Consumption Trends and Impacts of
 the Top-1000 Enterprises Energy-Saving Program and the Ten Key Energy-Saving Projects,"
 Energy Policy, 2012, 50, 562 ­ 569.
Mansur, Erin T, "Prices vs. Quantities: Environmental Regulation and Imperfect Competi-
 tion," Working Paper 13510, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2007.
McKinsey & Co., "Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy," Technical Report 2009.
Melitz, Marc J., "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.
   and Stephen J. Redding, "New Trade Models, New Welfare Implications," American
  Economic Review, 2015, 105 (3), 1105­46.
Ohrn, Eric, "The Effect of Corporate Taxation on Investment and Financial Policy: Evidence
 from the DPAD," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2018, 10 (2), 272­301.
Porter, Michael E. and Claas van der Linde, "Green and Competitive," Harvard Business
 Review, Sept-October 1995, pp. 120­134.
Price, Lynn, Xuejun Wang, and Jiang Yun, "The Challenge of Reducing Energy Con-
 sumption of the Top-1000 Largest Industrial Enterprises in China," Energy Policy, 2010, 38
 (11), 6485­6498.
Ramachandran, J, K S Manikandan, and Anirvan Pant, "Why Conglomerates Thrive
 (Outside the U.S.)," Harvard Business Review, 2013, Dec 1, 2013.
Ryan, Nicholas, "Energy Productivity and Energy Demand: Experimental Evidence from
 Indian Manufacturing Plants," Working Paper 24619, National Bureau of Economic Research
 May 2018.
Ryan, Stephen P., "The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated Industry,"
 Econometrica, 2012, 80 (3), 1019­1061.
Shapiro, Joseph S., "Trade Costs, CO2, and the Environment," American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, November 2016, 8 (4), 220­54.

                                            42
  , "The Environmental Bias of Trade Policy*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 5 2021,
  136 (2), 831­886.
   and Reed Walker, "Why Is Pollution from US Manufacturing Declining? The Roles of
  Environmental Regulation, Productivity, and Trade," American Economic Review, December
  2018, 108 (12), 3814­54.
Soliman, Felix Samy, "Intrafirm Leakage," Technical Report 2020.
van Biesebroeck, Johannes, "Productivity Dynamics with Technology Choice: An Applica-
  tion to Automobile Assembly," The Review of Economic Studies, 01 2003, 70 (1), 167­198.
Walker, W. Reed, "The Transitional Costs of Sectoral Reallocation: Evidence from the Clean
 Air Act and the Workforce," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 09 2013, 128 (4), 1787­1835.




                                             43
Figures

               Figure 1: Cross-Country Differences in Industrial Energy Use

                        1500

                                                                             China
             Energy Consumption (MTCE)
                              1000




                                                                              EU
                 500




                                                                             USA
           250




                                                                             India
                        0




                                         1990   1995   2000    2005   2010   2015    2020
                                                               Year

    Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the IEA. This figure plots aggregate industrial
energy consumption in China, the US, the EU and India from 1990 to 2018 using units of
million tons of coal equivalent (MTCE). The industrial energy consumption of China increased
dramatically after 2000, by more than threefold, while the industrial energy consumption of the
US and EU remained relatively stable with a slight downward trend. The red line marks the
start year of the Top 1,000 Energy Saving Program.




                                                              44
                             Figure 2: Examples of Firm Relations

                   A. Subsidiary                                      B. Investment


                                                                             Jilin Yatai
                                                                           Cement Co., Ltd.

                   Shanxi Fenxi Mining                            100%                        56.14%
                    (Group) Co., Ltd.
                                                           Yatai Group Yitong         Jilin Yatai Mingcheng
                                                            Cement Co., Ltd.             Cement Co., Ltd.

       Shanxi Fenxi Mining      Shanxi Fenxi Mining                                                  99.83%
         (Group) Co., Ltd.       (Group) Co., Ltd.
       Gaoyang Coal Mining     Shuguang Coal Mining                                   Yatai Group Tonghua
            Enterprise              Enterprise                                         Cement Co., Ltd.




                  C. Shareholder                             D. Shareholder Investment


                 Qingdao Jinlang Chemical                               China Chengtong
                      Group Co., Ltd                                  Holding Group Co., Ltd

                               100%                                 100%                      100%

                    Qingdao Runhua                            China Paper                Zhongye Paper
                    Chemical Co., Ltd                      Investment Co. Ltd            Group Co., Ltd

                              62.02%                       55.92%                                    83.37%

                    Qingdao Changhua                        Taigelin Paper              Zhongye Meili
                     Group Co., Ltd                         Group Co., Ltd           Pulp & Paper Co., Ltd


    Notes: Authors' calculations using data from CARD. This figure shows examples of related
firms, including wholly owned subsidiary firms in Panel A, investment firms in Panel B, share-
holder firms in Panel C and shareholder investment firms in Panel D. Firms shaded in gray are
part of the Top 1,000 program; firms without shading are part of the same conglomerate. In
Panel D, we denote firms not in the same 4-digit industry as the Top 1,000 firm with dashed
lines. Ownership share is reported next to each link. See Section 1.3 for the definition of related
firms.




                                                      45
                Figure 3: Conglomerate Size and Production Allocation

                                                                       A. Relative Firm Size




                                  1
                                  .8
                Relative Size
                 .4       .6      .2
                                  0




                                                              1            2           3             4             5
                                                                                      Rank



                                                              B. Output and Conglomerate Size
                                                    15
                Number of Firms in the Conglomerate
                           5      0     10




                                                         12          13           14           15          16          17
                                                                  ln(Output of the Largest Firm in Conglomerate)


    Notes: Authors' calculations using data from ASIF and CARD. This figure shows stylized
facts about conglomerate size and relative firm size within conglomerate. Panel A plots the
average relative size within a Top 1,000 conglomerate (each firm's size relative to the largest
firm in the conglomerate). Firms are ranked by size from the largest to the smallest, and size
is measured by industrial output. This figure shows that firm size declines very quickly in a
conglomerate, with the second largest firm accounting for only 29% of the size of the largest.
Panel B plots the results of a regression of firm number on log output of the largest firm in a Top
1,000 conglomerate. It shows that conglomerates with larger leading firms usually have more
firms. See Section 1.3 for additional discussion. 46
                             Figure 4: Effects of the Program on Regulated Firms

               A. Energy Use: Coefficients                                                     B. Energy Use: Event Study




                                                                                10.50
  .3
  .2




                                                                                10.40
  .1




                                                                                10.30
  0




                                                                                10.20
  -.1
  -.2




                                                                                10.10
  -.3




                                                                                10.00
  -.4




        2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006    2007    2008   2009   2010           2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008    2009   2010

                              Estimate            95% CI                                                      Top 1,000       Top 10,000



                  C. Output: Coefficients                                                        D. Output: Event Study


                                                                                12.50
  .3
  .2
  .1




                                                                                12.00
  0
  -.1




                                                                                11.50
  -.2
  -.3




                                                                                11.00
  -.4




        2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006    2007    2008   2009   2010           2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008    2009   2010

                              Estimate            95% CI                                                      Top 1,000       Top 10,000



         E. Energy Efficiency: Coefficients                                              F. Energy Efficiency: Event Study
                                                                                1.80
  .3
  .2




                                                                                1.60
  .1




                                                                                1.40
  0
  -.1




                                                                                1.20
  -.2




                                                                                1.00
  -.3




        2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006    2007    2008   2009   2010           2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008    2009   2010

                              Estimate            95% CI                                                      Top 1,000       Top 10,000



    Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the CESD. This figure shows estimates of
Equation 1 where the dependent variable is log firm energy consumption in Panels A and B,
log firm output in Panels C and D, and log firm energy efficiency in Panels E and F. Energy
efficiency is defined as output per unit of energy consumption. This figure shows that regulated
firms (Top 1,000 firms) decreased their energy consumption and output substantially relative to
similar control firms (Top 10,000 firms not related to Top 1,000 firms) after the regulation, while
no improvement in energy efficiency in these regulated
                                                 47      firms can be found. Point estimates are
displayed in Table 3. See Section 2 for additional discussion. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level.
                                     Figure 5: Spillover Effects on Related Firms

                               A. Output                                                                      B. Placebo
  .3




                                                                                  .2
  .2




                                                                                  .1
  .1




                                                                                  0
  0




                                                                                  -.1
  -.1




                                                                                  -.2
        2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011                          2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

                               Estimate            95% CI                                                     Estimate            95% CI



                             C. Energy Use                                                            D. Energy Efficiency
  .6




                                                                                  .6
  .4




                                                                                  .4
  .2




                                                                                  .2
  0




                                                                                  0
  -.2




                                                                                  -.2
  -.4




                                                                                  -.4




        2001   2002   2003    2004   2005   2006    2007    2008   2009   2010          2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006    2007    2008   2009   2010

                               Estimate            95% CI                                                     Estimate            95% CI



    Notes: Authors' calculations using data from ASIF. This figure shows the effects of the Top
1,000 Energy Saving Program on the related parties of regulated firms. Panel A shows that
related firms in the same 4-digit industry as regulated firms increased their output significantly
after the policy implementation relative to similar control firms and that this effect persisted
during the policy period. See Section 3 for a description of the procedure used to identify the
comparison firms. The point estimate for Panel A is displayed in Panel A of Table 4. Panel B
plots the output results for placebo firms (related firms in the same 2-digit industry but outside
the 4-digit industry of regulated firms). This graph shows that placebo firms were not affected
by the regulation. The point estimate for Panel B is displayed in Panel B of Table 4. Panels C
and D show that related firms in the same 4-digit industry increased their energy consumption
after the regulation but did not improve their energy efficiency relative to similar control firms.
The point estimates for Panels C and D are displayed in Table 5. See Section 3 for additional
discussion. The results of robustness checks using an alternative matching method are shown in
Figure A.5. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                                             48
                               Figure 6: Industry-level Spillovers
                  .3
                  .2
                  .1
                  0
                  -.1
                  -.2




                        2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

                                          Estimate        95% CI


    Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the ASIF. This figure shows estimates of
Equation 3 where the dependent variable is log firm output. Consistent with the market spillover
hypothesis, we see that unregulated firms in industries with stricter regulation increased their
output significantly after the policy was implemented. Coefficient estimates and robustness
checks are shown in Table 6 and Table A.16. See Section 3 for additional discussion. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                     49
             Figure 7: Structural Model Fit and Out-of-Sample Validation

                                           A. Moments: Data vs. Model

                                                               Model                   Data




                          .8    .6
                   Moment Value
                      .4  .2
                          0




                                      <1    5-20    20-100   100+     5-20    20-100    100+   1st-2nd 2nd-3rd
                                            Share of Firms               Share of Output       Relative Output

   B. Out-of-Sample Validation: Difference-in-Differences Effects of the Program
                      Output
                                           Regulated Firms

                                                                         Related Firms

                                                                   Market Spillover

                       Within-Conglomerate


                       Inputs
                                                 Regulated Firms

                                                                                        Related Firms


                      Energy Efficiency
                                                        Regulated Firms

                                                       Related Firms

                     -50             -40   -30      -20    -10     0     10      20            30    40      50
                                                     Estimate vs. Model Prediction

                                                 Model Prediction        95% CI of Estimate


    Notes: This figure shows the model fitting for both the firm size distribution prior to the
policy and the firm response after the policy. Panel A plots the size distribution of firms predicted
by our model in blue bars and the size distribution calculated from the ASIF and economic census
of 2004 in red bars. It shows that our model fits the data well for both the observed firm size
distribution and the concentration of output prior to the regulation. Panel B plots the firm
response predicted by the model in red squares and the firm response obtained from our previous
difference-in-differences estimates in blue diamonds. The blue lines span the 95% confidence
interval for our difference-in-differences estimates. This graph shows that our model does a good
job of fitting the output, input, and efficiency response of firms, with almost all model-predicted
values lying within the 95% confidence intervals. See Section 5.2 for additional discussion.

                                                                    50
              Figure 8: Within-Conglomerate Difference-in-Differences
                  .6
                  .3
                  0
                  -.3
                  -.6




                        2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011

                                                Estimate            95% CI


    Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the ASIF. This figure plots the output change
of regulated firms relative to their (same 4-digit industry) related firms within the same con-
glomerate. We see a strong and persistent output reallocation following the regulation from
regulated firms to their related firms. Point estimates are displayed in Table 9. See Section 5.3
for additional discussion. Conglomerate-by-year fixed effects are included, and standard errors
are clustered at the conglomerate level.




                                                           51
        Figure 9: Model-Based Estimates of the Shadow Costs of Regulation

                      A. Shadow Costs of Alternative Regulations




                           7.5 10 12.5 15 17.5 20
                                                        Regulation Threshold



                                                                                               No Spillover




                      Shadow Cost of Regulation
                                                                                        No Conglomerate Spillover
                               ()
                                                                                           Top 1,000 Program



                                                                                        Conglomerate Regulation
                        5




                                                                                              Energy Tax
                                       2.5
                                       0




                                                    0             10             20         30            40             50
                                                                            Conglomerate Productivity
                                                                                       


                              B. Size Distortions in Top 1,000 Program
                                       8.7




                                                                        Conglomerate Size Thresholds
                         8.68 8.685 8.69 8.695
                      Shadow Cost of Regulation
                               ()
                                       8.675
                                       8.67




                                                    10                 20            30              40             50
                                                                            Conglomerate Productivity
                                                                                       


    Notes: This figure shows the implied shadow cost of different regulations estimated by our
model. Panel A plots the shadow cost of our baseline regulation (the Top 1,000 Energy Saving
Program) with the blue line, the shadow cost of the counterfactual in which both conglomerate
spillovers and market spillovers are shut down with the gray line, the shadow cost of the coun-
terfactual in which only conglomerate spillovers are shut down with the yellow line, the shadow
cost of regulating conglomerates with the same energy saving amount with the green line, and
the shadow cost of imposing an energy tax with the same energy saving amount with the dashed
red line. For each scenario, we solve the model and calculate the corresponding shadow cost. See
Appendix E for the equilibrium conditions under these alternative regulations. We can see that
both market spillovers and conglomerate spillovers lower the shadow cost substantially, while
regulating conglomerates and imposing an energy tax can further lower the shadow cost by over
40% with the same amount of energy saving. Panel B zooms in to show the shadow cost un-
der our baseline regulation. We see that shadow costs are no longer constant among different
conglomerates as in Panel A. Conglomerates with more firms have a slightly lower shadow cost,
while conglomerates with the same number of firms have the same shadow cost. See Section 6.1
and Section 6.2 for additional discussion.
                                                52
                  Figure 10: Welfare Effects of Alternative Regulations

                                                             A. Changes to Top 1,000 Program




                                          0
                                              Increase
                                                                                                                 SCC=$51
                                                                5%




                                             -2
                        Welfare Cost of Price
                                   -ln(P/P )
                                          *                                           50%
                                                                                          56%
                                                                                Top 1,000                        SCC=$125
                                                                                        20%   60%
                                -4




                                                                                                       30%       SCC=$160

                                                                                           SCC=$210
                     -6




                                                         0               2                    4              6
                                                                             Reduction in Energy
                                                                                           *
                                                                                                 Use
                                                                                     ln(E/E )

                                                                     Varying Regulation
                                                                                
                                                                                                  Varying Regulation
                                                                     Threshold                    Intensity 




                                                                B. Alternative Regulations
                                                                                      3.96     4.36
                                          0
                                              Increase

                                             -2
                        Welfare Cost of Price
                                   -ln(P/P )
                                          *




                                                                                Top 1,000
                                -4




                                                                                                             Universal
                                                                                                             Energy Tax
                                                                                                              SCC=$151


                                                                                                        SCC=$160
                     -6




                                                         0               2                    4              6
                                                                             Reduction in Energy
                                                                                           *
                                                                                                 Use
                                                                                     ln(E/E )

                                                                      Conglomerate-level           Size-dependent
                                                                      Regulation                   Energy Tax


    Notes: This figure shows the welfare effects of different regulations measured by the trade-
off between reductions in energy use and the welfare cost of price increases. Panel A shows the
welfare effects of the Top 1,000 program. The black lines are indifference curves for different SSCs.
The red diamond shows that the Top 1,000 program led to an aggregate energy consumption
reduction of close to 4% and a price level increase of about 3.5%, which can be rationalized with
an SSC=$160. The navy line indicates that expanding or contracting policy coverage to cover
between 50% and 60% of an industry's energy use does not change the fundamental trade-off
between reductions in energy consumption and price increases. The crimson line indicates that
increasing the input reduction quota from 5% to 30% makes this trade-off slightly worse. See
Section 6.1 for additional discussion. Panel B shows the welfare effects under alternative types
of regulations. Regulating conglomerates and imposing a size-dependent energy tax show a
similar trade-off at an SSC=$152, which is a better performance than that of the original policy.
A universal energy tax performs even better, with SSC=$151. See Section 6.2 for additional
                                                53
discussion.
                                                                                 Figure 11: Welfare Effects: Robustness
                                          A. Endogenous Energy Efficiency                                                                     B. Heterogeneous Energy Efficiency

                          0




                                                                                                                                0
                           Increase




                                                                                                                                   Increase
                           -2




                                                                                                                                   -2
     Welfare Cost of Price




                                                                                                             Welfare Cost of Price
                                                                                                                                                                                     R=1.2
               -ln(P/P )




                                                                                                                       -ln(P/P )
                                                                      11.6%                                                                                                          O=1.2
                      *




                                                                                                                              *
                                                                   10.4%                                                                                                                     SCC=$133
                                                                                                                                                                                    R=1.2
                                                 Baseline                                                                                                            Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                       R=0.8
           -4




                                                                                                                   -4
                                                                                                                                                                                             SCC=$135
                                                                                                                                                                R=0.8
                                                                                           SCC=$112                                                             O=0.8
                                                                                             =7.4

                                                              SCC=$160                 SCC=$129                                                                                              SCC=$160
                                                                 =                      =12.8
                                                                                                                                                                        SCC=$196      SCC=$191
                          -6




                                                                                                                                -6
                                          0      2           4         6         8        10      12                                          0            2                   4                  6
                                                            Reduction in Energy
                                                                          *
                                                                                Use                                                                       Reduction in Energy
                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                              Use
                                                                    ln(E/E )                                                                                      ln(E/E )
54




                                              C. Alternative Parameters                                Notes: This figure shows the robustness of the welfare effects of
                                                                                                       the Top 1,000 program. The black lines plot indifference curves
                                      0




                                                                                                       for the baseline value of SCC=$160, and the light gray lines plot
                             Increase




                                                                                                       values of the SCC according to different extensions. Panel A
                            -2




                                                                                                       shows the effects under different values of the parameter , which
      Welfare Cost of Price
                -ln(P/P )




                                                                                                       determines the cost of improving energy efficiency. See Section 7.1
                       *




                                                               =0.95
                                                                               =0.85
                                                                                                       for details. Panel B shows the effects when we assume preexisting
               -4




                                                                              C=0.9
                                                                                           SCC=$154    differences in energy efficiency. R > 1 denotes that related firms
                                                                                                       are more energy efficient than Top 1,000 firms, while O < 1
                                                                                       SCC=$160
                                                                                                       denotes that unregulated and unrelated firms are less efficient
     -6




                                                                                       SCC=$165
                                                                                                       than Top 1,000 firms and vice versa. See Section 7.2 for details.
                                          0             2                    4             6
                                                            Reduction in Energy
                                                                          *
                                                                                Use                    Panel C shows the effects when we assume different values of
                                                                    ln(E/E )
                                                                                                       the calibrated parameters. Blue triangles hold  = 0.9 and vary
                                              Baseline =0.9, =0.75              Vary {0.7,0.9}
                                              Vary {0.85,0.95}                  C=0.9                    {0.7, 0.9}, while green circles hold  = 0.75 and vary  
                                                                                                       {0.85, 0.98}. See Section 7.3 for details. The black square in Panel
                                                                                                       C plots the effects when we assume that the outputs of firms in
                                                                                                       a conglomerate are imperfect substitutes (i.e., c = 0.9). See
                                                                                                       Section 7.4 for details. Across these wide-ranging assumptions,
                                                                                                       the SCC that rationalizes the Top 1,000 program lies between
                                                                                                       $112 and $196.
Tables

     Table 1: Energy Consumption of Top 1,000 Firms in Different Industries

                                       Energy Consumption Proportion Firm Number
     Industry                       (10, 000 ton coal equiv.)   (%)
     Iron and Steel                                 22528.63        30.72             249
     Electric Power                                 16249.64        22.16             144
     Chemical                                       10909.29        14.88             238
     Petroleum and Petrochemical                    10581.76        14.43              98
     Mining                                          5278.77         7.20              60
     Nonferrous                                      2993.08         4.08              70
     Construction Materials                          2913.19         3.97              93
     Pulp and Paper                                   961.36         1.31              24
     Textile                                          917.57         1.25              22
Notes: This table reports the number of firms and energy consumption of Top 1,000 firms in each
industry in 2005 according to the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) and
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of China (Bulletin on Top 1,000 Firms' Energy Consumption,
2007). The first column shows the industry name, the second column shows the aggregate energy
consumption of Top 1,000 firms in each industry in 2005, the third column shows the proportion
of energy consumption, and the last column shows the number of firms. A total of 998 of the
1008 Top 1,000 firms are included in this report.




                                              55
                                  Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                      A. Firm-level Data

                                               Top 1,000                 Top 10,000
             Source   Variables                                     (Excluding Top 1,000)
                                       Obs      Mean        SD       Obs      Mean      SD
                      ln(Output)       8,745     14.15     1.58     81,547    12.18    1.60
                      Soe              8,787      0.31     0.46     81,833    0.09     0.29
             ASIF     ROA              8,564     0.05       0.10    79,944     0.08    0.16
                      Age              8,777     23.03     20.32    81,721    12.55    13.67
                      Export           8,789     0.34      0.47     81,845     0.26    0.44
                      ln(Energy)     3,419       12.37     1.48     20,207    9.84     1.58
                      ln(Coal)       3,419       12.41     1.47     20,207    9.91     1.59
             CESD     ln(Output)     3,381       13.69     1.66     20,076    11.26    1.58
                      ln(Efficiency) 3,381        1.31     1.45     20,076     1.42    1.71



                      B. Conglomerate Networks: Related Parties

                                                               Two Levels             Six Levels
         Datasets
                                                         25%        20%       51%       20%
         CARD                              46,178                  50,846    30,096    77,783
         CARD&ASIF                          7,329                   7,907    5,061      9,832
         CARD&ASIF (same 2-digit industry) 3,992                   4,137     2,941      4,800
         CARD&ASIF (same 4-digit industry) 2,466                    2,514    1,963      2,827
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for Top 1,000 firms, Top 10,000 firms, and the
conglomerate networks of Top 1,000 firms. Panel A shows the mean characteristics and firm
counts with nonmissing data from the ASIF and CESD for Top 1,000 and Top 10,000 firms.
We exclude related firms from the same 4-digit industry as Top 10,000 firms for both datasets.
Additionally, for the CESD data, we exclude all industries whose electricity consumption accounts
for more than 30% of total industry energy consumption. See Section 1.2 for a detailed data
description and the cleaning procedure. Panel B shows the total number of related firms that
Top 1,000 firms have under different definitions of related parties. With 2 levels and a 25%
ownership requirement, Top 1,000 firms have 3,992 related firms in the same 2-digit industry in
the ASIF and 2,466 related firms in the same 4-digit industry in the ASIF. See Section 1.3 for
additional discussion.




                                                  56
                 Table 3: Effects of the Program on Regulated Firms

                                       A. Energy Use
              Variables                          ln(Energy Use)
              Treat × Post           -0.125***    -0.156***     -0.156***   -0.128***
                                      (0.042)      (0.045)       (0.047)     (0.048)
              Observations             23,607       23,602        23,151      20,571
              R2                        0.887        0.890         0.892      0.898

                                          B. Output
              Variables                                   ln(Output)
              Treat × Post           -0.096**     -0.226***     -0.204***   -0.145***
                                      (0.040)      (0.041)       (0.042)     (0.042)
              Observations            23,435        23,430        22,991      20,446
              R2                       0.881         0.887         0.889      0.893

                                    C. Energy Efficiency
              Variables                               ln(Energy Effiency)
              Treat × Post             0.032           -0.069     -0.049      -0.019
                                      (0.042)         (0.044)    (0.046)     (0.047)
              Observations            23,435          23,430     22,991      20,446
              R2                       0.837           0.840       0.842       0.848
              Firm FE                    Y               Y           Y           Y
              Year FE                    Y               Y           Y           Y
              Industry × Year FE                         Y           Y           Y
              Province × Year FE                                     Y           Y
              Firm-level Controls                                                Y
Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the CESD and ASIF. This table shows estimates
of Equation 2 where Treat × Post is an indicator for regulated firms interacted with an indicator
for years after 2006 and the dependent variable is log firm energy consumption in Panel A, log
firm output in Panel B, and log firm energy efficiency in Panel C. The estimates in this table
correspond to a pooled version of the regression displayed in Figure 4. The coefficient in column
(4) means that regulated firms decreased energy consumption by 12.8% and output by 14.5%,
while no significant energy efficiency improvement after the policy implementation can be found.
See Section 2 for additional discussion and Table 2 for more information about the data and
variables. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses with p-values
below. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                 57
               Table 4: Spillover Effects on the Output of Related Firms

                                            A. Output
            Variables                                       ln(Output)
            Related × Post                  0.152***   0.147***    0.118***    0.127***
                                             (0.037)    (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.035)
            Observations                     18,423     18,420      18,418      17,905
            R2                                0.865      0.873       0.881       0.889

                                  B. Placebo Test on Output
            Variables                                       ln(Output)
            Related × Post                    -0.026     -0.025      -0.015     -0.003
                                             (0.040)    (0.039)     (0.039)    (0.038)
            Observations                      8,923      8,921        8,905      8,730
            R2                                0.898       0.903       0.911      0.919

                    C. Heterogeneous Effects on Output by Firm Size
            Variables                                       ln(Output)
            Related × Post(0%-30%)    0.104*   0.109**   0.048                   0.078
                                      (0.054)  (0.052)  (0.052)                 (0.051)
            Related × Post(30%-60%) 0.130*** 0.123*** 0.096**                  0.111**
                                      (0.047)  (0.045)  (0.046)                 (0.043)
            Related × Post(60%-100%) 0.164*** 0.156*** 0.161***                0.161***
                                      (0.045)  (0.044)  (0.043)                 (0.040)
            Observations              17,691   17,691   17,689                  17,212
              2
            R                          0.892    0.900    0.907                   0.915
            Firm FE                      Y        Y        Y                       Y
            Year FE                      Y        Y        Y                       Y
            Industry × Year FE                    Y        Y                       Y
            Province × Year FE                             Y                       Y
            Firm-level Controls                                                    Y
Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the ASIF. This table shows estimates of Equation
2 where Related × Post is an indicator for related firms interacted with an indicator for years
after 2006 and the dependent variable is log firm output. The estimates in Panel A correspond
to a pooled version of the regression displayed in Panel A of Figure 5. It shows that related firms
in the same 4-digit industries increased output by 11.8%­15.2% after the policy implementation.
The estimates in Panel B correspond to a pooled version of the regression displayed in Panel
B of Figure 5 and show that related firms outside the 4-digit industry of regulated firms (but
still in the same 2-digit industry) were not significantly affected by the policy. Panel C shows
estimates of heterogeneous spillover effects by terciles of firm size. We can see that the related
spillovers are greater for larger related firms. See Section 3 for additional discussion. The results
of robustness checks with additional matching methods are shown in Table A.9. Standard errors
clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses with p-values below. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01.
                                                 58
  Table 5: Spillover Effects on Related Firms: Energy Use and Energy Efficiency

                                        A. Energy Use
                Variables                         ln(Energy Use)
                Related × Post         0.322***        0.320***   0.302***   0.318***
                                        (0.075)         (0.073)    (0.076)    (0.094)
                Observations             3,759           3,759      3,705      2,823
                R2                       0.916           0.919      0.927      0.926

                                    B. Energy Efficiency
                Variables                          ln(Energy Efficiency)
                Related × Post           -0.077         -0.077     -0.059     -0.087
                                        (0.078)        (0.077)    (0.080)    (0.099)
                Observations             3,724           3,722     3,668      2,801
                R2                        0.866          0.870     0.880      0.867
                Firm FE                     Y              Y         Y          Y
                Year FE                     Y              Y         Y          Y
                Industry × Year FE                         Y         Y          Y
                Province × Year FE                                   Y          Y
                Firm-level Controls                                             Y
Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the CESD and ASIF. This table shows estimates of
Equation 2 where Related × Post is an indicator for same 4-digit industry related firms interacted
with an indicator for years after 2006 and the dependent variable is log firm energy consumption
in Panel A and log firm energy efficiency in Panel B. The estimates in this table correspond to
a pooled version of the regression displayed in Panels C and D of Figure 5. This figure shows
that same 4-digit related firms increased their energy consumption by 30.2%­32.2% after the
policy implementation but that their energy efficiency did not improve significantly. See Section
3 for additional discussion. The results of robustness tests with additional matching methods
are shown in Table A.10. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in parentheses
with p-values below. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                  59
                             Table 6: Industry-level Spillovers

          Variables                                         ln(Output)
                                         All Sample            Energy-Intensive Industries
          Spillover × Post        0.081***      0.073***       0.083***       0.084**
                                   (0.022)       (0.019)        (0.023)       (0.027)
          Observations            2,557,940     2,557,940      843,313        843,313
            2
          R                         0.840         0.856          0.831         0.848
          Firm FE                     Y             Y              Y             Y
          Year FE                     Y             Y              Y             Y
          Industry-level Controls     Y             Y              Y             Y
          Firm-level Controls                       Y                            Y
Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the ASIF. This table shows estimates of Equation
3 where Spillover × Post is an indicator for industry-level exposure to the Top 1,000 program
interacted with an indicator for years after 2006 and the dependent variable is log firm output.
Exposure to Top 1,000 program is defined as the proportion of total energy saving targets of Top
1,000 firms relative to the total energy consumption in 2004 for each industry. The estimates in
this table correspond to a pooled version of the regression displayed in Figure 6. The results show
that the average market-level spillover led to a 7.3%­8.4% increase in the output of unregulated
firms. See Section 3 for additional discussion. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are
shown in parentheses with p-values below. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                          Table 7: Structural Model Parameters

    Parameter                                     Value       Target
    1. Fixed Values
                                           1
    Elasticity of substitution          = 1- 
                                                     4.00     Melitz and Redding (2015)
    Returns to scale                                 0.90     Burnside et al. (1995)
    Returns to scale (Labor Share)      l            0.80     Cost share of variable inputs
    2. Method of Moments
    Efficiency depreciation                       0.900       Within-conglomerate distribution
                                                 (0.003)
    Dispersion of ln-ability             m        1.239       Firm size distribution
                                                 (0.055)
    Survival threshold                    1       0.609       Share of small firms
                                                 (0.166)
    3. Policy Parameters
    Policy threshold                     ~
                                                     9.29     Energy share of Top 1,000 firms
    Input quota                         1-           0.20     11th Five Year Plan
Notes: This table summarizes the parameters that we set or estimate to solve the model.
Standard errors are calculated using a bootstrapped variance-covariance matrix of data moments.
See Section 5.1 for the detailed estimation procedure.


                                                60
        Table 8: Model Decomposition of Difference-in-Differences Estimates

                                         Allocation    Residual Revenue           Market   Total
                                           Effect           Effect                Effect   Effect
       A. Effect on Regulated Firms
          Top 1,000 Firms                  -0.129            -0.037               0.026    -0.140
          Control Firms                       0               0.039               0.026     0.065
          Difference-in-Differences        -0.129            -0.076                 0      -0.205

       B. Effect on Related Firms
          Related Firms                     0.204            -0.037               0.026    0.193
          Control Firms                       0               0.039               0.026    0.065
          Difference-in-Differences         0.204            -0.076                 0      0.128

       C. Within-Conglomerate Effect
          Difference-in-Differences        -0.333                 0                 0      -0.333
Notes: This table reports the decomposition results for difference-in-differences estimates ac-
cording to the model. Panels A, B, and C in this table correspond to Panel B of Table 3, Panel
A of Table 4, and Table 9 separately by decomposing the difference-in-differences estimates first
into the effects on treated and control firms and then further into allocation effects, residual
revenue effects and market effects. See Section 5.3 for additional discussion.

                Table 9: Within-Conglomerate Difference-in-Differences

           Variables                                      ln(Output)
           Treat × Post           -0.343***           -0.350***       -0.367***    -0.315***
                                   (0.067)             (0.068)         (0.070)      (0.067)
           Observations             15,174              15,149          15,146       14,745
             2
           R                         0.530              0.535            0.582       0.626
           Treat                       Y                  Y                Y           Y
           Conglomerate × Year FE      Y                  Y                Y           Y
           Industry × Year FE                             Y                Y           Y
           Province × Year FE                                              Y           Y
           Firm-level Controls                                                         Y
Notes: Authors' calculations using data from the ASIF. This table shows the output change
of regulated firms relative to that of their (same 4-digit industry) related firms within the same
conglomerate. Treat × Post is an indicator for regulated firms (Top 1,000 firms) interacted with
an indicator for years after 2006, and the dependent variable is log firm output. The estimates
in this table correspond to a pooled version of the regression displayed in Figure 8 and show that
regulated firms experience a 31.5%­36.7% output decrease relative to the output of their related
firms in the same conglomerate. See Section 5.3 for additional discussion. Conglomerate-by-year
fixed effects are included, and standard errors clustered at the conglomerate level are shown in
parentheses with p-values below. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                               61
