                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        WHO OWNS WHAT? A FACTOR MODEL FOR DIRECT STOCK HOLDING

                                     Vimal Balasubramaniam
                                       John Y. Campbell
                                        Tarun Ramadorai
                                        Benjamin Ranish

                                       Working Paper 29065
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29065


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank seminar participants at Imperial College Business School, Harvard Business School,
UC Boulder, Dartmouth, Case Western Reserve, Stanford, CU Hong Kong, London School of
Economics, Rutgers, Goethe University, the Istanbul Finance Seminar, Virtual Finance Seminar,
and Xavier Gabaix and Robin Greenwood for comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29065.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Vimal Balasubramaniam, John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Owns What? A Factor Model for Direct Stock Holding
Vimal Balasubramaniam, John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish
NBER Working Paper No. 29065
July 2021
JEL No. G11,G51

                                          ABSTRACT

We build a cross-sectional factor model for investors' direct stock holdings, by analogy with
standard time-series factor models for stock returns. We estimate the model using data from
almost 10 million retail accounts in the Indian stock market. We find that stock characteristics
such as firm age and share price have strong investor clienteles associated with them. Similarly,
account attributes such as account age, account size, and extreme underdiversification (holding a
single stock) are associated with particular characteristic preferences. Coheld stocks tend to have
higher return covariance, suggestive of the importance of clientele effects in the stock market.


Vimal Balasubramaniam                            Tarun Ramadorai
School of Economics and Finance                  Imperial College Business School
Queen Mary University of London                  London SW7 2AZ
Mile End Rd, Bethnal Green,                      United Kingdom
London E1 4LJ                                    t.ramadorai@imperial.ac.uk
United Kingdom
vimsaa@gmail.com                                 Benjamin Ranish
                                                 Federal Reserve Board of Governors
John Y. Campbell                                 Washington, DC 20006
Morton L. and Carole S.                          ben.ranish@frb.gov
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29065
1    Introduction
Finance theorists have developed a rich variety of models that describe household portfolio
choice. Most famously, the venerable CAPM says that all investors should hold the same
risky portfolio, with different degrees of cash dilution to accommodate differences in risk
aversion (Markowitz 1952, Tobin 1958, Sharpe 1964, Lintner 1965).
    What evidence we have on household portfolios differs substantially from the CAPM
prediction, documenting considerable heterogeneity in portfolio composition (for a survey,
see Curcuru et al. (2010)). More complex theories to explain this heterogeneity can be
broadly classified into two groups. One group focuses on heterogeneous financial circum-
stances such as non-traded income risks (Mayers 1972, Vissing-Jørgensen 2002, Fagereng
et al. 2018), investment horizons (Merton 1973), or liquidity needs (Amihud and Mendel-
son 1986). Another group emphasizes differences in investor familiarity with firms and
beliefs about their returns (Merton 1987, Harris and Raviv 1993, Meeuwis et al. 2018),
or heterogeneous preferences for firm characteristics such as ethical and environmental
quality (Hong and Kacperczyk 2009, P´    astor et al. 2020).
    Progress on assessing these explanations for household portfolio heterogeneity requires
a more general characterization of the structure of heterogeneity: a parsimonious summary
of "who owns what." Our goal in this paper is to provide such a general characterization.
We introduce a new framework to organize the empirical evidence in a way that can guide
the refinement of theoretical explanations. We apply this framework on a large, detailed,
and comprehensive administrative dataset of household stockholdings in India, where we
unearth robust evidence of clientele effects which can help to inform theories of household
portfolio construction.
    This task is challenging for a number of reasons. The conceptual challenge is to model
a sparse holdings matrix of N stocks by H households, where both N and H are large
(3103 and 9.7 million, in our dataset for August 2011). Our response in this paper
is to specify a cross-sectional factor model for stock holdings across households that is
analogous to the classic time-series factor model for stock returns over time (Fama and
French 1992). This allows us to exploit numerous insights and methods from the time-
series factor literature and, as in that literature, permits "dimension reduction" using a
small number of factor portfolios (Fama and French 1993).
    Another challenge, evident in the relatively small empirical literature on these impor-
tant questions, arises from the difficulty of measuring the complete portfolios of house-
holds. Surveys rarely ask about the individual stocks that investors hold, while admin-
istrative data from brokerage firms may not capture the complete portfolios of investors


                                            1
with multiple accounts. Administrative data from Scandinavian countries have been used
in recent research such as Calvet et al. (2007) and Betermeier et al. (2017), but the impor-
tant role played by mutual funds in these countries makes it hard to interpret individual
stock holdings without also looking through mutual fund holdings to the underlying stocks
held by funds.1 We make progress by applying our methods to Indian administrative data
on direct stock holdings, exploiting the very limited share of mutual funds in India em-
phasized by Campbell et al. (2014) and Campbell et al. (2019).
    As a first step towards a general description of household portfolio choice, we ask
"what" characteristics some investors seek out and others avoid. We measure the clientele
strength for each characteristic as the variance of the holdings-weighted characteristic (i.e.,
portfolio tilt) across households, using each household's portfolio shares as its holdings. A
characteristic that is strongly positive for some household portfolios and strongly negative
for others is a characteristic that appears to matter in household portfolio formation: we
say that such a characteristic has a strong clientele effect. This logic is analogous to using
the return variance of a portfolio such as HML or SMB as a measure of the tendency for
value stocks or growth stocks to move together.
    In a refinement of this approach, we distinguish two components of characteristic
clientele strength: one coming from the popularity of individual stocks with extreme char-
acteristic values, and one coming from the tendency of investors to hold pairs of stocks
with similar characteristics. These two components are analogous to the contributions of
individual stock variances and of cross-stock covariances to the return variance of a factor
portfolio, but in the holdings context, as a result of severe heteroskedasticity, the variance
contributions tend to be more important than they are in the context of returns.
    Among the characteristics we consider, firm age (the number of years since listing) has
the strongest investor clientele but stock price, turnover, and recent past returns also have
strong clienteles. The characteristics of stocks that are emphasized in time-series factor
models such as the Fama-French (1993) model are relatively less important. While some
of these characteristics are correlated with one another in the cross-section of stocks, we
find very similar results when we orthogonalize the characteristics across stocks.
    It is striking that the two strongest characteristic clientele effects we find are for firm
age and stock price. Firm age is potentially correlated with more fundamental stock
characteristics like volatility and market capitalization, but it is more important in our
analysis than these other characteristics; and stock price is an arbitrary characteristic,
   1
      These problems are less severe for an extensive related literature that studies households' trading
behavior and performance, rather than their portfolio composition--examples include Barber et al. (2009),
Barber and Odean (2000, 2001), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000), Kaniel et al. (2008), Odean (1998), Seru
et al. (2010).

                                                   2
since firms can reset it as they wish using stock splits. This suggests the potential relevance
of a behavioral theory in which investor attention is drawn to certain characteristics
whether or not they are fundamentally important. These findings are also of interest
to corporate finance, given the extensive literature showing how managers can "cater" to
investor clienteles using policies such as stock splits (Baker et al. 2009, Baker and Wurgler
2013).
    We also show that stock characteristics form clusters that tend to be coheld by Indian
investors. The most important cluster, as identified by principal components analysis of
characteristic tilts, consists of old (established) stocks that pay dividends and have high
turnover and volatility. Some investors strongly prefer these stocks, while others strongly
prefer to hold stocks with the opposite characteristics: young firms (recent IPOs) that
do not pay dividends and have low turnover and volatility. A second cluster contains
easily traded "lottery-like" stocks: young firms with low share prices, high turnover, high
returns, and positive skewness. A third cluster comprises dividend-paying stocks with
low beta, low turnover, and high past returns.
    To develop our understanding of clienteles further, we turn our attention to the at-
tributes of investors and ask "who" makes up clienteles that favor the same stocks. We
find intuitive patterns in which larger, older, and better diversified accounts tend to tilt
their portfolios towards the first and third clusters described above--established stocks
and dividend-paying low beta stocks--but disfavor young, lottery-like stocks. In contrast,
accounts with high turnover and extremely underdiversified accounts have the opposite
preferences and favor young, lottery-like stocks. Accounts holding a single stock strongly
prefer young, large stocks or "mega-IPOs."
    In a rational model of income risk hedging, investor attributes that drive portfolio
tilts should line up with income risks. This would be plausible for geographical location
attributes, which do have a modest effect in our multifactor analysis, but is less likely for an
attribute such as account age. With the caveat that our data only permits measurement
of account attributes rather than the attributes or demographic characteristics of the
underlying investors (such as their age, income, or sector of employment), we note that
behavioral models stress learning from experience (Malmendier and Nagel 2011, Anagol
et al. 2021), making account age a very natural attribute under such an interpretation of
the evidence.
    We develop our analysis further by estimating a factor model at the stock level to
predict household stock holdings, telling us in more granular detail "who owns what."
We use this model to parsimoniously summarize the coholdings matrix, which captures
the average intensity with which households hold stocks and pairs of stocks together in

                                               3
portfolios. We work with observable factors, as in the modern empirical literature follow-
ing Fama and French (1993). However we also use methods from the unobservable factor
literature (Chamberlain and Rothschild 1983, Connor and Korajczyk 1986, 2019, Ahn
and Horenstein 2013) to characterize the potential importance of omitted unobservable
factors.
     The observable factors in our model come in two varieties. "Account-attribute factors"
are attributes of stock holding accounts that do not depend on the particular stocks
held by these accounts, such as account age, size, location, and the number of stocks
held. These factors are analogous to macroeconomic factors in a time-series model. In
contrast, "portfolio-attribute factors" are based on the characteristics of the other stocks
held in each account: these factors are analogous to return-based factors in a time-series
model such as the Fama-French SMB and HML factors. We estimate the loadings
of stocks on these factors using unrestricted cross-sectional regressions, and show that
account-attribute factors account for over half the explanatory power of the factor model,
with account size playing a particularly important role. The most important portfolio-
attribute factors capture the tendency for certain accounts to hold stocks that are members
of business groups linked by common ownership.
     We conclude our analysis by exploring the relation between measured coholdings and
return comovement across stocks. We show that there is a significantly positive rela-
tion across stock pairs between coholdings and stock return covariances, a finding which
suggests that investor clienteles may be important drivers of stock return comovements.
The positive relation between coholdings and covariances is also visible at the level of
characteristic portfolios.
     These results appear contrary to na¨   ive approaches to portfolio diversification, which
would predict coholdings of stocks with low return correlations, and a negative relation
between coholdings and covariances. Related to this, we show that Indian households do
not maximally diversify their portfolios, conditional on the number of stocks held. We
find that while the stocks that are popular in single-stock portfolios do tend to be large
stocks with relatively low idiosyncratic risk, household portfolios are far from optimally
diversified. This result holds true both when the mean-variance optimal portfolio is
described by the market portfolio (i.e., CAPM), as well as when the optimal portfolio is
defined by exposure to the market and three additional factors.
     Our work is connected to the small but growing literature which uses detailed data to
describe household portfolio construction. For example, Dorn and Huberman (2010) iden-
tifies idiosyncratic volatility as a relevant attribute of stocks that investors pay attention
to in their stock selection. Massa and Simonov (2006) and Døskeland and Hvide (2011)

                                              4
show that Scandinavian households hold stocks that have a more positive correlation with
their labor income than average, indicating a tendency to "anti-hedge". Other authors in-
vestigate household mutual fund holdings (rather than direct stock holdings), with diverse
results. For example, Betermeier et al. (2017) look at portfolio tilts in household mutual
fund choices, showing evidence consistent with risk-based theories, while Grinblatt et al.
(2016) show that differences in IQ help to predict mutual fund choices, more consistent
with the importance of behavioral factors.
    Some of our findings on household stock holding behavior have parallels in the litera-
ture on institutional stock holding. For example Coval and Moskowitz (1999) document
local bias in the stocks held by US mutual fund managers, and we document a similar
pattern among Indian households. Our work can also be regarded as complementary to
efforts such as Koijen and Yogo (2019) to empirically characterize the structure of insti-
tutional investors' portfolio demands.

Organization of the paper
    The organization of our paper is as follows. Section 2 lays out the factor structure
that we use to organize our empirical research. Section 3 describes our Indian dataset.
Section 4 measures the strength of investor clienteles over a range of stock characteristics
and attributes of investors. Section 5 estimates multifactor models of stock holdings,
not only our model with observable factors but also models with unobserved principal-
components-based factors. Section 6 compares empirically observed coholdings with
those predicted by the factor models, uses our observable factors to explain clienteles,
and relates coholdings and clienteles with return covariances. Section 7 concludes. An
internet appendix, Balasubramaniam et al. (2021), provides additional details on the
empirical analysis.


2    Factor Structure in Stock Holdings
In this section, we introduce some concepts that we use to structure our empirical investi-
gation of cross-sectional patterns in stock holdings. We first define the holdings matrix,
which summarizes the holdings of N stocks by H households. From this, we derive a
stock coholdings matrix and show how it can be used to measure the strengths of differ-
ent types of investor clienteles. We describe how we collapse N stocks into a set of K
characteristics to make the analysis lower-dimensional. Later in the paper, we return to
the stock level, and describe a cross-sectional factor model for stock holdings, analogous
to the familiar time-series factor models used to describe stock returns.

                                             5
2.1     Stock Holdings and Coholdings
Traditional time-series factor models for stock returns work with stocks i = 1, ..., N ob-
served over time periods t = 1, ..., T . Our goal is to empirically describe the patterns
in market participants' stock holding decisions. This means that we are interested in
another important dimension, namely, h = 1, ..., H , which indexes households in our cur-
rent application, but could also capture institutional investors or other types of market
participants more generally. To reduce the dimensionality of the problem, we begin by
collapsing the time dimension into a single period.2 This eliminates the need for time
subscripts in our notation.
    The stock holdings matrix
    We first define an N by H stock holdings matrix of households' stock holdings
Q. The choice of this letter refers to "quantum" or "quantity". The elements Qih are
positive whenever household h holds stock i, and zero otherwise. We denote the N -vector
of household h's stock holdings (i.e., the h'th column vector of Q) by Qh , and call it the
household's stock holdings vector.
    Elements of the stock holdings matrix
    There are several ways to define the elements of the stock holdings matrix Q, and we
make a choice that has desirable properties in our empirical setting. In common with
other studies of retail investors (see, e.g., Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) and Liao et al.
(2020)) our setting has extreme variability across households in the number of stocks held
and the amount invested. We therefore define the elements of Q in a way that ensures
each household has equal weight in our analysis, despite this variability across households.
This ensures that our conclusions reflect the behavior of a representative individual stock
investor.
    Specifically, we set the stock holdings vector for household h, Qh , to be the vector
of portfolio shares for household h. Since portfolio shares add to one, this approach
equalizes the sum of the elements of Q across households:  Qh = 1 for all h.
    The stock coholdings matrix
    Consider the demeaned stock holdings vector for household h:

                                                       H
                                    ~ h = Qh - H -1
                                    Q                        Qh ,                               (1)
                                                      h =1




   2
     In our empirical application, we study a single month, August 2011, which is the last month in
our sample period and therefore provides us the maximum past history for each investor. The internet
appendix shows the stability of our inferences when we re-estimate using data from other years.

                                                 6
where demeaning takes place across all households. The empirical stock coholdings
matrix, defined over N stocks, is the N × N matrix

                                                        H
                                        h = H -1            ~ hQ
                                                            Q  ~ h.                                   (2)
                                                     h=1


    The stock coholdings matrix h is analogous to the familiar empirical covariance ma-
trix of stock returns. To construct the stock return covariance matrix, we also begin
with a single time period and calculate the outer product matrix of returns in that period
(after time-series demeaning returns), and subsequently average these outer products over
time. Thus, the empirical stock return covariance matrix uses time periods where the
stock coholdings matrix uses households, but otherwise the two matrices have the same
structure. The stock coholdings matrix must be positive semi-definite whenever H > N ,
just as the empirical covariance matrix of stock returns must be positive semi-definite
whenever T > N .
    The diagonal elements of h measure the variances of stock holdings across households.
Because households have sparse stock holdings vectors Qh , with many zero elements and a
few positive ones, the variability of stock holdings is high for stocks that are more widely
held.3 Thus, we can also say that the diagonal elements of h capture the popularity or
holdings intensity of each stock among individual investors.
    Similarly, the off-diagonal elements of h measure the covariances of stock holdings
across households. The same logic as above implies that these off-diagonal elements cap-
ture the popularity or coholdings intensity of pairs of stocks among individual investors.


2.2     Characteristics and Clientele Effects
We are interested not so much in specific stocks as in characteristics of stocks. For each
continuous stock characteristic of interest, we define c as a zero-mean N -vector of the
cross-stock rank of the characteristic on the interval [-0.5, 0.5].
    Although each stock characteristic has an equal-weighted average of zero across all
stocks, the holdings-weighted average characteristic across stocks need not be zero. House-
holds on average may tilt their portfolios towards stocks with certain characteristics, but
in general, these tilts will reflect the supply of those characteristics as well as household

   3
     The intuition is easiest to see in a simplified example where all households own only a single stock.
Then, the elements of Qh are either zero or one, and the i'th diagonal element of h is the variance of
a binomial random variable that equals one with probability equal to the holding probability p of the
stock. The variance of a binomial is p(1 - p) which is increasing in p for all p < 1/2. Since the largest
p in our dataset is about 0.4, the diagonal elements of h are greater for more widely held stocks.

                                                    7
demand. Accordingly, we focus not on the average characteristic but on the variance
of the holdings-weighted characteristic across households. This captures the tendency
for a characteristic to be strongly favored by some households and strongly disfavored by
others: we say that such a characteristic has a strong clientele effect.
    To study the clientele for a particular characteristic we calculate c Qh , the holdings-
weighted characteristic, or equivalently the characteristic-weighted holding, for each house-
hold h. Since each characteristic has mean zero in the cross-section of stocks, we can also
describe c Qh as the characteristic tilt of the household's portfolio. We define char-
acteristic clientele strength as the empirical variance of c Qh across households:

                                        2 (c Qh ) = c h c.                                   (3)

In the time-series analysis of returns, the analogous object to c Qh is c Rt , the characteristic-
weighted return, in each period. The analogous approach to our measurement of charac-
teristic clientele strength is to argue that a pervasive characteristic represents a potentially
important risk if a long-short portfolio formed by sorting stocks on this characteristic has
a high time-series variance of returns (Kozak et al. 2018).
    The quadratic form in equation (3) can be decomposed into a contribution from the
diagonal elements of h and a contribution from the off-diagonal elements. The diagonal
component reflects the extent to which intensely held stocks have extreme characteristic
values, while the off-diagonal component reflects the extent to which stocks with extreme
characteristic values tend to be held together. Even though we have many stocks, so
that one might expect the diagonal component to be modest as it generally is in a time-
series context, extreme heteroskedasticity in holdings intensity across stocks and the large
number of concentrated household portfolios imply an important role for the diagonal
component in our context. In our empirical analysis we look at these two components
separately and find that they play somewhat different roles.
    Our choice of portfolio share as the elements of Q makes our characteristic clientele
strength measure c h c representative of a typical household's stock investment. This
necessarily means that it primarily reflects investor preferences within the set of widely
held stocks. In other words, elements of the stock coholdings matrix are small in magni-
tude for the numerous stocks which are rarely held by households. As a check that our
conclusions about characteristic clientele strength are applicable to the broader universe
of stocks, we alternately exclude the most widely held 10 or 50 stocks, and recompute c,
Qv , and c v  h c using this reduced dataset.




                                               8
2.3     From Stock Coholdings to Characteristic Coholdings
While we have defined clientele effects for particular stock characteristics, we are also in-
terested in whether investors group stock characteristics into clusters when they construct
portfolios.
    To permit such analysis, we define Q to refer to the K by H characteristic holdings
matrix which summarizes households' holdings of different stock characteristics. To go
from the stock holdings matrix to the characteristic holdings matrix, we aggregate the
elements of the stock holdings matrix along each of K characteristic dimensions.
    Consider k = 1, ..., K characteristics. For each stock characteristic k of interest, we
define ck as a zero-mean N -vector of the rank of each stock's characteristic on the interval
[-0.5, 0.5]. For each household, ck Qh then captures the ranked household holding of
characteristic k . The K by H matrix Q which has ck Qh in each of its entries is then the
characteristic holdings matrix. The entries of this matrix describe the holdings-weighted
tilts towards K different stock characteristics for each of the H households.4
    Analogously to the stock coholdings matrix, the empirical characteristic coholdings
matrix, defined over K stock characteristics, is the K × K matrix

                                                        H
                                            =H    -1         ~ Q
                                                             Q  ~
                                        h                      h h.                                    (4)
                                                       h=1


Here, the diagonal elements of     h capture the intensity with which particular stock charac-
teristics are held, and the off-diagonal elements capture the intensity with which particular
pairs of stock characteristics are held, averaging across all households.
    The characteristic coholdings matrix is analogous to the empirical covariance matrix
of stock portfolio returns. To construct this return covariance matrix, we also begin with
a single time period and calculate the outer product matrix of (characteristic-weighted)
portfolio returns in that period (after time-series demeaning returns), and subsequently
average these outer products over time.
    To detect characteristic clusters in the data, we extract principal components of the
characteristic coholdings matrix      h , to decompose investor preferences for characteristics
into orthogonalized basis vectors. We then regress observed stock characteristic tilts ck Qh
on these unobserved principal components to assign characteristics to clusters.


   4
     As we later describe, in our empirical work, we orthogonalize these K characteristics against each
other using an ordering procedure informed by our clientele strength analysis. This provides confidence
that we capture preferences for different characteristics over and above their correlation with one another
in the cross-section of individual stocks.

                                                    9
2.4    Linking Who with What
Thus far, we have discussed measures of clientele strength for stock characteristics, but we
have not linked the attributes of investors to the characteristics of the stocks they hold.
A simple first step is to regress investors' characteristic tilts ck Qh on investor attributes
Fh . These investor attributes might include demographics such as investors' geographical
location, but they might also include attributes of their portfolios such as total portfolio
size, the extent of time they have been in the market, their portfolio turnover, and so on.
    A second step is to combine characteristics into clusters using the principal compo-
nent analysis discussed above, and regress these principal components, computed at the
household level, on investor attributes.
    This analysis can be conducted in a univariate fashion, to answer simple questions
such as whether investors with larger portfolios, or those who are better diversified, hold
particular clusters of characteristics, or in a multivariate fashion in which (orthogonalized)
characteristic tilts are regressed simultaneously on a number of investor attributes.
    Such analysis can also be conducted at the stock level rather than the characteristic
level. As we later describe, we do so by setting up and estimating a factor model (anal-
ogous to classic factor models in the literature explaining stock returns) to explain stock
holdings, where factors Fh vary across investors rather than across time.


3     Indian Equity Market Data
3.1    Equity Ownership
Our data on Indian stock holdings, which are also used in Campbell et al. (2014), Anagol
et al. (2018), Campbell et al. (2019), and Anagol et al. (2021), come from India's two share
depositories with the approval of India's apex capital markets regulator, the Securities
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). We observe data from the beginning of February
2002, but because the cross-sectional relationships we study are fairly stable over time,
we focus primarily on August 2011. This is the last month of data in our sample, and
consequently, provides us the maximum past history for each account.
    The older and larger of the two depositories, National Securities Depository Limited
(NSDL), accounts for 64% of the roughly 9.7 million individual accounts we study in
August 2011, with the remainder held at Central Depository Services Limited (CDSL).
These two depositories together record almost all trading in and holdings of Indian equity




                                             10
at the account-issue level at a monthly frequency.5
    We do not observe data on holdings of equity derivatives or mutual funds. However,
during our sample period derivatives and mutual funds are relatively unimportant for
Indian individual equity investors. While single-stock futures markets are quite active in
India (Martins et al. 2012, Vashishtha and Kumar 2010), a minority of accounts invest in
equity derivatives over our sample period.6 Moreover, while mutual funds have grown in
popularity in India, the typical investor that holds individual equities in our sample has
no bonds or mutual funds.7 Additionally, we estimate that 89% of individuals' aggregate
equity holdings in 2011 were direct, as opposed to holdings of equity mutual funds, unit
trusts and unit-linked insurance plans.8
    The sensitive nature of these data mean that there are limitations on the demographic
information provided to us. The information we do have includes the state in which the
investor is located, whether the investor is located in an urban, rural, or semi-urban part
of the state, and the type of investor. We use investor type to identify individual investor
accounts.9 A given individual investor can hold multiple accounts, so we aggregate
accounts that share the same Permanent Account Number (PAN)--a unique identifier
issued to all taxpayers by the Income Tax Department of India. This aggregation may
not always correspond to household aggregation if a household has several PAN numbers,
for example, if children or spouses have separate PANs. In addition, we are unable to
link accounts by PAN between NSDL and CDSL. However, conversations with our data
provider suggest that few retail investors have multiple depository relationships.
    Given our interest in household portfolio construction, we restrict our current analysis
to the portfolios of retail investors in the market, and do not at this stage consider
the portfolios of institutions or government entities (which we also observe). We also
exclude non-public equities, which the typical household may have difficulty acquiring.
   5
      The share depositories were established to promote dematerialization, i.e., the transition of equity
ownership from physical stock certificates to electronic ownership records. While equity securities in
India can be held in both dematerialized and physical form, settlement of all market trades in listed
securities in dematerialized form is compulsory. To facilitate the transition from the physical holding of
securities, the stock exchanges do provide an additional trading window, which gives a one time facility for
small investors to sell up to 500 physical shares. However, the buyer of these shares has to dematerialize
such shares before selling them again, thus ensuring their eventual dematerialization. Statistics from the
Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and the National Stock Exchange (NSE) highlight that virtually all stock
transactions take place in dematerialized form.
    6
      A 2011 SEBI survey estimates that fewer than one million Indian households invest in derivatives.
See: https://www.sebi.gov.in/sebi data/attachdocs/1326345117894.pdf
    7
      A 2009 SEBI survey found that about 65% of Indian households owning individual equities did not
own any bonds or mutual funds. See: http://www.sebi.gov.in/mf/unithold.html
    8
      See Table A1 of the internet appendix to Campbell et al. (2014).
    9
      We exclude "individuals" that hold at least 5% of a stock with market capitalization above 500
million Rs (approximately $10 million), reclassifying these accounts as beneficial owners.

                                                    11
Furthermore, since there is no requirement in India that publicly listed equities have a
large investor base, we remove de-facto private equities. We define these as stocks in
the bottom 25th percentile ranked by the number of shareholders invested at the end of
the previous month. This cutoff corresponds to removing equities with fewer than 1,177
investors at the end of July 2011 from the August 2011 cross-section of stocks that we
study. After applying these filters, our final sample comprises 3,103 Indian equities and
the portfolios of 9.7 million individual accounts that hold at least one of these stocks at
the end of August 2011.


3.2     Stock Characteristics
We match our data on Indian equity holdings to data on returns, dividends, market capi-
talization, share price, book value, turnover, and the age, industry, location, and business
group affiliation of the firm. These data are primarily drawn from the CMIE Prowess
database, with Datastream and Compustat Global used to supplement and validate these
data.10
    Some of our stock characteristics are categorical variables, and others are continuous.
Because the distribution of raw continuous characteristics is often skewed and fat-tailed,
we rank stocks by their characteristic values and use the demeaned rank as our stock-level
characteristic measure for each continuous characteristic. By construction, this demeaned
rank has a uniform distribution ranging from -0.5 to 0.5, with a mean of zero.11
    We handle missing stock characteristics as follows. For stocks missing an industry as-
signment, we assign values to their industry dummies equal to the fraction of stocks in the
given industry. For other missing characteristics which take continuous values, we use all
available characteristics in a regression to impute values for the missing characteristics.12
This has little impact on our results as our use of rank-normalized characteristics limits
the influence of any measurement errors, and characteristics are missing for relatively few

   10
      Where two or more data sources differ, we first select the two sources that are more consistently
in close agreement for the stock. From these two, we use the source that is more consistently in close
agreement across stocks. For stock returns, we also (1) manually validate the 25 largest and smallest
percentage returns observed in the data and (2) manually collect and fill missing returns for the few
instances in which a stock with a missing return comprises an average portfolio share of at least 1%.
   11
      Stocks may have the same value of a given characteristic. For each unique value of the characteristic,
we compute the average of the ranks spanned by stocks with this value, and assign this average to each
of those stocks. Since a given value is never shared by many stocks, the distribution of ranks remains
approximately uniform and the mean c remains zero.
   12
      Prior to imputation we apply a log transformation to share price and market capitalization, as the
distribution of these variables has a fat right tail. We further winsorize the book-market ratio, returns,
volatility and skewness that are used for imputation purposes at the 5th and 95th percentiles of their
cross-sectional distribution.

                                                    12
stock holdings.13
    The continuous stock characteristics we consider are share price, stock age (years
since listing), realized volatility, market capitalization, realized returns, turnover, market
beta, book-market ratio, and realized skewness. Turnover and all the return-based stock
characteristics are computed over the year from September 2010 through August 2011,
using weekly data to compute return volatility and skewness. The book-market ratio is
computed using the standard Fama-French methodology applied to Indian stocks.


3.3     Summary Statistics
In the early 21st Century, equity market participation in India underwent dramatic ex-
pansion. The number of individual depository accounts increased roughly four-fold from
2.4 million in 2003 to 9.7 million at the end of our sample period in August 2011.14 The
period also saw a significant jump in the number of accounts in January 2008, when the
extraordinarily large IPO of Reliance Power brought over a million new investors into the
market.
    Table 1 summarizes attributes of the household accounts and the composition of their
stock portfolios in the August 2011 cross-section that we study. The median account is
slightly over four years old at this date (where age is measured from the first month in
which the account holds any stock) and roughly 10% of accounts are ten or more years
old. While some stockholders do exit the market, the large share of young accounts
reflects the enormous growth in households holding equities during the years before 2011.
    As documented in Campbell et al. (2019), the account size distribution is dispersed and
right-skewed, with a median account size of US$ 780, and a mean account size of over US$
11,000, close to the 90th percentile value of US$ 13,000. This distribution of account
sizes is similar to the United States when accounting for the differences in per-capita
GDP between the two countries, as we show in internet appendix Figure A.2. Jayaraj
and Subramanian (2008) show that the median (wealthiest) deciles of Indian households
had average total asset values of about $3,000 ($35,000) in 2008, meaning that the stock
portfolios we study represent a non-trivial share of wealth for many of the investors in
the data.
    Our empirical work utilizes several other account attributes, including the number of
  13
      Specifically, for August 2011, we impute stock age for 6.2%, the book-market ratio for 3.2%, and
lagged returns, volatility and skewness for about 0.24% of stock holdings. We impute industry for 2.7%
of stock holdings. Other characteristics do not require imputation.
   14
      We illustrate this fact in the top-left panel of online appendix Figure A.1. It does not reflect
increases in dematerialization, as even at the beginning of our sample period, most Indian stocks were
held in dematerialized form.

                                                 13
stocks held by the account (of the total set of 3,103 stocks that we consider), the number
of stocks traded, and portfolio turnover. Table 1 shows that all these attributes are
dispersed and right-skewed. The median account in the data holds four stocks, and the
mean number of stocks held is 8.45. Only the top decile of individual accounts holds 20
or more stocks. Relatedly, the median account makes trades in only one stock over the
year prior to August 2011, while accounts at the 90th percentile trade 13 different stocks
over the prior year. We also measure trading activity by account turnover, computed
as the dollar value of shares traded between September 2010 and August 2011 divided
by the current account value. We winsorize this ratio at the 99th percentile to remove
the influence of outliers. This measure of trading activity is similarly dispersed and
right-skewed.
    The bottom half of Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the stocks held in investor
portfolios. The median retail investor holds large stocks, with a portfolio at the 95th
percentile of the firm size distribution. The other characteristics of median stock holdings
are in line with this tilt towards large stocks, since larger stocks in our sample tend to
have higher share prices, lower book-market ratios, and lower past realized volatility and
skewness. However stock characteristic tilts vary significantly across accounts, with a
standard deviation of close to 0.2 for most characteristics and as high as 0.27 for stock
age. We explore the volatility of these tilts in greater detail in section 4.
    Details on other investor attributes are reported in the internet appendix. Figure
A.1 in the appendix shows the distribution of accounts across four regions of India. The
wealthier west of India contributes 43% of all accounts, the east of India contributes
roughly 11% of all accounts, and the remaining accounts are divided roughly equally
between the north and south of India. The figure also shows the distribution of stock
holdings across seven industries and business groups. Business groups--sets of inde-
pendently listed companies with a large ownership stake and common control by a single
underlying entity--are quite common in developing countries (see e.g., Anagol and Pareek
2019), and in our data, 886 of the 3,103 stocks are affiliated with 266 business groups. In
the average account, the top 10 business groups account for 31% of stock holdings, with
remaining business groups accounting for a further 16% of stock holdings.
    Figure A.3 in the internet appendix shows correlations between account attributes
and characteristic tilts in investor portfolios. Within the set of account attributes, there
are positive correlations between account age, account size, the number of stocks held,
and the number of stocks traded, but all correlations are below 0.6. The strongest cor-
relations are within the set of characteristic tilts. Portfolio tilts towards larger stocks
(measured by market capitalization) are strongly positively correlated with tilts towards

                                            14
high-share price stocks (0.78) and negatively correlated with tilts towards value stocks
with high book-market ratios (-0.57). Share price and market cap tilts are both nega-
tively correlated with realized volatility tilts. Tilts towards stocks with high past returns
have strong correlations with other characteristic tilts. These correlations reflect both
investor preferences and the correlation of characteristics in the cross-section of stocks, a
problem we handle later in the paper by orthogonalizing characteristics across stocks.
    Figure 1 plots the cross-sectional distribution of the number of investors holding each
stock in August 2011. The most widely held stock is Reliance Power Limited, held by
roughly 40% of all accounts, comprising roughly 4 million accounts. The top five stocks
ranked by holdings are each held by over 10% of all individual accounts, and the top ten
stocks are each held by over 7.5% of all accounts. At the other extreme, roughly 62% of
all stocks in our sample are held by fewer than 0.1% of individual accounts.15 The char-
acteristics of stock holdings in the summary statistics, therefore, heavily reflect holdings
of popular stocks. This distribution highlights the distinction between an analysis of the
composition of a typical investor's portfolio and an analysis of the investor clientele for a
typical stock.
    Figure 2 similarly plots the cross-sectional distribution of the average portfolio share
held in each stock, where the average is taken both over all individual investors and
over those investors who hold the stock. (For example, roughly 80% of all stocks have a
portfolio weight of 10% or less in the portfolios of investors who hold it, and roughly 80% of
all stocks have a weight of approximately 0.02% on average across all investors' portfolios,
including those who do not hold it). This figure further illustrates the extreme differences
between a few stocks that are widely held with high portfolio weights, and many stocks
that are rarely held and have low portfolio weights even when held.


4        Clientele Effects
In this section we apply our methodology to evaluate the strength of clientele effects in
Indian stock holdings.


4.1      Stock Characteristic Clienteles
As discussed in section 2, the strength of the clientele effect for a stock characteristic can
be measured by the empirical variance of the characteristic tilt c Qh across households,
    15
     The left censoring of the distribution in Figure 1 results from the filter that we described in the data
section, which results from dropping the bottom 25% of stocks based on the number of accounts holding
the stock at the end of July 2011.

                                                     15
where c is a stock characteristic rank ranging from -0.5 to 0.5, and the i'th element of
Qh is the weight of stock i in investor h's portfolio. The use of portfolio weights ensures
that each investor has equal weight in the holdings matrix Qh , although investors with
concentrated portfolios will contribute more strongly to the stock coholdings matrix and
to characteristic clientele strength.
    Table 2 shows this measure of clientele strength for a range of stock characteristics
that we observe in the data. These include the nine continuous stock characteristics
described in Table 1, but also include a range of categorical variables such as whether
or not the stock belongs to a business group, and dummies for industry membership
of seven industry groups. To place continuous and categorical variables on an equal
footing, we divide the variances of categorical variables by three to account for the fact
that the maximum variance of a binary variable is three times the variance of a uniformly
distributed variable with a range of one.16 We indicate the categorical variables with
italic font in the row labels for these variables.
    The table has two panels, in the first of which we present "raw" clientele strength mea-
sures, and in the second of which we orthogonalize characteristics relative to one another.
Orthogonalization helps to ensure that the clienteles we identify for particular charac-
teristics are not merely the result of correlation in the cross-section of stocks between
those characteristics and other characteristics which investors really care about. We
proceed sequentially, first identifying the characteristic with the strongest clientele and
orthogonalizing all other characteristics to it using kernel regression, then identifying the
two strongest characteristics and orthogonalizing all other characteristics to them using
multivariate kernel regression, and so forth.17
    In the table, stock characteristics are presented in descending order of their clientele
strength when the characteristics are orthogonalized. The first column in each panel
shows the total clientele strength, with categorical variables renormalized. The second
column in each panel shows the percentage of clientele strength that comes from off-
diagonal elements or coholdings, rather than diagonal elements or holdings. Off-diagonal
contributions are always smaller than diagonal contributions in this table where all in-
vestors are included.18 The ordering of clientele strength across characteristics is similar

   16
      The maximum variance of a binomial variable is 1/4, while the variance of a uniformly distributed
variable with a range of one is 1/12.
   17
      Online Appendix Section A describes the orthogonalization procedure in detail.
   18
      The off-diagonal contribution is more important for investors with larger portfolios, as well as for
those with well diversified portfolios (a Herfindahl-Hirschman index, or sum of squared portfolio weights,
of 0.2 or less, corresponding to the diversification of an equally weighted portfolio containing five or more
stocks). These results are shown in Tables A.1 and A.2 in the internet appendix. Shifting focus to
well diversified investors or to the off-diagonal share of total variance (Table A.3) do not alter our main

                                                     16
whether we consider total clientele strength or the diagonal and off-diagonal contributions
separately, so for simplicity, we focus our discussion on total clientele strength. For refer-
ence, the third column in each panel shows the raw standard deviations of characteristic
tilts across households without renormalizing categorical tilts.
     The strongest clientele effect in Table 2 is associated with stock age. Some Indian
individual investors strongly prefer to hold young companies (recent IPOs), while other
investors strongly prefer established companies.19 Looking at other continuous charac-
teristics, the second strongest clientele effect is associated with share price. As noted
earlier, share price is strongly correlated (0.78) with market capitalization in the cross-
section of Indian stocks; but the clientele strength for share price is noticeably stronger
than that for market cap when these characteristics are studied separately without or-
thogonalization, and share price dominates when we orthogonalize characteristics. Thus
we find evidence that some investors prefer to hold high-priced stocks, while others prefer
low-priced stocks. The preference for market capitalization is relatively uniform (all in-
dividual investors tend to hold large companies) which explains the weaker clientele effect
for this characteristic.
     Among other continuous stock characteristics, both stock turnover and past realized
returns also have relatively strong clientele effects in our data. The turnover clientele effect
may reflect the tendency for some investors to prefer liquid stocks and others to focus on
illiquid stocks in their portfolios. Turnover is positively correlated with volatility and
market beta in the cross-section of Indian stocks, and it drives these other characteristics
down the orthogonalized ranking of clientele strength. The clientele effect for past realized
returns could arise because some investors trade momentum while others trade reversal.
We caution, however, that since our data are a snapshot at a point in time, we cannot
distinguish momentum preferences from preferences for other stock characteristics that
happened to do well in the period September 2010­August 2011.
     Perhaps surprisingly, the clientele effects for Fama-French styles (market beta, book-
market, and market capitalization) are weaker than those we have already discussed,
indicating more limited investor heterogeneity in preferences for these style characteristics.
However, even these clientele effects are quite strong in an absolute sense as we now
discuss.
     There are several ways to judge the absolute strength of a clientele effect. One ap-
proach is to compare clientele strength to what we would observe under a series of simple
conclusions about clientele strength, so we discuss the measures derived from all investors in what follows.
    19
       Tables A.1 and A.2 show that the stock age effect is strongest regardless of whether we look at
all investors, investors with large portfolios, or only well diversified investors. The age effect remains
strongest even if we exclude the top 10 or 50 most popular stocks from the clientele strength calculation.

                                                    17
alternative models. Table A.4 in the internet appendix reports clientele strength, broken
into the holdings and coholdings components, for three alternative models applied to or-
thogonalized characteristics. If stocks are randomly picked with probability proportional
to the free-float capitalization of the stock--which we view as a realistic benchmark, in
contrast with, say, equal-weighted random stockpicking--then we obtain different clientele
strengths for each characteristic which are reported in the table. Similarly, if we assume
that investors hold optimally mean-variance diversified portfolios conditional on the num-
ber of stocks they hold (which we estimate using a lasso procedure that we describe later
in the paper), then we again obtain different values for each characteristic which are re-
ported in the table. We find that clientele effects in our Indian data are strong relative
to all these alternatives. For a few characteristics, mean-variance optimization implies
stronger coholdings components of clientele strength than we find in the data, but overall
clientele strength is always considerably stronger in the data than can be explained by
any of these alternative models.
    As we have seen, a range of continuous stock characteristics have strong associated
clientele effects. Table 2 also reveals that investor clientele effects for discrete categories
of stocks are very strong. For example, whether or not a stock pays dividends exhibits the
second strongest clientele effect of all stock characteristics observed in the data, showing
that some investors prefer dividend-paying stocks while others eschew them. There is also
a strong clientele for stocks that belong to business groups, with some investors attracted
to such stocks and others avoiding them.20 The fact that there are clienteles for these
categorical stock characteristics appears consistent with theories of classification of risky
assets into "styles" (Barberis and Shleifer 2003).


4.2     Stock Characteristic Clusters
In this subsection we assess whether there are clienteles for clusters of stock character-
istics in the Indian equity market. To reduce the dimensionality of the analysis, we
consider only our nine continuous stock characteristics together with the categorical div-
idend paying characteristic which has a particularly strong clientele effect. We apply
the approach discussed in section 2, using orthogonalized characteristic tilts to create the
K by H characteristic holdings matrix Q which has ck Qh in each of its entries. This
matrix describes the holdings-weighted average tilts towards K different orthogonalized
stock characteristics for each of the H households. We use this to compute the empirical

  20
     Internet appendix Table A.1 shows that this business group clientele effect is even stronger among
large individual investors.

                                                  18
characteristic coholdings matrix       h , and finally extract principal components (PCs) of
  
h . The first three PCs account for a large fraction of the total variance of household
tilts to the characteristics with the strongest clienteles, as reported in Figure 3, and we
focus on these three PCs in our analysis of characteristic clusters.
    Figure 3 visualizes characteristic clusters by regressing observed stock characteristic
tilts (i.e, the rows of the characteristic holdings matrix) simultaneously on three principal
components, which are simply linear combinations of the stock characteristic tilts and
by construction are orthogonal to one another. Figure 3 plots the loadings from these
regressions, and reveals the types of stock characteristics that are grouped together into
these three distinct clusters.
    PC1, shown in red, captures an investor clientele for old (established) stocks that pay
dividends and have high turnover and volatility. Since clientele effects are defined by
variance, this can also be interpreted as a preference by some investors to hold young
(IPO), non-dividend-paying stocks with low turnover and volatility, i.e, the characteristic
cluster defines a spectrum along which investors are located. PC2, shown in blue, captures
an investor clientele for (or against) young stocks with low share prices, high turnover,
high returns, and positive skewness. We view this as a clientele effect for "lottery-like"
stocks. PC3, shown in green, shows that dividend-paying stocks with low beta, low
turnover, and high past returns constitute the third characteristic cluster in individual
portfolios.
    Table 3 verifies the clusters revealed by the principal components analysis in a simpler
fashion. Panel A of the table shows how tilts towards each of ten characteristics, ordered
by their clientele strength, are correlated across investor portfolios. The table essentially
plots    h , but normalized by the variances along the diagonal to convert covariances into
correlations. The table color-codes these correlations using a heatmap, with deeper shades
of red representing positive correlations, and blue indicating negative correlations. In
Panel B of the table, we re-order these characteristics based on the principal components
analysis. The first four characteristics are dominant in PC1, the next three are dominant
in PC2 while playing a smaller role in PC1, and the last three are relatively important
in PC3. We see positive correlations among the characteristic tilts within each block,
which are strongest for PC1 and weakest for PC3 reflecting the declining importance of
successive PCs in the structure of the characteristic coholdings matrix      h.
    In the internet appendix, we assess the robustness of these conclusions to variations
in the weighting of individual accounts and the characteristics we consider. Table A.5
repeats Table 3 weighting accounts by their size, showing broadly similar correlations
among characteristic tilts although the characteristics included in PC1 are less strongly

                                             19
correlated among large accounts relative to those in PC2 and PC3. Figure A.4 recon-
structs Figure 3 after applying size weights to investors. These PCs capture clientele
effects within the set of investors holding larger portfolios, and are thus a bit different.
For this group, PC1 continues to capture a strong clientele effect for stocks of extreme
ages. PC2 and PC3 capture contrarian preferences for stocks with poor realized returns­
but the PC2 clientele seeks negative skewness, low price, and low beta, while the PC3
clientele prefers high beta and high turnover. Figure A.5 repeats Figure 3 including all
characteristic tilts (including discrete categories of stocks), and shows a similar structure
for PC1, although somewhat different patterns for PC2 and PC3 when all characteristics
are included.


4.3     Who Owns What Characteristics?
Having identified strong clientele effects both for individual stock characteristics and for
clusters of characteristics, our next step is to link preferences for particular characteristics
with investor attributes. We do so by regressing tilts to characteristics and PCs onto a
range of account attributes that we observe in the data.
    We focus on ten account attributes that can be calculated without knowledge of the
particular stocks held: continuous measures of account value, age, turnover, the number
of stocks held, and the number of stocks traded; a dummy variable that captures whether
an investor is extremely underdiversified, i.e., holding only a single stock in their account;
and dummy variables for the four regions where investors may be located. Much as we do
for stock characteristics, we transform continuous account attributes into ranks ranging
from -0.5 to 0.5.21
    Table 4 shows coefficients from univariate regressions of stock characteristic tilts onto
these investor attributes. The table reveals that large accounts hold established dividend-
paying stocks with high share prices, volatility, and past returns but low betas. These
accounts also prefer growth stocks with relatively lower market cap that are not part of
a business group. Well diversified and older accounts have many of the same prefer-
ences.22 Accounts with high turnover, by contrast, tilt towards small, low-share-price,
  21
      Households may have the same value of a given attribute. For each unique value of the attribute, we
compute the average of the ranks spanned by households with this value, and assign this average to each
of those households. While certain household attributes, such as account turnover (which is often zero)
and the number of stocks held, are shared by a significant fraction of all households, this assignment of
ranks reduces the variance of the ranked attribute across households by less than 10% while preserving
the mean of zero.
   22
      These patterns are broadly consistent with the findings of Campbell et al. (2014) in a study focusing
exclusively on account age, and of Campbell et al. (2019) in a study focusing exclusively on account size.



                                                    20
value stocks with high turnover, volatility, beta, and skewness (i.e., the easily traded
"lottery-like" stocks detected earlier in PC2), and single-stock accounts hold young, non-
dividend-paying stocks, affiliated with business groups, that have high market capitaliza-
tion and low volatility (which we can characterize as "mega-IPOs").
    These findings are reinforced by Table 5, which repeats these univariate regressions on
account attributes, but using the three principal components as left-hand side variables.
The table reaffirms that larger, older, and better diversified accounts tend to tilt their
portfolios towards PC1 and PC3, i.e., established stocks and dividend-paying low-beta
stocks, but disfavor PC2, i.e., young, lottery-like stocks. In contrast, accounts with high
turnover and extremely underdiversified accounts tend to favor young, lottery-like stocks,
and load negatively on both PC1 and PC3. The negative loading on PC1 is most pro-
nounced for accounts holding a single stock, reflecting the fact that this one stock tends
to be a young, large stock, i.e., a mega-IPO.23


4.4     Robustness and Stability Over Time
The internet appendix extends these results in several directions. Tables A.6 to A.8
report regressions like those of Table 4 for discrete firm characteristics such as business
group affiliation, industry group, and firm headquarters location. Table A.8 shows that
there is a pronounced home bias evident in the data, with investors located in the South,
West, and North of the country preferring stocks headquartered in those locations. Tables
A.9 and A.10 show that the patterns in Tables 4 and 5 are robust to weighting accounts
by their size, and Tables A.11 and A.12 show that these patterns are robust to using
multivariate regressions on all account attributes simultaneously rather than univariate
regressions. Table A.13 shows that the first three PCs from the full set of characteristic
tilts have similar relationships with investor attributes as when the PCs are extracted
from the subset used in our main analysis.
    It is natural to ask whether the clientele effects we have identified are stable over time.
The internet appendix also explores this question. Table A.14 shows that the ordering of
characteristic clientele strength is largely stable when comparing August cross-sections in
each year from 2002 through 2010 with the August 2011 cross-section we discuss in the
body of the paper. Table A.15 presents the average correlation of investors' characteristic
tilts estimated using the August cross-sections in each year from 2003 through 2010,
and shows that the resulting clusters are similar to those in Table 3, with the PC1 and
  23
     Internet appendix Table A.6 provides supporting evidence by showing that the single-stock dummy
has a strong positive loading on the Reliance ADAG business group dummy. This business group contains
Reliance Power, the firm which had a mega-IPO in 2008.

                                                 21
PC2 clusters very stable over time, and some shifts in PC3. Table A.16 utilizes average
factor loadings from regressions identical to those in Table 4, but estimated on the 2003-
2010 August cross-sections, and shows that the relations between account attributes and
characteristic tilts estimated in Table 4 also appear in earlier time periods. In Table A.17,
we fix the composition of the three PCs to be the same as in 2011, but estimate it over
2003-2010. Reassuringly, Table A.17 shows that the resulting portfolios have very similar
clienteles as those observed in Table 5, which uses the August 2011 cross-section. Overall,
these exercises reassure us that our inferences are not merely an artifact of the 2011 time
period, and are stable over time.


5     Factor Models of Stock Holdings
Our focus so far has been on stock characteristics rather than on individual stocks. For
some applications, such as individual corporations learning about the clientele that holds
their stocks, going down to the more granular stock level may be necessary. In this
section we develop a methodology for doing this by estimating a factor model of stock
holdings, and we contrast results from observed and unobserved factor models.


5.1    Observed Multifactor Model: Theory
Our approach is to estimate a factor model, a cross-sectional analog of the models com-
monly used to describe the variation in stock returns over time. Focusing on the portfolio
share holdings matrix Q, for each stock i we can estimate a cross-sectional regression:

                                   K
                      Qih = i +           ik Fkh + ih ,   h = 1, ..., H,                 (5)
                                   k=1


where  ik is the loading of stock i on factor k , and Fkh is the factor realization for
household k .
    In equation (5), the factors can be attributes of the household, such as account size
or account age, which are not affected by the composition of the household's portfolio.
Pursuing the analogy with factor models of stock returns, these are like time-series factors
that are estimated without reliance on the behavior of other stocks, such as shocks to
inflation or industrial production. However, the factors can also be attributes of the
household portfolio, like the average size or book-to-market ratio of the other stocks held
by the household. This is analogous to using the contemporaneous returns on other stocks
to create factors such as HML and SMB in the usual Fama-French time-series analysis.

                                               22
    In time-series factor analysis, it is common practice to construct factors using all stock
returns, so that an individual stock's betas are estimated from a regression in which that
individual stock's return influences the explanatory variables as well as the dependent
variable. This practice is generally harmless because factor portfolio returns are well
diversified across stocks. In our context, however, many households have concentrated
portfolios so we are careful to use a "leave-out" approach that excludes own holdings when
we construct portfolio attribute factors. This implies that portfolio attribute factors are
missing for all accounts that hold only a single stock.
    The  ik coefficients inform us about the average attributes of the investor clientele
for each stock i. In other words, they tell us which types of households (the "who" in
the paper's title) tend to hold stock i ("what"). We estimate these coefficients freely,
stock by stock, but we report weighted averages of the coefficients using important stock
characteristics as weights. This enables us to measure the determinants of clienteles not
only for individual stocks, but also for stock characteristics.
    The factor model (5) simplifies the structure of the stock coholdings matrix h . Con-
sider a situation where i = 0, as will be the case if equation (5) is estimated using
household-demeaned holdings Q     ~ h and zero-mean factors. Assume in addition that the
factors are orthogonal to one another, and that enough factors are included to make the
error terms ih uncorrelated across households h for all stocks i. Under these conditions
the diagonal elements of the stock coholdings matrix h take the form:

                                              K
                                   h,i,i =         2   2    2
                                                   ik  k +  i ,                            (6)
                                             k=1


where  2                                              2
        k is the cross-sectional variance of Fkh and  i is the cross-sectional variance of ih .
Under the same assumptions, the off-diagonal elements of the stock coholdings matrix
take the form:
                                              K
                                    h,i,j =             ik  jk  2
                                                                k,                         (7)
                                              k=1

so the common factors determine the coholdings propensities for pairs of stocks i and j .
Factors with large standard deviations or dispersed loadings are influential determinants
of coholdings.
    These properties of the model follow from the linearity of equation (5). A disadvantage
of (5) is that it is a linear probability model whose fitted values may lie outside the
theoretically appropriate range from zero to one. An alternative approach would be to
estimate a nonlinear bounded model for holding probabilities such as a probit or logit


                                                  23
model, but in this case the implied coholdings matrix would no longer have the simple
structure of equations (6) and (7).


5.2       Observed Multifactor Model: Implementation
To estimate an observed multifactor model for stock holding, we construct 15 account-
attribute and portfolio-attribute factors from the account and portfolio attributes sum-
marized in Table 1 and discussed previously in the paper. To this we add several other
sets of factors. First, we include 3 dummy variables to capture the broad geographical
zones in which households are located. Second, we add industry factors which capture
the share of the portfolio in each of 6 industry groups, namely, construction; financial
services; food agriculture and textiles; information technology; manufacturing; oil and
gas; and other retail. Third, we add business group factors which capture the share of
the portfolio in each of 10 large business groups. Fourth, we add 3 dummy variables for
the broad geographical zones in which the firms are headquartered.24 Finally, we add a
dummy variable for single-stock accounts, for which portfolio attribute factors are un-
available given our "leave-out" factor construction. The factors enter the model in raw
form, without orthogonalization. In all, we have 38 factors in our observed multifactor
model.
    We estimate stock holdings using all observed factors for each of our 3,103 stocks in
our August 2011 sample. Each stock-specific cross-household regression is of the form
shown in equation (5), and is run with 9.7 million household observations.
    The factor loadings  ik in these regressions are the product of unconstrained estima-
tion, and have no mechanical correlation with the observable characteristics of any given
stock. For example, it is entirely possible for a small stock to have a positive loading on
the factor that measures the average size rank of households' stock holdings, if that small
stock is typically co-held with large stocks. This allows our model to capture complex
patterns of portfolio construction.
    For ease of interpretation, we first divide each factor by its unconditional standard
deviation in each stock-specific regression, and multiply it by 104 for readability.    ~ is
                                                                                         ik
then the basis point increase in the portfolio weight of stock i for a one standard deviation
increase in factor k .
    Table 6 summarises the   ~ ik estimated from the 3,103 stock-specific estimates of equa-
tion (5). The rows of the table correspond to the K factors, and the columns present
various statistics of the cross-stock distribution of the betas estimated on these factors.

  24
       To avoid collinear factors, we exclude the other retail industry, and the eastern geographical zone.

                                                     24
The cross-stock mean  k measures the average loadings of a particular factor across 3,103
stocks. Our focus here is on the cross-sectional dispersion in these loadings as it is a neces-
sary condition for a factor to be useful in predicting cross-sectional dispersion in household
stock holdings. Given our focus, the first four columns of the table therefore summarize
the cross-stock distribution of   ~ ik , presenting the cross-stock standard deviation, and the
10th, 50th, and the 90th percentiles of the cross-stock distribution of factor betas. The
last two columns show the average absolute t-statistic across all 3,103 regressions, and
the percentage of estimated     ~ 's that are statistically significantly different from zero at
                                 ik
the 5% level.
    Panel A of Table 6 shows the distribution of      ~ ik for the account-attribute factors, and
Panel B summarizes the distribution of        ~ for investors' portfolio characteristic tilts. The
                                                ik
final two columns of both panels reveal that the majority of factors have high t-statistics
on average, with a few exceptions such as realized skewness and some of the business
group factors which are important for only a small number of stocks. In all cases, the
fraction of coefficients that are statistically significant at the 5% level far exceeds the 5%
that we would expect to see if our factors were noise uncorrelated with household portfolio
decisions.
    While the statistical significance of the factors is high on average, they exhibit very
different levels of cross-stock variation. A necessary condition for a useful factor is that it
helps to predict cross-sectional dispersion in household stock holdings. The equivalent in
the standard returns setting is factors such as SMB and HML that exhibit a large cross-
sectional spread in normalized factor loadings, and help to explain the time-variation
in realized returns across stocks. We later discuss how specific stock characteristics are
connected with account-attribute and portfolio-attribute factors, but for now, we simply
discuss the magnitude of the cross-stock spread in factor loadings seen in Table 6.
     Account-attribute factors
    The account-attribute factor with the highest cross-sectional standard deviation of
factor loadings is account size. The next most important account-attribute factor, again
looking at the standard deviation of         ~ across stocks, the dummy for single-stock ac-
                                               ik
counts. The cross-sectional distribution of loadings indicates that almost all stocks have
a negative loading on this factor, but a few stocks--which we might call "entry-level"
stocks--are particularly favored by single-stock investors and have a large positive load-
ing. Of the continuous account attributes, turnover and account age follow in order of
importance. The numbers of stocks held and traded have smaller effects once we control
for single-stock accounts using a dummy variable. The loadings on all these factors seem
to be close to symmetric across stocks, as the median loading is close to zero.

                                               25
    As discussed earlier, there is some evidence of geography-based stock selection, mainly
driven by local bias of the sort found by Coval and Moskowitz (1999) for US mutual
funds. However, the geographical factors are only significant for 50-70% of stocks and
are among the less important factors in the model. This may in part reflect the fairly
coarse geographical information captured in our data.
      Portfolio-attribute factors
    Panel B of Table 6 turns to portfolio-attribute factors based on portfolio characteris-
tic tilts. The table divides these factors into six categories, namely the Fama and French
(1993) style factors capturing the size and value characteristics of household portfolios;
return-based factors based on realized stock returns experienced in the portfolio; behav-
ioral factors capturing revealed preferences through stock holdings for high or low share
price, old, high-turnover, or dividend-paying stocks; business group factors; industry fac-
tors, and geographical factors capturing the location of the headquarters of the firms held
in investors' portfolios.
    The loadings for many of the industry and business group factors are positively skewed,
as we see from the negative median loadings. This reflects the fact that industry and
business group factors strongly increase the probability of holding stocks in the same
industry or business group, but weakly decrease the probability of holding all other stocks.
    Comparison of explanatory power
    Connor and Korajczyk (2019) introduce a way to assess the performance of specific
groups of factors in multifactor models. The approach they recommend is to first stack all
3, 103 stocks into a single pooled OLS regression. In our implementation, we regress the
holdings of all stocks by all households onto stock dummies and stock dummies interacted
with the set of observable factors Fk , effectively allowing stock-specific intercepts and
factor loadings. In Table 7 we report the R2 statistic from such a pooled regression. This
measure of explanatory power captures the model's ability to explain which accounts hold
the most widely held stocks, as these account for the bulk of the variance in the pooled
stock holding data.
    The first row of Table 7 shows that the R2 of the full multifactor model is 3.96%.
The remaining rows of the table show the contribution to explanatory power offered
by each of the groups of factors included in the model. As suggested by Connor and
Korajczyk (2019), we measure this contribution using the marginal R2 , which is the
difference between the full-model R2 and the R2 of a model in which the set of factors under
consideration is dropped. In each case, we express the contribution as a percentage of the
full-model R2 . For example, the table shows that account-attribute factors contribute
roughly 57% of the total explanatory power in the equally-weighted case, with portfolio-

                                            26
attribute factors accounting for roughly 36% of the total R2 . The two contributions do
not add up to 100%, because the underlying factors are not orthogonal to one another.
    Among the account-attribute factors, account size is the most important and the
single-stock dummy is the next most important. This analysis helps to bring together
disparate themes in prior literature on the influence of account characteristics on stock
holding propensities into a common framework. For example, account size and wealth
have been highlighted as important determinants of stock holdings behavior by Campbell
et al. (2019) and Bach et al. (2020), and account age by Campbell et al. (2014) and
Betermeier et al. (2017).
    Among the portfolio-attribute factors, business group factors are the most important.
Industry factors are next most important, followed by Fama-French factors.
    Stock characteristics and factor loadings
    Akin to the analysis in Table 4, we can aggregate individual factor loadings across
stocks up to the level of characteristics, using the characteristic ranks constructed for
each stock to generate weighted average loadings, using the demeaned ranks as weights.
    Tables A.18 and A.19 in the internet appendix show the results of this exercise, which
delivers very similar results to the analysis of stock characteristics described earlier. For
example, the first row of the top panel of Table A.18 verifies that controlling for other
account attributes, older accounts prefer older stocks with lower share prices, positive
momentum (high past realized returns), lower beta, higher book-market ratios, higher
volatility, and lower market capitalization. Table A.19 shows how investors' portfolio
attributes are related to orthogonalized stock characteristics. The diagonal elements of
the panel show the extent to which the tendency to hold a particular stock with a given
characteristic can be predicted by holdings of other stocks with the same characteristic.
The off-diagonal elements show the extent to which holdings of stocks with particular
characteristics are predictive of investors' holdings of stocks with other characteristics.
Since we have orthogonalized the characteristics in the cross-section of stocks, any such
association is not mechanical but reflects investor behavior.
    Unsurprisingly, the diagonal elements are all positive and tend to be the strongest
effects in this part of the table, but there are some interesting off-diagonal effects indicat-
ing that stock characteristics cluster into groups, with similar investor clienteles holding
constellations of these characteristics simultaneously, as we saw in the characteristic-level
analysis. Our multifactor model shows once again that investor clienteles form around
related stock characteristics.




                                              27
5.3    Unobserved Multifactor Model
It is natural to ask how our observed multifactor model compares with an unobserved
multifactor model based on principal components analysis (PCA) applied at the individual
stock level. To construct such a model, we compute the principal components (PCs)
of the 3,103 by 3,103 covariance matrix of stock holdings derived from the 9.7 million
accounts that we observe. The first PC is the eigenvector of this covariance matrix
which corresponds to the largest eigenvalue, and subsequent PCs are estimated as the
eigenvectors associated with successively smaller eigenvalues of the covariance matrix.
By construction, these PCs are orthogonal to one another, and are normalized linear
combinations of household stock holdings that together summarize the total variance of
stock holdings. They are ordered by the fraction of the total variance that they capture.
    In internet appendix Table A.20 we report the pooled R2 statistic for a 10-factor PCA
model and for the first, second, and third PCs. Since the PCs are orthogonal to one an-
other by construction, their contributions can be added together to calculate the overall
fit of single-factor, two-factor, and three-factor PCA models. The left column of Table
A.20 works with the full sample, in which a single-factor PCA model has a considerably
higher explanatory power (12.4%) than our observed multifactor model (4.0%). A ten-
factor PCA model does even better with an explanatory power of 31.5%. However this
explanatory power of PCA models is concentrated in a few widely held stocks. If we
eliminate from the sample only the most widely held stock, Reliance Power, the explana-
tory power of the single-factor PCA model is almost entirely eliminated because the first
PCA factor is chosen to explain the holdings of that one stock. Once we eliminate the
ten most widely held stocks from the sample, the first three PCA factors have negligible
explanatory power. If we eliminate the fifty most widely held stocks, the observed mul-
tifactor model clearly dominates even the ten-factor PCA model. This reflects the fact
that PCA methodology applied to stock holdings concentrates on explaining patterns in
the large number of holdings of a very few stocks. Internet appendix Figure A.6 makes
a similar point visually, presenting scatter diagrams that plot the explanatory power of
our observed multifactor model against the explanatory power of a single-factor PCA
model (panel A) or a ten-factor PCA model (panel B), separately for each stock in our
sample. Points above the 45-degree line are stocks for which the observed multifactor
model predicts holdings better than the PCA model. In Panel A this is the case for all
stocks except Reliance Power at the far right of the figure. In Panel B it is the case for
almost all stocks, and the exceptions are mostly among the ten most widely held stocks
(shown as red diamonds).


                                           28
6     Coholdings and Return Covariances
In this section we study the relation between the clientele effects that we have identified for
particular stock characteristics, and the return variances and covariances of portfolios of
stocks formed on the basis of these characteristics. Table 8 shows results when we regress
the return variances of these portfolios (formed using the ck weighting scheme for each of
the ten characteristics k ) on their total holding variances (clientele strengths), and on the
diagonal and off-diagonal components of clientele strength separately. We do this both
for the variances of these portfolios (columns 1-3) as well as for the covariances of these
portfolios with one another (columns 4-6). We find little effect of total clientele strength,
but when we decompose clientele strength into diagonal and off-diagonal contributions
in columns 3 and 6, we find that the off-diagonal contribution which captures coholdings
propensity has a strong positive effect on portfolio variances and covariances, while the
diagonal contribution which captures the tendency for widely held stocks to have extreme
characteristic values has a negative effect. Although we only observe ten variances and
45 covariances, the explanatory power of the regressions in columns 3 and 6 is impressive
at 50% and 69% respectively. Table A.21 confirms that this pattern holds true when we
size-weight all investors while constructing the characteristic tilt estimates.
    We interpret these findings as follows. Widely held stocks tend to have low return
variances, so characteristics that load on these stocks also tend to have low variances.
However, characteristics that attract coholdings have volatile returns, either because in-
vestor clienteles form around characteristics whose stock prices move together, or because
investor clienteles themselves move stock prices as money flows in and out of favored
characteristics. Similarly, characteristics that are coheld by overlapping clienteles also
tend to move together.
    We verify these insights using regressions of stock return volatility and correlations on
stock-level holdings variances and coholdings. In Table A.22 in the internet appendix, we
regress return variance on holdings variance, both in levels and in cross-sectional ranks.
We find weak evidence of a negative relationship in levels and strong and significant
evidence of a negative relationship when both left- and right-hand side variables are
measured in ranks, as well as a strong negative relationship when return volatility is in
natural units and holdings variance is measured in ranks. This reflects the fact that widely
held stocks, whose holdings variance is high, tend to be well diversified stocks with low
variance. Figure 4 Panel A plots this relationship, binning holdings variance into deciles
on the horizontal axis, and plotting the average return volatility in each bin on the vertical
axis.


                                              29
    In Table A.23 we ask how stock return covariances are related to holdings covariances,
the off-diagonal elements of the coholdings matrix, in a regression with roughly 4.8 mil-
lion observations. We obtain a significant positive relationship although the explanatory
power is modest (about 0.4% in levels and 1-1.3% in ranks). Figure 4 Panel B plots this
relationship, binning holdings covariance into deciles on the horizontal axis, and plotting
the average pairwise return correlation in each bin on the vertical axis. The plot shows
a clear positive relationship: stocks that are held together tend to move together. Online
appendix Tables A.24 and A.25 show that these patterns documented using the August
2011 cross-section continue to remain strong when estimated using other cross-sections of
the data.


6.1    The Failure of Diversification
The tendency for coheld stocks to move together suggests that Indian investors are not
following the prescription of classical finance theory to diversify portfolio risk. To show
this quantitatively, in this section we contrast the data on Indian investor portfolios
with the solution to a constrained diversification problem. That is, we check whether
households h attempt to get as close to the market portfolio Sharpe ratio as possible,
while operating under a constraint on the number of stocks Nh that they hold, as well
as a constraint on short sales. Exogenous variation in Nh across households could arise
from cognitive or real frictions associated with holding and trading multiple stocks, or
simply from a lack of financial sophistication; we do not model these frictions here.
    To conduct this evaluation, we first assume that expected excess returns follow the
CAPM, meaning that the market Sharpe ratio is ex-ante optimal. We then assume that
households attempt to get as close to the market Sharpe ratio as possible subject to the
constraint of holding Nh stocks, by building a portfolio that maximizes the fit to the
returns on the market portfolio.
    To generate an empirical benchmark for the constrained optimization problem faced
by households, we implement a least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (lasso)
regression. We regress market portfolio returns on individual stock returns, using weekly
total realized returns over the period September 2009 through August 2011, and for each
value of Nh we adjust the lasso regularization parameter to deliver a portfolio with exactly
Nh stocks. That is, for lower (higher) Nh , the regularization parameter tightens (weakens)
the constraint on the number of regressors included in the model. The estimated portfolios
associated with each Nh trade off the regression fit against the number of regressors
included, and are plausible solutions for the constrained optimization problem. For


                                            30
Nh = 1 we simply choose the stock which is maximally correlated with the market.
     Panel A of Figure 5 plots the results from this exercise for Nh ranging from 1 to 50.
The height of each grey bar in panel A indicates the maximum obtainable Sharpe ratio
associated with each value of Nh on the horizontal axis using the lasso implied portfolio
of stocks.25 This maximum Sharpe ratio roughly doubles as Nh increases from 1 to 5,
increases more slowly as Nh increases further to 25, and has small gains beyond that
point. For optimal portfolios with more than 25 stocks, the Sharpe ratios are very close
to that of the market portfolio, which is shown as a black bar.
     The blue triangles in panel A show the locations of the median estimated Sharpe ra-
tios of investors' actual stock portfolios observed in the data over the same time period.
Holding larger numbers of stocks is associated with a Sharpe ratio that is relatively larger
compared to the constrained optimum. This finding could reflect the role of financial so-
phistication in jointly determining performance and Nh , or could simply reflect underlying
heterogeneity in investors' preferences for taking idiosyncratic risk.
     The dotted lines extending vertically above and below the triangles span the 10th
to 90th percentiles of investors' estimated Sharpe ratios. Even at the 90th percentile,
these values are below the empirical benchmark estimated using the lasso approach for
all values of Nh , with an especially large relative gap when Nh is low.
     Of course, the CAPM may not be the best model for pricing Indian stocks. As an
alternative, we also consider investors' performance under a popular four-factor model of
returns. We add three standard priced factors--size, value, and momentum--to the mar-
ket return to create a four-factor model. The maximum Sharpe ratio is now achieved by
the tangency portfolio of these four factors.26 Once estimated, we compute the tangency
portfolio's returns by applying its loadings to the factor returns. As before, we generate
an empirical benchmark for the constrained optimization problem faced by households
using lasso regression that maximizes the fit of the returns to the tangency portfolio re-
turns over September 2009 through August 2011, conditional on holding only Nh stocks
with no short selling. To assess households' performance, we calculate their portfolio
returns' fit to the tangency portfolio returns.
     Panel B of Figure 5 reveals that the four factor benchmark makes the optimal diver-
sification conjecture even more tenuous. Few portfolios lean heavily towards factors that
  25
      The Sharpe ratio on the market is estimated over a longer sample period from April 2003 through
August 2011, since realized Sharpe ratios are noisy estimates of true Sharpe ratios over short sample
periods.
   26
      We use the dataset of Agarwalla et al. (2013) available at http://www.iimahd.ernet.in/~iffm/
Indian-Fama-French-Momentum. Following the procedure we used for the CAPM, we estimate the
tangency portfolio's factor loadings and Sharpe ratio using weekly factor returns over the period April
2003 through August 2011.

                                                  31
have been well compensated historically, aside from the market factor--which accounts for
less than half of the tangency portfolio. This exercise shows little evidence of constrained
mean-variance optimization.
    Overall, the positive relationship between return covariances and coholdings is intrigu-
ing. If Indian investors were attempting to diversify portfolios with a small number of
stocks, they would tend to cohold stocks with relatively low return correlations. On the
other hand, if investor clienteles buy and sell coheld stocks at the same time, that could
lead to a positive relationship between coholdings and return correlations, and could in-
crease the return volatility of characteristic portfolios that have strong clienteles. More
generally, in equilibrium asset pricing models holdings and returns are jointly determined,
and different models have different implications for the relationship between them. The
results in this section warrant further investigation, as they are a first step to more deeply
understanding the empirical relationships between holdings and returns.


7     Conclusion
In this paper we have suggested that a factor model for investors' stock holdings provides
a natural way to understand household portfolio decisions and the structure of investor
clienteles for different types of stocks. The model is a cross-sectional analog to the time-
series factor models that are commonly used to describe the variation in stock returns over
time. We have applied the model to comprehensive administrative data from India, where
direct stock holdings are the norm at the time of our analysis. While direct stock holdings
have become less prevalent over the longer run in many advanced economies, we note that
they are, at the time of writing this paper, experiencing an unusual resurgence around
the world, accompanied by substantial increases in trading volume by retail investors.
    Our main emphasis is on a model with multiple observable factors, some related to
account characteristics such as the number of stocks held, and others related to the
characteristics of accounts' stock holdings such as their average market capitalization.
We find that this model exhibits good performance in comparison with an unobservable
PCA-based factor model, and provides a good description of the empirical coholdings
matrix.
    Certain characteristics of stocks seem to have strong clientele effects associated with
them, meaning that many investors' portfolios load either positively or negatively on
these characteristics. The strongest characteristic clienteles are associated with firm age
and share price, even though these are not characteristics that attract a great deal of
attention in the asset pricing literature. Clientele effects are weaker for Fama-French

                                             32
style characteristics despite their importance in academic asset pricing research and in
the organization of the US mutual fund industry.
    We use our model to estimate which types of accounts hold which stocks and make
up the clienteles for these characteristics. We find that single-stock accounts have strong
preferences for particular types of stocks, as do older vs. younger accounts and larger
vs. smaller accounts. By including all these account attributes in a single model, we are
able to compare their importance rather than consider their effects on portfolio choice
in isolation as most previous research has done.27 Also, we find that characteristics
form clusters with similar clienteles, even after we orthogonalize those characteristics
in the cross-section of Indian stocks. Established, dividend-paying stocks have similar
clienteles, as do easily traded lottery-like stocks.
    Finally, we explore the relation between coholdings and the covariances of stock re-
turns. Stocks and characteristic portfolios that are more commonly coheld tend to
correlate more strongly with one another. This pattern runs counter to the view that
investors optimally diversify their portfolios conditional on a constraint on the number
of stocks held, but it reinforces the idea that clientele effects, captured by coholdings
propensities, contribute to common variation in stock returns.




  27
     For example, account size and wealth have been highlighted as important determinants of stock-
holdings behavior by Campbell et al. (2019) and Bach et al. (2020), and account age by Campbell et al.
(2014) and Betermeier et al. (2017).

                                                 33
References
Agarwalla, S. K., J. Jacob, and J. R. Varma (2013). Four factor model in Indian eq-
  uities market. Working Paper W.P. No. 2013-09-05, Indian Institute of Management,
  Ahmedabad.
Ahn, S. C. and A. R. Horenstein (2013). Eigenvalue ratio test for the number of factors.
 Econometrica 81 (3), 1203­1227.
Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson (1986). Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread. Journal of
 Financial Economics 17 (2), 223­249.
Anagol, S., V. Balasubramaniam, and T. Ramadorai (2018). Endowment effects in the
 field: Evidence from India's IPO lotteries. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (4),
 1971­2004.
Anagol, S., V. Balasubramaniam, and T. Ramadorai (2021). The effects of experience
 on investor behavior: Evidence from India's IPO lotteries. Journal of Financial Eco-
 nomics forthcoming.
Anagol, S. and A. Pareek (2019). Should business groups be in finance? Evidence from
 Indian mutual funds. Journal of Development Economics 139, 229­248.
Bach, L., L. E. Calvet, and P. Sodini (2020). Rich pickings? risk, return, and skill in
  household wealth. American Economic Review 110 (9), 2703­2747.
Baker, M., R. Greenwood, and J. Wurgler (2009). Catering through nominal share prices.
  The Journal of Finance 64 (6), 2559­2590.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2013). Behavioral corporate finance: An updated survey. In
  Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Volume 2, pp. 357­424. Elsevier.
Balasubramaniam, V., J. Y. Campbell, T. Ramadorai, and B. Ranish (2021). Online
  Appendix to Who Owns What? A factor model for direct stockholding.
Barber, B. M., Y.-T. Lee, Y.-J. Liu, and T. Odean (2009). Just how much do individual
  investors lose by trading? Review of Financial Studies 22 (2), 609­632.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000). Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
  stock investment performance of individual investors. Journal of Finance 55 (2), 773­
  806.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2001). Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and
  common stock investment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1), 261­292.
Barberis, N. and A. Shleifer (2003).     Style investing.   Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 68 (2), 161­199.
Betermeier, S., L. E. Calvet, and P. Sodini (2017). Who are the value and growth in-
  vestors? Journal of Finance 72 (1), 5­46.

                                          34
Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2007). Down or out: Assessing the welfare
  costs of household investment mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5), 707­747.
Campbell, J. Y., T. Ramadorai, and B. Ranish (2014). Getting better or feeling
  better? How equity investors respond to investment experience. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20000, Available at SSRN:
  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2176222.
Campbell, J. Y., T. Ramadorai, and B. Ranish (2019). Do the rich get richer in the stock
  market? Evidence from India. American Economic Review: Insights 1 (2), 225­40.
Chamberlain, G. and M. Rothschild (1983). Arbitrage, factor structure, and mean-
 variance analysis on large asset markets. Econometrica 51 (5), 1305­1324.
Connor, G. and R. A. Korajczyk (1986). Performance measurement with the arbitrage
  pricing theory: A new framework for analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 15 (3),
  373­394.
Connor, G. and R. A. Korajczyk (2019). Semi-strong factors in asset returns. Available
  at SSRN 3419446 .
Coval, J. D. and T. J. Moskowitz (1999). Home bias at home: Local equity preference in
  domestic portfolios. Journal of Finance 54 (6), 2045­2073.
Curcuru, S., J. Heaton, D. Lucas, and D. Moore (2010). Heterogeneity and portfolio
 choice: Theory and evidence. In Y. Ait-Sahalia and L. P. Hansen (Eds.), Handbook
 of Financial Econometrics: Tools and Techniques, pp. 337­382. San Diego: North-
 Holland.
Dorn, D. and G. Huberman (2010). Preferred risk habitat of individual investors. Journal
 of Financial Economics 97 (1), 155­173.
Døskeland, T. M. and H. K. Hvide (2011). Do individual investors have asymmetric
 information based on work experience? Journal of Finance 66 (3), 1011­1041.
Fagereng, A., L. Guiso, and L. Pistaferri (2018). Portfolio choices, firm shocks, and
  uninsurable wage risk. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (1), 437­474.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal
  of Finance 47 (2), 427­465.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3­56.
Grinblatt, M., S. Ik¨
                    aheimo, M. Keloharju, and S. Kn¨
                                                   upfer (2016). IQ and mutual fund
  choice. Management Science 62 (4), 924­944.
Grinblatt, M. and M. Keloharju (2000). The investment behavior and performance of
  various investor types: A study of Finland's unique data set. Journal of Financial
  Economics 55 (1), 43­67.

                                           35
Grinblatt, M. and M. Keloharju (2001). How distance, language, and culture influence
  stockholdings and trades. The Journal of Finance 56 (3), 1053­1073.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1993). Differences of opinion make a horse race. The Review of
  Financial Studies 6 (3), 473­506.

Hong, H. and M. Kacperczyk (2009). The price of sin: The effects of social norms on
  markets. Journal of Financial Economics 93 (1), 15­36.

Jayaraj, D. and S. Subramanian (2008). Adjusting headcount deprivation for horizontal
  and spatial inequality: Some illustrative examples using census housing data. Indian
  Journal of Human Development 2 (2), 425­434.

Kaniel, R., G. Saar, and S. Titman (2008). Individual investor trading and stock returns.
 Journal of Finance 63 (1), 273­310.

Koijen, R. S. and M. Yogo (2019). A demand system approach to asset pricing. Journal
 of Political Economy 127 (4), 1475­1515.

Kozak, S., S. Nagel, and S. Santosh (2018). Interpreting factor models. The Journal of
 Finance 73 (3), 1183­1223.

Liao, J., C. Peng, and N. Zhu (2020). Price and volume dynamics in bubbles. Available
  at SSRN 3188960 .

Lintner, J. (1965). The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in
  stock portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics 47 (1), 13­37.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences
 affect risk taking? The quarterly journal of economics 126 (1), 373­416.

Markowitz, H. M. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance 7 (1), 77­91.

Martins, R., H. Singh, and S. Bhattacharya (2012). What does volume reveal: A study of
 the Indian single stock futures market. Indian Journal of Economics & Business 11 (2),
 409­419.

Massa, M. and A. Simonov (2006). Hedging, familiarity and portfolio choice. Review of
 Financial Studies 19 (2), 633­685.

Mayers, D. (1972). Nonmarketable assets and capital market equilibrium under uncer-
 tainty. Studies in the theory of capital markets 1, 223­48.

Meeuwis, M., J. A. Parker, A. Schoar, and D. I. Simester (2018). Belief disagreement and
 portfolio choice. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Merton, R. (1987). A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete infor-
 mation. Journal of Finance 42 (3), 483­510.



                                           36
Merton, R. C. (1973). An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41,
 867­887.

Odean, T. (1998). Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance 53 (5),
 1775­1798.

P´
 astor, L., R. F. Stambaugh, and L. A. Taylor (2020). Fund tradeoffs. Journal of Financial
  Economics .

Seru, A., T. Shumway, and N. Stoffman (2010). Learning by trading. Review of Financial
  Studies 23 (2), 705­739.

Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under condi-
  tions of risk. Journal of Finance 19 (3), 425­442.

Tobin, J. (1958). Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk. Review of Economic
  Studies 25 (2), 65­86.

Vashishtha, A. and S. Kumar (2010). Development of financial derivatives market in India:
  A case study. International Research Journal of Finance and Economics 37 (37), 15­29.

Vissing-Jørgensen, A. (2002). Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice het-
  erogeneity: Nonfinancial income and participation cost structures. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                             37
                                              Table 1
                                          Summary Statistics

This table provides means, standard deviations and quantiles of the main variables of interest for the
August 2011 cross-section of roughly 9.7 million individual investors in the 3,103 stocks in our sample.
Age is the number of months since the investor opened their first depository account. Size is the investors'
USD value of all holdings of stocks in our sample. Account Turnover is the investors' average monthly
value of trades over the past year divided by the portfolio size as on August 2011. Turnover is winsorized
at the 99th percentile. No. Stocks is the number of stocks in our sample held by the investor. No. Stocks
Traded is the number of unique stocks traded by the investor over the past year. Characteristic tilts are
the value weighted average stock characteristic of investors' portfolios, where the stock characteristics
(except for "Dividend Paying") are rank normalized on the interval [-0.5, 0.5]. Stock Age is the number
of months since the stock began public trading. Book/Market is constructed using the latest book value
as of December 2010. Stock Turnover and Realized Volatility, Returns, Skewness, and Market Beta are
measured over the previous year, using weekly data. Dividend paying equals one for stocks that paid a
cash dividend in the previous year and zero for stocks that did not.



     Variable Name              Mean      Std. Dev.          P10     P25    Median     P75       P90
     Account Attributes
     Age                         61.30        36.89         16.00   39.00    52.00    84.00   124.00
     Size ('000s USD)            11.54       533.43          0.04    0.14     0.78     3.54    13.01
     Account Turnover             0.38         1.17          0.00    0.00     0.02     0.18     0.71
     No. Stocks                   8.45        16.48          1.00    1.00     4.00     9.00    20.00
     No. Stocks Traded            4.74        11.24          0.00    0.00     1.00     5.00    13.00

     Characteristic Tilts
     Stock Age                   -0.06          0.27        -0.43   -0.30     -0.08    0.15      0.34
     Dividend Paying              0.68          0.38         0.00    0.44      0.86    1.00      1.00
     Share Price                  0.22          0.21        -0.06    0.13      0.26    0.38      0.44
     Stock Turnover               0.08          0.19        -0.14   -0.02      0.07    0.22      0.33
     Realized Returns            -0.02          0.20        -0.28   -0.16      0.00    0.10      0.22
     Market Beta                  0.11          0.18        -0.12   -0.02      0.12    0.23      0.34
     Realized Skewness           -0.15          0.19        -0.34   -0.30     -0.17   -0.05      0.12
     Realized Volatility         -0.17          0.18        -0.35   -0.30     -0.21   -0.09      0.09
     Book/Market                 -0.14          0.18        -0.33   -0.25     -0.19   -0.07      0.08
     Market Capitalization        0.38          0.17         0.18    0.37      0.45    0.48      0.49




                                                       38
                                                 Table 2
                                     Characteristic Clientele Strength

The shaded rows of this table present the variance of investors' characteristic tilts (characteristic clientele
strength) in August 2011, using both raw and orthogonalized stock characteristics produced following
the procedure described in section 2.2. Characteristics are presented in descending order of this variance
(using orthogonalized characteristics). The second of each set of columns presents the percentage of the
variance that can be attributed to off-diagonal elements of the coholdings matrix, i.e. the tendency for
investors to cohold stocks with similar characteristics. The third and final columns convert the variances
into standard deviations. The variances, but not standard deviations, of discrete stock characteristics
(italicized row labels) are divided by 3 to account for the fact that the maximum variance of a binary
variable is three times as large as one that is uniformly distributed with a range of one. All statistics
weight investors equally. As the set of industry and zone dummies are collinear, the weakest one is
dropped in the orthogonalization.


                                                     Raw                                Orthogonalized
  Characteristic                      Variance   % Off-diagonal   Std. Dev   Variance   % Off-diagonal   Std. Dev
  Stock Age                              0.074           11.8%       0.273      0.074          11.77%       0.273
  Dividend Paying                        0.047           12.5%       0.375      0.049          11.88%       0.384
  Share Price                            0.044           22.4%       0.211      0.045          12.85%       0.213
  Stock Turnover                         0.035            8.5%       0.187      0.045           7.01%       0.211
  Business Group: Any                    0.048            6.8%       0.378      0.042           5.93%       0.354
  Realized Returns                       0.040           13.5%       0.201      0.040           7.36%       0.201
  Zone: West                             0.041            5.8%       0.350      0.040           5.20%       0.344
  Beta                                   0.033           11.7%       0.181      0.035           6.02%       0.186
  Industry: Financial Services           0.030            6.5%       0.298      0.033           6.97%       0.313
  Realized Skew                          0.035            7.5%       0.187      0.030           3.88%       0.173
  Realized Volatility                    0.033           15.9%       0.182      0.030           5.45%       0.172
  Industry: Manufacturing                0.038            5.4%       0.339      0.026           1.74%       0.279
  Book/Market                            0.032           13.0%       0.180      0.026           3.87%       0.161
  Market Capitalization                  0.029           21.2%       0.171      0.025           6.89%       0.159
  Industry: Oil & Gas                    0.032           10.0%       0.310      0.022           9.02%       0.256
  Business Group: Reliance (ADAG)        0.024           11.9%       0.266      0.021          11.52%       0.250
  Zone: South                            0.024            4.6%       0.267      0.018           3.03%       0.232
  Industry: IT                           0.023            3.3%       0.263      0.013           1.39%       0.198
  Industry: Construction                 0.011            2.6%       0.182      0.012           9.09%       0.193
  Public Sector Enterprise               0.030           10.1%       0.302      0.012           5.80%       0.193
  Business Group: Reliance (DAG)         0.012            6.8%       0.192      0.012           6.67%       0.193
  Industry: Food, Agro. & Textiles       0.008            3.7%       0.158      0.010           4.67%       0.177
  Zone: North                            0.027            3.9%       0.286      0.008           0.92%       0.153
  Business Group: Tata                   0.007            4.2%       0.147      0.007           2.83%       0.141
  Business Group: Suzlon                 0.003            1.6%       0.094      0.003           1.44%       0.094
  Business Group: Mahindra               0.003            1.1%       0.089      0.003           0.77%       0.090
  Business Group: Jaypee                 0.003            7.8%       0.087      0.002           7.29%       0.087
  Business Group: Jindal                 0.002            1.5%       0.081      0.002           1.35%       0.084
  Business Group: Birla Aditya           0.002            1.7%       0.075      0.002           1.28%       0.079
  Business Group: Adani                  0.001            2.9%       0.057      0.002           5.58%       0.075
  Business Group: Vedanta                0.001            2.1%       0.058      0.001           2.51%       0.060
  Industry: Other                        0.005            4.0%       0.120
  Zone: East                             0.011            2.2%       0.178




                                                        39
                                            Table 3
                         Correlations of Investors' Characteristic Tilts

The panels below present the correlations of investors' characteristic tilts (using orthogonalized char-
acteristics, excluding business group, industry and geographic zone) in August 2011, equally weighting
each investor. The shading illustrates the sign and magnitude of the correlations indicated in gray text.
In Panel A, characteristics are presented in order of their clientele strength (Table 2), whereas Panel B
reorders the characteristics to illustrate the presence of clusters of (coheld) characteristics.


               Panel A: Ordered by Characteristic Clientele Strength




                                Panel B: Ordered by Cluster




                                                   40
                                                                                Table 4
                                                                   Who Owns What: Characteristic Tilts
                                                                     Single Factor Model Estimates

     This table presents coefficients, along with the corresponding standard errors and R-squared, from univariate regressions of investors' characteristic
     tilts (in columns, using orthogonalized characteristics) on account attributes (in rows). Statistics equally weight all investors in August 2011. Shading
     of coefficients corresponds to their sign and magnitude.

                                 Stock Age    Dividend     Share        Turnover     Bus.   Gp.   Realized      Market       Realized      Realized      Book         Market
                                              Paying       Price                     Any          Returns       Beta         Skew          Volatility    /Market      Cap.
            Size                       7.11         9.65         5.84         0.13        -4.22          2.89        -1.80         -0.64          1.71        -1.79        -2.29
                                    (0.008)      (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       6.78        18.89         7.53         0.00         4.28          2.06         0.94          0.14          0.98         1.24         2.06
            No.Stocks                  3.36         3.08         1.17         0.09        -1.21          1.45        -0.52          0.48          0.81        -0.47        -1.09
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       1.51         1.93         0.30         0.00         0.35          0.52         0.08          0.08          0.22         0.09         0.47
            Age                        4.25         1.75         1.00        -2.93        -0.77          2.57        -1.91          0.92          1.39         0.63        -1.73
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)




41
                                       2.43         0.62         0.22         1.93         0.14          1.64         1.05          0.28          0.65         0.15         1.19
            Turnover                  -1.26        -1.93        -3.75         2.36        -0.14         -1.13         0.93          1.08          1.29         0.95         0.14
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       0.21         0.75         3.09         1.25         0.00          0.32         0.25          0.39          0.56         0.35         0.01
            Single Stock Dummy        -5.17        -5.75        -0.48        -0.93         1.85         -2.17         0.58         -0.12         -2.07         0.65         0.61
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       3.59         6.70         0.05         0.19         0.82          1.16         0.10          0.01          1.45         0.17         0.15
            No. Stocks Traded          1.67         1.89        -0.15         1.53        -1.19          0.00         0.39          0.50          1.10        -0.06        -0.86
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       0.37         0.72         0.01         0.52         0.34          0.00         0.04          0.08          0.41         0.00         0.29
            Eastern                    0.42         0.38        -0.21         0.66        -0.22          0.08         0.45         -0.16          0.19         0.11         0.31
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       0.02         0.03         0.01         0.10         0.01          0.00         0.06          0.01          0.01         0.00         0.04
            Southern                   0.08         1.00        -0.52         1.13        -0.72          0.69         0.86          0.00          0.30         0.00        -0.59
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       0.00         0.20         0.06         0.29         0.13          0.12         0.22          0.00          0.03         0.00         0.14
            Western                    1.04        -0.10         0.53        -0.83         0.26          0.05        -1.25          0.45          0.25        -0.18        -0.29
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       0.15         0.00         0.06         0.16         0.02          0.00         0.45          0.07          0.02         0.01         0.03
            Northern                   1.04        -1.15         0.05        -0.63         0.57         -0.79         0.28         -0.40         -0.72         0.13         0.68
                                    (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                       0.35         0.27         0.00         0.09         0.08          0.16         0.02          0.05          0.18         0.01         0.18
                                           Table 5
                            Who Owns What: Characteristic Clusters
                                Single Factor Model Estimates

This table reports the factor loadings, the standard error, and the R2 from univariate regressions of
the first three principal components of investors' characteristic tilts (using orthogonalized characteristics
and excluding business group, industry and geographical zone) in August 2011 on account attributes.
The account attributes (in rows) are normalized to each have variance of one. Shading of coefficients
corresponds to their sign and magnitude. The estimates equally weight all investors in the data.


                                                    PC1         PC2         PC3
                        Size                         0.0922     -0.0549      0.0828
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       9.21        5.00       12.50
                        No.Stocks                    0.0402     -0.0105      0.0270
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       1.75        0.18        1.33
                        Age                          0.0351     -0.0169      0.0350
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       1.33        0.47        2.23
                        Turnover                    -0.0012      0.0396     -0.0313
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       0.00        2.60        1.79
                        Single Stock Dummy          -0.0720      0.0066     -0.0410
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       5.62        0.07        3.07
                        No. Stocks Traded            0.0292      0.0044      0.0050
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       0.92        0.03        0.04
                        Eastern                      0.0079      0.0033     -0.0026
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       0.07        0.02        0.01
                        Southern                     0.0102      0.0117      0.0035
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       0.11        0.23        0.02
                        Western                      0.0051     -0.0099      0.0067
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       0.03        0.16        0.08
                        Northern                    -0.0219     -0.0023     -0.0093
                                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
                                                       0.52        0.01        0.16




                                                     42
                                             Table 6
                       Stock-level Estimates: Multi Factor Model Summary

For each stock, we estimate the observed factor model in using the equally-weighted cross-section of 9.7
million investors in August 2011. This table summarizes the factor loadings across the 3,103 stocks,
presented in terms of the basis point change in portfolio share per standard deviation change in the
factor. Each row in Panel A corresponds to an account attribute, and each row in Panel B corresponds to
a characteristic tilt. Characteristic tilts used in the regression exclude any holdings of the selected stock
in their construction. Columns show the standard deviation, 10th , 50th , 90th percentiles of the cross-
sectional distribution, respectively. The last two columns present the average of the absolute values of
the t-statistic, and the percent of stocks for which the factor loading is statistically significantly different
from zero at the 5% level.


                                      Panel A: Account Attributes

                                          Std. Dev        10%       50%       90%       Avg. |t-stat|     Sig.(5% level)
                 Age                            3.53   -0.40         0.05     0.63             13.70               85.92
                 Size                          14.85   -0.77        -0.01     0.96             18.12               90.36
                 Turnover                       5.90   -0.10         0.01     0.34              6.41               62.26
                 No. Stocks                     2.17   -0.15         0.00     0.30              4.49               57.20
                 No. Stocks Traded              1.81   -0.16         0.01     0.28              4.69               54.46
                 Single Stock Dummy            10.19   -0.46        -0.07     0.08              8.19               80.89
                 Geographic Region
                    Southern                    2.89   -0.27         0.00     0.31              6.20               57.43
                    Northern                    3.90   -0.27        -0.01     0.16              4.50               50.66
                    Western                     5.06   -0.34         0.04     0.34              6.37               71.16


                              Panel B: Portfolio Characteristic Tilts

                                               Std. Dev     10%        50%      90%       Avg. |t-stat|    Sig.(5% level)
                 Fama-French factors
                    Book/Market                    1.17     -0.02      0.07      0.30             6.38             84.85
                    Market Capitalization          2.17     -0.44     -0.14     -0.02            10.06             94.55
                    Market Beta                    1.66     -0.22     -0.02      0.20             5.39             63.81
                 Return-based factors
                    Realized Returns               1.67     -0.34      0.01     0.14              5.12             56.94
                    Realized Volatility            1.42     -0.06      0.07     0.30              6.67             84.53
                    Realized Skewness              1.47     -0.06      0.02     0.15              3.90             48.08
                 Behavioral factors
                    Share Price                    1.89     -0.77     -0.16     -0.02            12.21             95.55
                    Stock Age                      2.61     -0.34      0.05      0.38             9.09             82.02
                    Turnover                       1.03     -0.22     -0.02      0.31             6.12             72.22
                    Dividend Paying                1.83     -0.83     -0.17      0.00            13.11             93.23
                 Business Group Holdings
                    Reliance (ADAG)               12.64     -0.14      0.00     0.18              4.96             49.69
                    Tata                           1.32     -0.18      0.00     0.07              3.30             46.70
                    Reliance (DAG)                 2.24     -0.57     -0.06     0.09              4.56             56.82
                    Birla Aditya                   2.39     -0.11     -0.01     0.02              2.42             29.91
                    Jaypee                         2.35     -0.23     -0.01     0.04              3.41             49.47
                    Jindal                         1.22     -0.15     -0.01     0.02              2.70             38.58
                    Mahindra                       0.81     -0.18     -0.01     0.03              2.62             35.48
                    Suzlon                         1.39     -0.27     -0.03     0.02              4.13             60.33
                    Vedanta                        0.78     -0.12     -0.01     0.04              2.40             34.87
                    PSE                            2.40     -0.13      0.01     0.11              3.98             49.79
                 Industry Holdings
                    Construction                   2.02     -0.35     -0.04     0.04              3.95             50.63
                    Financial Services             1.67     -0.63     -0.07     0.03              7.52             76.64
                    Food, Agri. and Textiles       1.13     -0.12      0.01     0.21              4.06             51.11
                    Information Technology         1.51     -0.11      0.00     0.14              4.22             52.76
                    Manufacturing                  1.07     -0.07      0.03     0.30              5.38             65.23
                    Oil and Gas                    3.36     -0.14      0.00     0.11              4.03             45.60
                 Geography
                    Southern                       0.79     -0.10      0.00     0.11              3.58             44.80
                    Northern                       0.82     -0.09      0.00     0.06              2.81             35.74
                    Western                        1.00     -0.16     -0.02     0.09              3.96             50.50
                                             Table 7
                            Stock-level Estimates: Explanatory Power

This table presents the relative contribution of different groups of factors to the explanatory power of the
regressions summarized in Table 6. The first row in Panel A presents the full model R-squared from a
pooled least squares model with stock-specific intercepts and loadings. In each row following the first, we
re-estimate this model excluding factors corresponding to the attributes or tilts listed at left, and report
the reduction in R-squared that results (i.e. the marginal R-squared) as a percentage of the full model
R-squared.



                  Full R-squared                              3.96
                                                   Percent of Full R-squared
                    Account Attributes                       57.15
                     Size                                    15.31
                     One Stock Accounts                       9.89
                     Turnover                                 4.36
                     Age                                      1.49
                     No. Stocks                               0.35
                     Geographic factors                       0.26
                    Characteristic Tilts                     36.23
                     Business group                          13.66
                     Industry factors                         2.11
                     Behavioral factors                       1.14
                     Fama-French factors                      0.89
                     Return factors                           0.82




                                                    44
                                           Table 8
                   Characteristic Return and Tilt Variances and Covariances

This table presents regressions of characteristic return factor variances (columns 1 through 3) and co-
variances (columns 4 through 6) on characteristic tilt variances and covariances, or the contribution to
these characteristic tilt (co)variances due to stock holdings (diagonal) and coholdings (off-diagonal). All
variables are constructed using orthogonalized characteristics and equally weighting investors, and ex-
cludes the business group, industry and geographical zone characteristics. Regressions use the August
2011 cross-section, with return factor (co)variances constructed using weekly returns from March 2002
to August 2011.


    Dep. Var: Return Factor (Co)Variance                   Variances                       Covariances
                                                   (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
    Holding Factor (Co)variance                   0.003                          0.0001
                                                 (0.004)                         (0.002)
    Of which, coholding contribution                        0.028     0.120***             0.038***   0.063***
                                                           (0.018)     (0.038)              (0.008)    (0.006)
    Of which, holding contribution                                   -0.020***                        -0.010***
                                                                       (0.008)                         (0.001)
    Constant                                       Y         Y            Y        Y          Y           Y
    Adj. R-squared                               -0.047    0.133        0.499    -0.023     0.359       0.685
    N                                              10       10           10        45        45           45
    * p < 0.10, ** p< 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                    45
                                                                            Figure 1
                                                                   Number of Investors per Stock

This figure plots the cross-sectional distribution of the number of investors holding each stock in August
2011 sample. The x-axis plots the percentile cut-offs from 0 to 100, the left y -axis shows the number
of investors (logarithmic scale), and the right y -axis shows the corresponding percent share of investors
(%). The 10 most widely held stocks and the share of investors holding them are: Reliance Power
limited (40%), Reliance Industries limited (26%), Reliance Communications limited (12%), National
Hydro Power Corporation (12%), Power Grid Corporation of India (11%), Suzlon Energy limited (9.5%),
National Thermal Power Corporation (8%), Tata Steel limited (8%), Larsen and Toubro limited (7.5%),
Reliance Infrastructure limited (7.5%).
                                               5000000




                                                                                                                                                                          51.71
                                                                                                                                     Share of Investors Holding Stock (%)
                No. of Investors (Log-scale)

                                               500000




                                                                                                                                                               5.17
                                               50000




                                                                                                                                                    0.52




                                                                                                    0.1%
                                               5000




                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                               1000




                                                                                                                                     0.01




                                                         0           20            40             60            80             100

                                                             Cross-sectional Distribution (Percentile Cut-offs): August 2011




                                                                                          46
                                                                                         Figure 2
                                                                                   Average Portfolio Share

This figure plots the cross-sectional distribution of the average portfolio share of each stock in August
2011, both across all individual investors (blue curve, left hand side axis) and only those investors holding
the stock (green curve, right hand side axis).




                                                                                                                                               Avg. Portfolio Share When Held (%, Log-scale)
                                                   10.000
             Avg. Portfolio Share (%, Log-scale)




                                                                Avg. Portfolio Share (left-scale)
                                                                Avg. Portfolio Share When Held (right-scale)




                                                                                                                                                                            20 30
                                                   1.000
                                                   0.100




                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                   0.010




                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                   0.001




                                                            0               20              40                 60            80          100

                                                                       Cross-sectional Distribution (Percentile Cut-offs): August 2011




                                                                                                    47
                                                              Figure 3
                                                    Stock Characteristic Clusters
                                                    Principal Component Analysis

This figure presents the loadings of investors' characteristic tilts (using orthogonalized characteristics) on
the first three principal components extracted from the 9.7M x 10 matrix of characteristic tilts (excluding
business group, industry and geographical zones). Characteristics appear along the horizontal axis in
decreasing order of their clientele strength. All statistics are constructed by equally weighting investors.
                1.0




                                                                          PC1         PC2       PC3
                0.5
     Loadings

                0.0
                -0.5
                -1.0




                       Rsq. = 87.92%    73.14%      65.55%      47.25%      57.44%     33.8%     26.75%     26.28%      11.55%       6.38%


                              Stock    Dividend   (Low)Share    Stock      Realized    Market   Realized   Realized     Book/      Market
                               Age      Paying       Price     Turnover    Returns      Beta     Skew      Volatility   Market   Capitalization




                                                                             48
                                                                     Figure 4
                                                      Stock Returns and Holdings (Co)Variances

This figure presents the relationship between stock return volatility and decile bins of holdings variance
for 3103 stocks (Panel A) and between stock return correlation and decile bins of holdings covariances
for all stock pairs (Panel B). Standard errors are presented vertical lines for each bin.


                                           Panel A: Stock Return Volatility and Holdings Variance
                                     8.0
    Returns Standard Deviation (%)

                                     7.5
                                     7.0
                                     6.5
                                     6.0
                                     5.5
                                     5.0




                                            1     2        3      4        5         6        7      8   9   10


                                                                 Decile Bins of Holdings Variance



                                       Panel B: Stock Return Correlation and Holdings Covariance
                                     25
    Return Correlation (%)

                                     20
                                     15
                                     10




                                            1     2        3      4        5         6        7      8   9   10


                                                                Decile Bins of Holdings Covariance
                                                              Figure 5
                                               CAPM and Four Factor-Implied Sharpe Ratios

Panel A presents the annualized Sharpe ratio from the best N stock CAPM-implied portfolio. The x-
axis represents the number of stocks in the portfolio, with the market portfolio as the last bar in the
plot. The Sharpe ratio estimates are based on weekly returns data for the period March 2003 until
August 2011. The triangle plots the median CAPM implied Sharpe ratio for accounts in our data, for
the same time period, and the dotted lines represent the range from the 10th to the 90th percentile of
the household Sharpe ratio distribution. Panel B presents the annualized Sharpe ratio from the best N
stock Four Factor-implied portfolio for the same time-period, and the four factor-implied Sharpe ratio
for households, similar to Panel A.


                                           Panel A: CAPM-Implied Sharpe Ratio Estimates

                                               Median Sharpe Ratio
                                         1.0
             Sharpe Ratio (Annualized)




                                         0.8


                                         0.6


                                         0.4


                                         0.2


                                         0.0
                                                    1
                                                    2
                                                    3
                                                    4
                                                    5
                                                    6
                                                    7
                                                    8
                                                    9
                                                  10
                                                  11
                                                  12
                                                  13
                                                  14
                                                  15
                                                  16
                                                  17
                                                  18
                                                  19
                                                  20
                                                  21
                                                  22
                                                  23
                                                  24
                                                  25
                                                  26
                                                  27
                                                  28
                                                  29
                                                  30
                                                  31
                                                  32
                                                  33
                                                  34
                                                  35
                                                  36
                                                  37
                                                  38
                                                  39
                                                  40
                                                  41
                                                  42
                                                  43
                                                  44
                                                  45
                                                  46
                                                  47
                                                  48
                                                  49
                                                  50
                                               Market



                                                                     Number of stocks

                                         Panel B: Four Factor-Implied Sharpe Ratio Estimates

                                               Median Sharpe Ratio
                                         1.0
             Sharpe Ratio (Annualized)




                                         0.8


                                         0.6


                                         0.4


                                         0.2


                                         0.0
                                                          1
                                                          2
                                                          3
                                                          4
                                                          5
                                                          6
                                                          7
                                                          8
                                                          9
                                                        10
                                                        11
                                                        12
                                                        13
                                                        14
                                                        15
                                                        16
                                                        17
                                                        18
                                                        19
                                                        20
                                                        21
                                                        22
                                                        23
                                                        24
                                                        25
                                                        26
                                                        27
                                                        28
                                                        29
                                                        30
                                                        31
                                                        32
                                                        33
                                                        34
                                                        35
                                                        36
                                                        37
                                                        38
                                                        39
                                                        40
                                                        41
                                                        42
                                                        43
                                                        44
                                                        45
                                                        46
                                                        47
                                                        48
                                                        49
                                                        50
                                               4F Portfolio




                                                                     Number of stocks
