                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TEACHER COMPENSATION AND STRUCTURAL INEQUALITY:
        EVIDENCE FROM CENTRALIZED TEACHER SCHOOL CHOICE IN PERU

                                         Matteo Bobba
                                           Tim Ederer
                                     Gianmarco Leon-Ciliotta
                                       Christopher Neilson
                                        Marco G. Nieddu

                                       Working Paper 29068
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29068


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank the Ministry of Education of Peru for supporting rigorous policy evaluation efforts and
continued collaboration. Bobba acknowledges financial support from the AFD, the H2020-
MSCA-RISE project GEMCLIME-2020 GA No 681228, and the ANR under grant ANR-17-
EURE-0010 (Investissements d'Avenir program). Leon-Ciliotta recognizes financial support
from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (through the Severo Ochoa
Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (CEX2019-000915-S), grant ECO2014-55555-P
and the Ramon y Cajal Fellowship RyC-2017-23172) and the Barcelona GSE Seed Grant. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Matteo Bobba, Tim Ederer, Gianmarco Leon-Ciliotta, Christopher Neilson, and
Marco G. Nieddu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Teacher Compensation and Structural Inequality: Evidence from Centralized Teacher School
Choice in Peru
Matteo Bobba, Tim Ederer, Gianmarco Leon-Ciliotta, Christopher Neilson, and Marco G.
Nieddu
NBER Working Paper No. 29068
July 2021
JEL No. H52,I20,J3,J45,O15,R23,R58

                                           ABSTRACT
This paper studies how increasing teacher compensation at hard-to-staff schools can reduce
inequality in access to qualified teachers. Leveraging an unconditional change in the teacher
compensation structure in Peru, we first show causal evidence that increasing salaries at less
desirable locations attracts better quality applicants and improves student test scores. We then
estimate a model of teacher preferences over local amenities, school characteristics, and wages
using geocoded job postings and rich application data from the nationwide centralized teacher
assignment system. Our estimated model suggests that the current policy is helpful but both
inefficient and not large enough to effectively undo the inequality of initial conditions that hard-
to-staff schools and their communities face. Counterfactual analyses that incorporate equilibrium
sorting effects characterize alternative wage schedules and quantify the cost of reducing structural
inequality in the allocation of teacher talent across schools. Overall our results show that a policy
that sets compensation at each job posting using the information generated by the matching
platform is more efficient and can help reduce structural inequality in access to learning
opportunities. In comparison, a rigid system that ignores teacher preferences will indirectly
reinforce such inequalities.

Matteo Bobba                                       Christopher Neilson
Toulouse School of Economics                       School of Public and International Affairs
University of Toulouse Capitole                    Princeton University
1, Esplanade de l'Université                       Firestone Library, Room A2H
Toulouse Cedex 06 31080                            Princeton, NJ 08544
France                                             and NBER
matteo.bobba@tse-fr.eu                             cneilson@princeton.edu

Tim Ederer                                         Marco G. Nieddu
Toulouse School of Economics                       Department of Economics
University of Toulouse Capitole                    University of Cagliari and CRENoS
1, Esplanade de l'Université                       Viale Sant'Ignazio da Laconi 17
Toulouse Cedex 06 31080                            Cagliari 09123
France                                             Italy
tim.ederer@tse-fr.eu                               mgnieddu@unica.it

Gianmarco Leon-Ciliotta
Department of Economics and Business
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona GSE, IPEG and BREAD
Carrer Ramon Trias Fargas 25-27
Barcelona 08005
Spain
gianmarco.leon@upf.edu


An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29068
1       Introduction
Children born in remote and rural communities face significant disadvantages in achieving
comparable levels of human capital as their peers born in urban areas (World Bank, 2018).
Part of these wide inter-regional disparities reflect underlying differences in the distribution of
opportunities across geographic areas that is a result of past policies and historical inequities.
However, current policies can also contribute to further widening the gap in opportunities if
the pre-existing inequality is not compensated for (Glewwe and Muralidharan, 2016).
    In this paper, we study how inequality in the access to learning opportunities is ampli-
fied or reduced by policies that determine teacher compensation and shape the geographic
distribution of teacher talent.1 We study this question in the context of Per´    u, a developing
country with a heterogeneous geography and a population that is characterized by different
languages, cultures, and ethnicities. After documenting inequality in the access to schooling
inputs across rural and urban communities, we evaluate the impact of a recent policy reform
that significantly increased compensation at hard-to-staff schools in rural Per´     u. We use a
combination of a regression discontinuity design and an empirical model of teacher school
choice, to characterize the effects of the policy and the mechanisms through which it oper-
ated. We provide evidence that higher compensation at rural schools can increase the supply
of qualified teachers and improve student learning outcomes. Despite the positive effects of
increased compensation, we further show that the current policy is both inefficient in terms
of the spatial distribution of increased compensation and not large enough to effectively undo
the inequality of initial conditions that hard-to-staff schools and their communities face.
    We then consider the design of the optimal policy in our setting by asking what alternative
compensation schemes could reduce inequality in the access to learning opportunities. To
do so, we use the estimates of teacher preferences and information on school vacancies to
implement a matching-with-contracts algorithm that delivers the cost-efficient wage schedule
that is consistent with a given social objective (Hatfield and Milgrom, 2005). We finally
explore how the optimal allocation changes with the introduction of complementary policies
such as investing in rural school/community infrastructure or by increasing the supply of
teachers from different ethnic and geographic backgrounds.
    We begin our empirical analysis by presenting descriptive evidence on the structural
divide in school inputs and academic outcomes between rural and urban areas. Admin-
istrative data on school infrastructure and teacher qualifications show large gaps between
rural and urban schools, and these gaps persist when comparing student achievement. Job
    1
    There is ample evidence that teacher quality is important for student outcomes in e.g., the US (Chetty
et al., 2014; Jackson, 2018), Ecuador (Araujo et al., 2016), Pakistan (Bau and Das, 2020) and Uganda
(Buhl-Wiggers et al., 2017).

                                                    2
amenities, or the lack thereof, could be one explanation for these large differences in teacher
qualifications. Because teachers indicate their preferences over available positions through a
centralized application system, we are able to measure this empirically. We show that job
applications are highly skewed towards vacancies in urban areas, and the school system is
hard-pressed to staff many small rural public schools scattered throughout the poorest parts
of the country. The lack of teachers applying for jobs at rural schools could be due to several
factors, including insufficient compensation (Jackson et al., 2014).
    Against this backdrop, the government implemented a policy that increased compensation
at teaching positions in rural public schools based on a coarse set of school and community
attributes. We exploit discrete jumps in teacher wages at specific thresholds of the local
population to show causal evidence that higher wages significantly increase the demand at
vacancies in rural locations. Teachers who chose bonus-eligible positions have higher scores
(0.45 ) on the national teacher competency test compared to those who chose lower-paying
positions in otherwise similar teaching positions. Importantly, these effects are observed
only for contract-teachers for whom the assignment mechanism follows a transparent and
strict-priority assignment rule based on teacher competency scores and their preferences.2
    We also show that the increase in teacher compensation led to significantly higher student
academic achievement in math and language (0.3 and 0.35 , respectively). This is only
true for schools that had an available teaching position in the recruitment drives we analyze,
even though incumbent teachers were also paid more. This evidence suggests that there is no
effort response of incumbent teachers, which mirrors recent findings that establish little or no
effects of unconditional wage increases in contexts where most teachers are public servants
with permanent contracts (de Ree et al., 2018).3
    To evaluate the policy away from the eligibility cutoffs, we estimate an empirical model
of teacher school choice and construct counterfactual assignments in the absence of the pol-
icy. We estimate the model parameters taking advantage of teachers' revealed preferences
observed in the contract-teacher assignment system. Together with detailed information on
every school vacancy, teacher characteristics, and final assignments, this setting is ideal for es-
timating a flexible model of heterogeneous teacher preferences over wages and job attributes
(see Agarwal and Somaini (2020) for a review). The model is able to replicate the main
features of the data in terms of spatial sorting of teachers, including the local effects around
   2
       As found in other settings (Duflo et al., 2015; Estrada, 2019), the local institutions determining how
teachers are evaluated and assigned might be an important necessary condition for the effectiveness of policies
that provide incentives in the public sector.
     3
       In our context, instead, a large proportion of the school vacancies targeted by the wage reform are
filled by contract teachers, which is a common feature of teacher labor markets in most Latin American and
African countries.


                                                      3
the wage discontinuity as well as broader trends along the support of the variables that
characterize rural areas (locality population and remoteness to the provincial capital). The
estimated preference parameters quantify key trade-offs between wages and local amenities,
school characteristics, teacher-school match effects, and commuting/migration costs. Impor-
tantly, teachers from rural areas and ethnic minorities are more willing to work at schools in
communities similar to their hometown and thus require a lower compensation to staff those
positions.
    The model of teacher school choice provides a rich perspective on the effects of the wage
policy on the spatial distribution of teachers. By comparing simulated assignment outcomes
with and without the wage bonus, we can characterize the policy effects on teacher sorting
away from the discontinuities generated by the eligibility cutoffs of the recent policy reform.
We show that, while most of the effect of the wage bonus policy on teacher quality happens
close to the population threshold, the effect of the wage bonus on the share of filled vacancies
seems spatially concentrated in less desirable locations that are farther away from the cutoffs.
    Having established the effects of the policy that increased compensation, we turn to
the evaluation of the equilibrium effects of alternative compensation policies. We use the
estimated model to characterize counterfactual wage schedules that are consistent with two
independent objectives: (i) filling all vacancies with any teacher irrespective of their quality,
and (ii) recruiting in every school a teacher who is at least as qualified as the average
teacher in urban areas. We encode these objectives into schools' preferences over contracts
and use the matching-with-contracts algorithm to uncover the associated cost-efficient wage
schedules. The algorithm is akin to an ascending auction where schools increase the wages
they offer sequentially until the social objective is attained.
    Our results show that a policy that sets compensation at each job posting using the infor-
mation generated by the matching platform is more efficient and can help reduce structural
inequality in access to learning opportunities. In comparison, a rigid system that ignores
teacher preferences will indirectly reinforce such inequalities. We show that relative to the
current compensation policy, the budget neutral optimal policy increases the share of filled
vacancies by 7 percentage points and the share of schools with higher quality teachers by 4
percentage points. We find that filling every job vacancy with the current stock of teachers
would require twice the current budget (in terms of the total wage bill). However, shifting
the supply of highly qualified teachers towards hard-to-staff schools is significantly more
costly. Given the existing stock of teachers and schools, it would take six times the current
budget to equalize access to teacher quality across the country.
    We then repeat this exercise by implementing complementary policies such as investing
in school infrastructure or increasing the pool of teachers in locations where the supply

                                               4
is relatively scarce. We find that if differences in school infrastructure were completely
eliminated, the share of filled vacancies and the share of schools with higher quality teachers
both rise an additional six and 7 percentage points respectively. We get larger increments
in equity if, instead of equalizing school infrastructure, the number of teachers from rural
locations were to increase by just 3%. This targeted teacher training policy would lead to
significant cost savings for policies that seek to eliminate inequality. Filling every job vacancy
would cost 30% less and providing equal access to high quality teachers would cost 35% less
than the optimal policy with the existing stock of teachers. These results show that there
are large potential gains from complementary policy levers beyond wage incentives.4
    This paper brings new data and market design tools to a growing literature that studies
the role of compensation policy in the context of equilibrium models of the labor market
for teachers and their implications for the distribution of teacher quality (Tincani, 2021;
Biasi et al., 2021). Our results are relevant for the literature evaluating policies that vary
teachers' compensation in both developed and developing countries. There is large body of
work studying the effectiveness of pay-for-performance schemes.5 Relatively fewer studies
consider policy effects of unconditional wage increases on teacher turnover (Clotfelter et al.,
2008) and student outcomes (de Ree et al., 2018; Pugatch and Schroeder, 2018; Cabrera and
Webbink, 2020).
    More broadly, we contribute to the recent literature on the personnel economics of the
state (Finan et al., 2017). For instance, Ferraz and Finan (2009) find that higher wages
for politicians in Brazil attracted more educated candidates and improved politician perfor-
mance, Dal Bo et al. (2013) show that increased compensation for public sector positions
in Mexico led to a larger pool of applicants, and a higher quality of hired employees. We
bridge this literature with an empirical market design approach that leverages matching plat-
forms to study the sorting patterns of public school teachers and their effects on structural
inequality in the access to educational opportunities.


2       Data
In this paper, we combine several administrative data sources from the Ministry of Education
of Per´u over the period 2015-2018. While the resulting dataset spans the universe of public-
sector teachers and schools throughout the country, we restrict our analysis to primary
    4
      In addition to targeted teacher training or policies that equalize schooling inputs, Ajzenman et al.
(2021) show evidence that teacher applications to hard-to-staff schools can also be influenced by information
interventions or behavioral nudges.
    5
      See for example Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011); Barrera-Osorio and Raju (2017); Gilligan et
al. (2018); Leaver et al. (2020); Brown and Andrabi (2020).

                                                     5
schools for two reasons. First, secondary schools are much less prevalent in rural areas.6 To
the extent that the geographic distribution of schools is key to understanding disparities in
access to competent teachers, we need to focus on primary schools that are well represented
throughout the country. Second, in primary schools, all students in a classroom are taught
by a single teacher--instead of having a separate teacher for each subject. This setup allows
us to pin down the effect of the newly assigned teachers on student achievement in our
empirical analysis.
    Our first data source is the centralized teacher job application and assignment system.
This dataset includes information on all job vacancies posted at every public school in the
country during the first two rounds of the national recruitment of public sector teachers
(2015 and 2017), the scores in the subject competency evaluations for every applicant in the
centralized test, and detailed information on the job application process that we discuss in
Section 3.2. During the first (second) national recruitment drive, 77,500 (79,000) applicants
competed for 18,000 (25,500) vacancies in primary schools. Of those, about one-fifth report
no prior teaching experience (novice teachers).
    Our second administrative data source is the teacher occupation and payroll system
(NEXUS). This is an official dataset collected and maintained by the Ministry of Education,
which contains the complete records of all teachers employed in the public sector. In par-
ticular, the dataset includes individual identifiers for all teachers, the school in which they
work (but not the specific grade), and the type of contract/position (permanent or contract,
number of hours, etc.). This information is collected at the start, middle, and end of each
school year, allowing us to precisely trace both the school of origin (if any) and the school
of destination (if any) for each applicant to the national recruitment drives. Overall, 58% of
applicants had previously been employed as public sector teachers.
    We obtain school and locality characteristics data from the school census. These data
include the number of pupils, libraries, computers, classrooms, sports facilities, and staff
(teaching and administrative) at each school. They also include information on local ameni-
ties, such as access to basic services (electricity, sewage, water source) and infrastructure
(community phone, internet, bank, police, public library). This information is reported an-
nually by the principals of each school. Table A.1 in the Online Appendix reports basic
descriptive statistics for some of these characteristics for schools in urban and rural areas,
   6
    Secondary schools represent 27% of the total number of schools in the country. Only 14% of secondary
schools are located in Extremely Rural areas (as defined in Section 3.3). Peruvian public primary schools
serve 74% of the primary school enrollment countrywide. The majority of private schools target middle-class
students in urban areas. In rural communities, defined as localities with less than 2,000 inhabitants, public
schools are generally the only option, with more than 6,000 schools catering to 98 percent of the school-aged
children in 2015.


                                                     6
respectively.
    Our fourth data source is the administrative records on student academic outcomes.
The Evaluaci´  on Censal de Estudiantes (ECE) is a national standardized test that covers
curricular knowledge of math and language (Spanish). The test is administered by the
Ministry of Education at the end of every school year at selected grades at both public and
private schools whose enrollment exceeds five pupils (coverage is around 98%). We have
access to individual test scores from 2014­2018 for fourth grade students in public primary
schools.7
    Finally, in collaboration with the Ministry of Education, we administered an online survey
during the centralized job application process in 2015. Among several questions about the
application decisions, the survey asked applicants to rank the most important characteristics
of their chosen school. As shown in Table A.2, forty-four percent of teachers rank "being close
to home" as the most important characteristic. The two most often cited characteristics are
"prestige" and "cultural reasons".8 Other characteristics that drive decision-making for some
teachers include quality of school infrastructure, quality of students, and safety. In addition,
there is heterogeneity in the characteristics that are most important to teachers, with teachers
who score in the top quartile of the teacher evaluation test ranking characteristics differently.
These survey results partly motivate the empirical model that we propose and estimate in
Section 5.


3       Context and Institutions
3.1     Inequality of Education Inputs
Per´u's colonial history has affected current institutions, governance, public good provision,
and welfare (Acemoglu et al., 2001; Dell, 2010). The country spans a vast and varied geogra-
phy made up of mountainous, jungle, and coastal regions, with a population of culturally and
linguistically diverse groups who have lived for centuries under extractive systems of gover-
nance as a colony of the Spanish empire. The legacy of colonial institutions and policies is
one of the root causes of current structural inequalities. These policies were often targeted
to the highlands and jungle regions, where most of the natural resources were located. These
areas, in turn, have high poverty rates and a large concentration of indigenous population.
    7
     In 2017 there were a large number of floods and landslides throughout the country due to the El Ni~   no
natural calamity. This emergency led the Minister of Education at the time to take the (unfortunate) decision
to cancel the achievement test for that year.
   8
     While "prestige" is admittedly a somewhat vague concept, "cultural reasons" mainly refer to ethnolin-
guistic similarities between teachers and the communities where the schools are located.


                                                     7
    Over the last decade, the government has undertaken several efforts to improve educa-
tional outcomes in poorer rural areas, such as implementing a large-scale conditional cash
transfer program, investing in school infrastructure projects, and improving access to drink-
ing water and sewage (Bertoni et al., 2020). However, large differences still exist in the
access to education inputs such as school and locality infrastructure. Schools in rural ar-
eas predominantly hold (90%) mixed classes, with a single teacher attending to students of
different grades, and relative to urban schools they are 30% more likely to lack access to
basic services such as running water or electricity. See Table A.1 in the Online Appendix for
urban-rural differences across a broader set of indicators of schools, teachers, students, and
community characteristics.
    Figure 1 documents the stark differences in teacher quality and student achievement
between urban and rural schools. Panel A shows that teachers at rural schools are 20% less
likely to pass the requirements set by the government for permanent teachers (competent
teachers) and are twice as likely to lack teaching credentials (non-certified teachers).9 Panel B
of Figure 1 displays students' academic performance on the national standardized evaluation
in two subjects ­ Spanish and math. Approximately one in four students enrolled in rural
schools are classified as performing below the basic curricular requirements in either of the
two subjects, whereas the corresponding shares in urban schools are around 5%.
    We report additional stylized facts about the distribution of teacher quality in Online
Appendix A. Figure A.2 shows the geographic distribution of competent teachers across
provinces alongside the corresponding distribution of student test scores. Competent teachers
are heavily concentrated in the richer, coastal cities, while they are nearly absent in the
highlands and the inner amazonian regions (Panel A). The spatial variation in students'
achievement outcomes, shown in Panel B, is highly correlated with the concentration of
competent teachers across the country.
    We document inequality in schooling inputs and outputs across Per´      u. While local ameni-
ties and school infrastructures likely reflect structural differences between urban and rural
areas, the unequal spatial distribution of teacher quality suggests a margin where policy can
play an important role. To better understand the reasons behind the allocation of teachers
across different geographic areas, we now describe the institutions surrounding the labor
   9
     Competency is assessed by teachers' performance on the curricular and pedagogical knowledge module
of the standardized test used to both screen and recruit teachers (see Section 3.2). Subject competency test
have shown to correlate with teacher value added and other dimensions of teacher quality in several contexts
(Bold et al., 2017; Estrada, 2019; Gallegos et al., 2019; Araujo et al., 2020). In Per´
                                                                                      u in particular, Bertoni
et al. (2021) document strong correlations between various measures of teaching effectiveness and the score
in the curricular and pedagogical knowledge module of the evaluation test. Competent teachers are defined
in Figure 1 as those who attain a score of at least 60% in that module of the test. Figure A.1 in the Online
Appendix depicts a few individual-level correlates of performance in the standardized test.

                                                      8
                        Figure 1: Teachers and Students in Urban Vs. Rural Areas




                            a) Teachers                                                              b) Students


Notes: These figures show different summary statistics about teachers and students in urban and rural areas. Panel A shows that teachers in rural
schools are less likely to be classified as competent and are more likely to lack teaching certifications. Panel B shows how academic performance in
the Spanish and math modules of the national standardized evaluation differs between students of urban and rural schools. See A.1 in the Online
Appendix for a broader set of indicators for school and community-level characteristics across urban and rural areas.




market for public school teachers.


3.2        Contracts, Wages, and Sorting of Public School Teachers
Public school teachers in Per´ u are hired under two distinct types of contracts. Permanent
teachers (docentes nombrados ) are civil servants with indefinite contracts and very stable
employment. Teachers can also be hired by the central administration to work at a specific
school for an academic year as contract teachers (docentes contratados ). This contract can
be renewed for up to one more year subject to the approval of the school's administration.
Short-term contracts are routinely used in most education systems around the world and are
often designed as entry-level positions in the teaching career.10 In our setting, about one out
of five primary school instructors in urban areas is hired as a contract teacher. Short-term
contracts are more widespread in rural areas, reaching almost half of the labor force in the
most remote schools.
     The compensation of public-school teachers in Per´  u depends on (i) the type of contract
(permanent or contract), (ii) seniority, and (iii) some specific location or school charac-
teristics. In 2015, the base monthly wage for primary-school teachers under a short-term
   10
    Research in India and Kenya shows that students taught by locally hired teachers on annual contracts
have higher test scores (Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2011; Duflo et al., 2015), although in Kenya those
gains tend to vanish when the contracts are administered by the government rather than by a non-government
organization (Bold et al., 2018).

                                                                         9
contract was S/ 1,550 (US$ 510). This amount corresponds to the starting monthly wage of
permanent teachers, although more experienced permanent teachers can earn up to S/ 3,110
(US$ 1023). Additional wage bonuses are given to all teachers (irrespective of the contract)
working in specific types of schools, such as multi-grade or single-teacher schools, or schools
located in disadvantaged communities.11 While teacher compensation in the public sector in
Per´                        ~
    u is lower (Mizala and Nopo,   2016; Evans et al., 2020), they are higher than comparable
teaching positions in private schools.12
    The recruitment process of permanent and contract teachers in Per´      u was decentralized
until 2015. As in most countries, regional and local level officials often had significant
discretion in teacher hiring and allocation decisions (Bertoni et al., 2019; Estrada, 2019). In
an effort to make the process more transparent and meritocratic, the Ministry of Education
established a nation-wide recruitment process in which school-level job postings and teacher
job applications are processed on a single, centrally-managed platform. The first national
recruitment drive took place in 2015, followed by another round in 2017. Teachers recruited
through the 2015 and 2017 drives started teaching in the 2016 and 2018 academic years
(March-December), respectively.
    The process consists of two phases. In the first phase, every vacancy for permanent
teachers across all education levels are posted in the centralized system. Interested applicants
must have earned a teaching accreditation and taken a standardized competency evaluation.
The test is divided into three modules, which carry different weights in the total score: logical
reasoning (25 percent), reading comprehension (25 percent), and curricular and pedagogical
knowledge (50 percent). Those who correctly answer at least 60 percent of the questions in
each part of the test are eligible to apply for a permanent position by submitting a ranked-
order list of school preferences for up to five available positions in a given school district.13
Each school evaluates a short-list of the highest scoring teachers who express a preference
  11
     Figure A.3 in the Online Appendix shows the different wage bonuses, which vary between 3% (bilingual
school) and 30% (extremely rural locations, as defined in Section 3.3) of the monthly base wage. Schools
can satisfy multiple criteria (e.g. multi-grade and bilingual), in which case the bonuses are cumulative.
Accredited bilingual teachers are eligible for an additional bonus of S/ 100. There are also some compensation
adjustments throughout the year, such as a holiday bonus, which usually represents less than 5% of the total
monthly wage.
  12
     According to the national household survey (ENAHO 2016), the earnings of primary school teachers are
ranked second to last among the liberal professions in Per´   u, followed only by translators and interpreters.
Nationally representative survey data on teachers (ENDO 2014) document that the average monthly wage
for teachers working in primary schools in the private sector is approximately S/ 950. Only private school
teachers in the top ten percent of the distribution earn more than the base wage of a teacher in the public
sector (S/ 1,550).
  13
     In total there are 218 school districts participating in the assignment with substantial within-district
variation in the rural status of the school vacancies. For the average district, 71 percent of vacancies are in
rural locations. All available vacancies are in urban locations for 33 school districts (15 percent).


                                                      10
for that vacancy based on an in-class demonstration, their experience, and an interview.
At the end of the process, positions are allocated according to an overall score in both the
competency test and the school-based evaluation.14
     The short-term vacancies are assigned through the platform in a second phase, which
aims to fill most of the vacancies that remain unfilled after the first phase. In contrast to
the assignment of permanent teachers, short-term teaching positions are allocated through
a serial dictatorship algorithm where schools' preferences are taken to be a strict ranking of
the teacher competency scores. Applicants are sequentially allowed to choose from the list of
open vacancies in a given school district. Once a vacancy is filled, it is eliminated from the list
of the available options in that district, and the next lower-ranked teacher is allowed to pick
her preferred option. This iterative process continues until all vacancies are filled, or until
the lowest-ranked teacher in each school district is allowed to choose among the remaining
vacancies. After the first round of the matching process, unassigned applicants are given
another chance to choose among the remaining open vacancies from other districts. The
remaining teaching positions are eventually filled through a decentralized secondary market,
which includes teachers without accreditation.
     Figure 2 shows the data on applications to primary-school vacancies. While 80% of
schools in urban areas are ranked first by at least one permanent-job applicant, vacancies
posted in rural areas receive significantly fewer applications ­ nearly half of the rural schools
are never ranked by applicants. As a result, more than two-thirds of job vacancies for
permanent positions remain unfilled in rural schools, while three-fourths of vacancies are
filled in urban schools through the centralized assignment mechanism. Panel B considers the
sample of temporary positions by plotting the quintiles of the rank-order in which positions
get filled in the serial dictatorship algorithm. Again, short-term teaching vacancies in urban
areas are in higher demand: on average as more than half of those postings get filled by
teachers ranked in the top 20% of the pool of applicants in their respective school districts.
Overall, the centralized assignment process fills almost 90 percent of short-term vacancies in
urban areas and 80 percent of short-term vacancies in rural areas.
  14
    In the 2015 screening and recruitment process, candidates were allowed to rank a maximum of five
schools. This constraint was removed from 2017 onwards, and applicants were free to submit an unlimited
number of options.




                                                  11
                                    Figure 2: Teacher Choices over Job Postings




                  a) Permanent Teachers                                                        b) Contract Teachers


Notes: This figure depicts the demand for teaching positions in rural and urban schools. Panel a plots the relative share of schools depending on
the highest preference received, so that each blue bar indicates the proportion of schools that were included in the applicants' ranked-order lists (as
first, second, third, fourth or fifth choice, respectively). Similarly, the grey bar indicates the relative share of schools that were not mentioned in
any of the permanent teacher rankings. Panel b plots the rank order (grouped in quintiles) in which a contract teaching position is filled, together
with the share of vacancies that remained unfilled (not filled by a certified teacher). The rank order is defined based on the applicants' distribution
within each school district and teaching field, and is normalized so that it takes the value of zero when the position is chosen first and one when
the position is filled last. The numbers are obtained by pooling the data from the two recruitment drives from 2015 and 2017.




    We conclude that the spatial inequality in access to qualified teachers displayed in Panel
A of Figure 1 can be at least in part explained by teachers preferences and choices over
locations. Teachers in poor rural areas face numerous challenges: scarcity of basic school
inputs, lack of services and public goods, few local amenities, and (for some) being far from
friends and family. To the extent that wage-setting policies do not adequately compensate
for the lack of these amenities, those jobs will be less attractive. The micro-data on job
postings and teacher rank-order applications show that applications are concentrated at
positions in urban areas, and the system is hard-pressed to staff the roughly 14,000 positions
in rural public schools scattered throughout the poorest parts of the country. While some
of these vacancies are eventually filled using short-term contracts, many remain unfilled
until significantly less-qualified teachers fill the position through the decentralized secondary
market. On average, teachers that are assigned to rural schools have competency scores that
are 0.5 standard deviations lower than those assigned to urban schools.


3.3        Policy Changes to Compensation in Rural Locations
The government recently implemented a reform to the wage bonus that significantly increases
teacher compensation at positions in select rural schools. The new policy establishes three
distinct categories of rurality according to the school's locality population and its proximity
                                                                         12
to the provincial capital: Extremely Rural, Rural, and Moderately Rural (see Figure 3). The
population of the locality is measured by population counts in the latest available census
(2007). Travel time from the locality to the provincial capital is used as a proxy for how
remote a community is, and it is measured on the basis of GPS coordinates, after taking into
account usual modes of transport and the roads available at the time of the measurement.
The first category of Extremely Rural schools are in localities with less than 500 inhabitants,
and for which it takes more than 120 minutes to reach the province capital. The second
category of Rural schools is reserved for either: (a) schools in localities with less than 500
inhabitants and which are located between 30 and 120 minutes from the province capital,
or (b) schools in localities with 500­2,000 inhabitants that are farther than 120 minutes
from the province capital. The third category of Moderately Rural schools are either: (a) in
localities with 500­2,000 people that are closer than 120 minutes, or (b) in localities with
less than 500 inhabitants that are less than 30 minutes away from the province capital. All
other schools are classified as Urban and are not entitled to the wage bonus.
    The policy was first implemented in January 2014. At the time of implementation,
permanent teachers in Extremely Rural, Rural, and Moderately Rural schools were eligible
for the monthly wage bonuses of S/ 200, S/ 100, and S/ 70, respectively. In August 2015, the
wage bonus for Extremely Rural schools was increased to S/ 500 and bonus eligibility was
extended to include contract teachers. These changes were not announced until they were
implemented (in August, i.e. in the middle of the school year) and thus right before the first
centralized recruitment drive that took place in October 2015, which marks the start of our
study period. The bonus for Extremely Rural schools is fairly generous ­ it is equivalent to
30 percent of contract teachers' monthly earnings, and between 20 and 30 percent of earnings
of permanent teachers.
    Figure 3 displays a scatter plot of the distribution of the 25,000 rural primary schools in
Per´u over the population (x-axis) and remoteness of the communities where the schools are
located (y-axis). There is a large mass of schools around both the time cutoffs (30 minutes
and 120 minutes from the provincial capital) and the population cutoff (500 inhabitants) for
the rural wage bonuses. As the localities become more remote, schools are more likely to
be located in communities that are small and predominantly fall into the Extremely Rural
category. Likewise, for localities with populations above 1,000 inhabitants, there are more
communities that are closer to the provincial capitals (Moderately Rural ).




                                              13
         Figure 3: The Distribution of Rural Schools over Population and Remoteness




Notes. This figure shows the spatial distribution of rural primary schools along the two dimensions that determine assignment of the rural wage
bonus. Extremely Rural schools are the dark blue dots, Rural are light blue and Moderately Rural schools are green.




4       Causal Effects of the Increase in Compensation
4.1        Identification and Estimation
Offering higher wages for positions at rural locations could attract more and higher-quality
teachers, which may lead to better student outcomes. On top of these effects at the extensive
margin, additional compensation may also increase the quality of instruction through po-
tential changes in effort and motivation for both new and existing teachers in rural schools.
In the empirical analysis, we exploit the classification rules of the rural wage bonus to iden-
tify the causal effects of unconditional wage increases on teachers' application behavior and
assignment outcomes. We also study how student outcomes change in response to the wage
reform throughout the study period (2015-2018). Comparing schools with and without open
vacancies in the national recruitment drives of 2015 and 2017 allows us to discern whether
changes at the extensive or the intensive margin of teacher quality can explain the effect of
the wage reform on students' academic achievement.15
    The introduction of the rural wage bonus may generate incentives for school principals
and administrators to manipulate the information used to determine bonus eligibility. The
population threshold is based on census data, and as such, it is difficult to manipulate,
  15
    Table B.3 in the Online Appendix shows that there is no effect of the wage bonus on the probability
that a school has an open position for permanent or contract teachers. Figure A.4 in the Online Appendix
displays scatter plots similar to the one reported in Figure 3 for schools with and without vacancies in the
national recruitment drives of 2015 and 2017, respectively.

                                                                     14
whereas the time-to-travel measure is gathered by inspectors from the Ministry of Education,
who physically go to the schools and take a GPS measurement of the school's location. The
procedure was repeated in 2017 in order to account for possible changes in the transportation
network. By that time, the previous measurement had become public information, and hence
some schools located just below the 120-minute threshold may have then gained eligibility to
the S/ 500 wage bonus by slightly manipulating the GPS measurement. The data shows that
there is a significantly larger mass of schools that falls just above the time-to-travel threshold
for the assignment process that took place in 2017, while there are no significant jumps in
the density of schools at the population threshold for either of the years of interest.16
    We thus rely on the population-based assignment rule as the only source of variation in
teacher wages for this part of the analysis. Contract teachers in localities that are just below
the 500 inhabitants cutoff earn on average almost S/.250 more than those in localities that are
just above the cutoff, which represents an increase in the monthly wage of about 15 percent.
The corresponding average increase in wages for newly recruited permanent teachers (i.e. no
experience) due to the rural bonus reform is S/.240, or 14 percent of their monthly wage.
These effects are unconditional weighted averages of the different wage increases induced by
crossing from above the population cutoff for different values of the time-to-travel variable.17
    Given continuity of potential outcomes around the population cutoff, the following spec-
ification identifies the effect of a higher wage bonus:18

                      yjt = 0 + 1 1(popjt < popc ) + g (popc - popjt ) + t + ujt ,                              (1)
  16
      Figures B.1, B.2, and B.3 in the Online Appendix display the densities for each of the assignment variables
by year of the assignment mechanism based on local-quadratic density estimators with the corresponding
confidence intervals (Cattaneo et al., 2020) along with the bias-corrected t-statistics (and associated p-values)
for the null hypothesis of no difference in height between the two density estimators for the time-to-travel
discontinuity. While the locality population is a good predictor for the eligibility to the rural wage bonus
in both years, time-to-travel in 2015--which we observe to be less prone to manipulation--does not help
predict the policy eligibility status in 2017 and therefore doesn't provide useful variation for estimating the
effects of the wage bonus in 2017 (see Figure B.4 in the Online Appendix).
   17
      Table B.1 in the Online Appendix shows the RD estimates of the increase in wages for the two different
sub-samples that define the rural categories according to the values of the time-to-travel variable as well as
the weighted average effects reported in the text. Another strategy for dealing with the concern of partial
manipulation would be to limit the sample to observations that are above the 120-minute time-to-travel
cutoff, thereby comparing schools located in Rural and Extremely Rural localities. We don't pursue this
approach for two reasons. First, restricting the sample to schools above the time-to-travel cutoff would
imply conditioning on a partially manipulated variable. Second, this sample restriction would imply leaving
out a large portion of schools, and in particular, schools that are located in the lower-right quadrant of
Figure 3, thereby missing relevant variation in wages in the data, i.e. from Moderately Rural to Extremely
Rural.
   18
      Table B.2 in the Online Appendix shows that pre-determined school and locality-level covariates are
smooth around the population threshold, with point estimates that are very small and not statistically
different from zero in all but five cases for 2015, and in all cases for 2017 (out of the 29 covariates considered).


                                                        15
where yjt is an outcome variable for school j at time t, g (·) is a flexible polynomial in the
negative distance from the population cutoff, t denotes time indicators for the specific year
of the recruitment drive (for teachers) or the school year (for students), and ujt is an error
term clustered at the school-year level. The parameter of interest is 1 , which represents the
average outcome difference between schools, teachers, or students in localities that are just
above or below the population cutoff, and therefore that are marginally eligible to receive (or
not) a 15% increase in teacher wages. We estimate 1 non-parametrically using the robust
estimator proposed by Calonico et al. (2014) through local-linear regressions that are defined
within the mean squared error optimal bandwidths.
    We exclude from the estimation sample all urban and rural schools in localities within 30
minutes of the province capital since for those crossing the population cutoff does not imply
an increase in the rural bonus. We further restrict the sample to schools with non-missing
observations for the different outcome categories considered in our analysis discussed in this
section.19


4.2     Teacher Choices over Job Postings
We start by showing graphical evidence of threshold crossing effects separately by job ap-
plications for permanent and short-term teaching positions. This analysis provides direct
evidence on the effects of wage increases on teachers' labor supply decisions. In all panels
of Figure 4, the horizontal axis is the difference between the 500-inhabitants cutoff and the
population of the community where the school is located: crossing the cutoff from left to
right implies moving to the high bonus area.
    Panel A documents clear evidence that applicants for permanent teaching positions are
more likely to include in their rank-order lists (ROL) schools in localities with a population
just below the cutoff (eligible for wage bonus), as opposed to options just above (not eligible
for wage bonus). Away from the cutoff, the observed positive correlation between teachers'
choices over job postings and the population of the community is consistent with the notion
that the population captures some valuable amenities in the locality.20
    Panel B considers the choices over job posting for contract teachers. As in Section 3.2,
  19
     As mentioned in Section 2, student test scores data are collected only for public schools with five or
more students enrolled in the grade under evaluation. We present all the results pooling the data from the
two recruitment drives from 2015 and 2017. The results split by year are shown in Tables B.4 and B.5 in
the Online Appendix and they are broadly consistent with the patterns described here.
  20
     The two-sided matching mechanism in place for permanent teachers does not ensure that the preference
rankings submitted are strategy-proof. Indeed, teachers may submit ROLs that take into account their
beliefs about getting an offer for each specific job opening (see also Section 5). For this reason, we only
focus on the effect of the wage bonus on whether or not a given school was included in the ROL, thereby
deliberately discarding additional information on the relative intensity of teachers' stated preferences.

                                                    16
                                    Figure 4: Teacher Choices over Job Postings




           a) In ROL, Permanent teachers                                          b) Teacher rank, Contract teachers




       c) Teacher score, Permanent teachers                                       d) Teacher score, Contract teachers
Notes. This figure shows how applicants' preferences and quality vary based on the difference between the 500-inhabitants cutoff and the population
of the community where the school is located. Panels A and C focus on the assignment process of permanent teachers. In Panel A the outcome
variable is a dummy equal to one if a school was mentioned in at least one application, while in Panel C the outcome variable is the standardized
(total) score obtained in the centralized test by the newly-assigned permanent teacher. Panels B and D are analogous to A and C for the
assignment process of contract teachers. Panel B uses as outcome variable the rank in which a vacancy was chosen in the serial dictatorship
mechanism (normalized so that it takes value from zero to one), while Panel D uses the standardized score obtained in the centralized test by the
newly-assigned contract teacher. Each marker indicates the average of the outcome variable within each bin, defined following the IMSE-optimal
evenly spaced method by Calonico et al. (2015). Solid lines represent the predictions from linear regressions estimated separately for observations
to the left and to the right of the cutoff.




we back out the intensity of teachers' preferences by the rank order in which a position is
filled. We normalize the rank between zero (if the position is chosen first) and one (if the
position is filled last) in order to make the rank order comparable between school districts.
Short-term positions that are just below the population cutoff (higher wage) get filled at
higher priority order (lower rank) when compared to those above the cutoff, which again
indicates that the wage bonus increases the demand for these positions, largely offsetting the
observed negative gradient by rurality on teachers' preferences over job postings.

                                                                       17
    Table 1 reports the regression-discontinuity estimates from the empirical specification
depicted in equation (1) using data at the school/vacancy level. In Column (1) the dependent
variable is either an indicator that takes the value of 1 if a school was mentioned in at least
one application for a permanent teaching position (Panel A) or the normalized rank at which
a short-term position is filled (Panel B). In a neighborhood of the population discontinuity,
the average school is mentioned in 76% of permanent teacher rankings. This proportion
increases by 23% for schools that offer higher wages. Similarly, the average short-term
position in localities with a population close to 500 inhabitants is filled by a teacher ranked
in the 37th percentile of the score distribution of applicants, while schools that offer a wage
bonus manage to fill the position with an applicant in the 25th percentile.21
    Overall, the evidence presented suggests that vacancies at schools that receive a wage
bonus become more desirable. They are requested more often by applicants for permanent
positions and are filled faster by contract teachers. Increased competition for vacant positions
can lead to an increase in the quality of applicants who select into higher-paying teaching
jobs either by attracting a larger pool of prospective teachers into the public sector or by
pure sorting within the system, whereby competent teachers who would have otherwise
accepted offers in other rural or urban schools are instead choosing positions in Extremely
Rural schools due to the wage incentives. We explore some of these potential margins of
response to the wage reform in the next subsection.


4.3     Teacher Sorting Patterns
A first-order dimension of the centralized assignment system is whether or not a position
is filled. If the vacancy goes unfilled, schools either recruit teachers without credentials
or increase the workload for the existing teachers at the school, presumably reducing their
effectiveness. Column (2) of Panel A in Table 1 presents regression-discontinuity estimates
for the probability that a vacancy is filled in the selection process of permanent teachers,
while Panel B shows analogous estimates for contract teachers. For contract teachers, we
find a positive but not statistically significant effect of higher wages on the probability that
a vacancy is filled. Increased compensations in extremely rural schools do not seem to
significantly affect the probability of filling vacancies within the assignment mechanism for
permanent or contract teachers.
  21
     Teacher rank reported in Column (1) and teacher scores for both permanent and contract teachers
reported in Column (3) of Table 1 are defined for the subset of the open vacancies that got filled in the
centralized stages of the matching process (see Section 3.2). To deal with potential endogenous selection
into the sample, we report RD bounds below the point estimates using the approach outlined in Gerard et
al. (2020). The bounds are in general quite tight, thereby suggesting that the censorship in the density of
the observations due to the fact that some vacancies remain unfilled is inconsequential for the RD estimates.

                                                     18
                                         Table 1: Teacher Choices and Sorting
Panel A: Permanent teacher
                                               (1)                                  (2)                                (3)
                                            In ROL                           Vacancy filled                    Competency score
Above cutoff                                 0.177                                -0.001                             -0.014
                                            (0.068)                              (0.071)                            (0.175)
Bounds                                    [.154; .28]                         [-.005; .041]                      [-.271; .201]
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                         0.759                                 0.372                             -0.099
BW                                          173.292                              165.291                            205.787
Schools                                        860                                  830                               601
Observations                                  1038                                 1697                               864
Panel B: Contract teacher
                                               (1)                                 (2)                                (3)
                                        Teacher rank                         Vacancy filled                    Competency score
Above cutoff                                 -0.121                               0.045                              0.451
                                            (0.035)                              (0.045)                            (0.123)
Bounds                                  [-.132; -.109]                        [.048; .048]                       [.396; .472]
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                          0.372                               0.900                              0.068
BW                                         157.271                              157.103                            161.830
Schools                                        881                                 925                                909
Observations                                  2010                                2183                               2069

Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on different outcomes. Panel A uses the sample of permanent teachers.
In Column (1) the outcome variable is a dummy equal to one if a school was mentioned in at least one application, while in Column (2) is an
indicator for whether the vacancy was filled by a certified teacher in the assignment process for permanent teachers. The regression displayed in
the last column uses the standardized total score obtained by the teachers in the centralized test as outcome variable. In Columns (3) the sample
is restricted to vacancies that were actually filled by a certified teacher. Panel B focuses on the selection process of contract teachers. Column
(1) shows the effects on the rank in which a vacancy was chosen in the deferred acceptance mechanism (normalized so that it takes values from
zero to one), while Columns (2) and (3) are analogous to those from Panel A. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates
obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014) and their bounds estimated using the procedure developed in Gerard et al.
(2020). Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of the table. The table also
reports the mean of the dependent variable computed within the interval (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). Standard errors are clustered at
the school×year level.




    In Panels C and D of Figure 4 we evaluate whether the observed boost in competition
for high-paying positions in extremely rural locations leads to an increase in teacher quality,
as measured by the competency score used to define priorities in the assignment algorithm.
The two-sided nature of the assignment process for permanent teachers may explain the lack
of an effect of a higher wage bonus on scores for the assigned permanent teachers, which is
consistent with the small and noisy estimate reported in Column (3) of Panel A in Table
1.22
    Both the graphical evidence and the RD estimates show that contract teachers who select
into schools that offer a higher wage bonus have higher competency scores, on average, than
those who choose a position in another rural school. The point estimate reported in Column
(3) of Panel B in Table 1 is 0.45 standard deviations, which is a very large effect that points
  22
    We provide supporting evidence for this interpretation in Figure B.5 of the Online Appendix, where
we report the estimated threshold-crossing effects for different quintiles of the teacher score distributions
separately for permanent and contract teachers. This evidence is consistent with recent findings reported in
Bertoni et al. (2021), which point toward the discretionary role of the decentralized stage of the assignment
mechanism in potentially undoing the meritocratic aspect of the recruitment process for permanent teachers.

                                                                       19
toward quantitatively important sorting implications within the assignment system. To put
this magnitude in perspective, the average gap in the teacher competency score between
Extremely Rural schools and other rural schools is approximately 0.3 standard deviations,
whereas the average gap between rural and urban schools is about 0.5 standard deviations.23
    We document additional evidence on teacher sorting in Online Appendix B. In Table
B.6 we compare individual characteristics between applicants who select into higher paying
positions and those that do not. Overall, there does not appear to be systematic differences
in the pool of applicants and hence no composition effects triggered by the rural bonus at the
margin. One potential concern with our estimates is that the observed threshold-crossing
effect is due to the fact that higher-quality teachers who sort into schools right below the
population cutoff would have otherwise chosen schools just above the cutoff. The estimates
reported in Table B.7 seem to suggest that the observed sorting effects are not the result of
a zero-sum game among schools located around the population cutoff.
    In sum, a higher wage bonus targeted at disadvantaged locations shifted applications
toward schools offering both permanent and short-term positions. This change in teachers'
labor supply leads to a large inflow of more competent teachers for short-term positions. To
the extent that contract teachers account for nearly half of the teaching positions in the RD
sample (with 3 teachers per school on average), the increased quality of new teachers may
generate substantial improvements in student outcomes. The analysis that we discuss in the
next subsection digs into this issue.


4.4     Student Achievement
We document the effect of a higher wage bonus on learning outcomes by comparing student
test scores in schools that are located just above and just below the population cutoff. In
Table 2 we report separate results for standardized test scores in Spanish (Panel A) and
math (Panel B) administered to fourth graders three years after the policy change. We focus
on test scores collected during the 2018 academic year since this increases the likelihood that
any given cohort of students in the fourth grade was exposed to teachers recruited through
the centralized system after the introduction of the rural wage bonus.24
    Wage bonuses apply to all teachers in an eligible school. To the extent that higher wages
affect the behavior of incumbent teachers, we should observe that student outcomes improve
in schools that did not have an open teaching vacancy to fill in the 2015 or 2017 recruitment
  23
     The main estimates reported in Table 1 are robust to alternative specifications and estimation choices.
The results of these specification checks are reported in Figure B.6 in the Online Appendix.
  24
     As mentioned in Section 2, the data available does not allow us to precisely link teachers to classes
within a school, and hence we are unable to isolate the precise effect of having a better teacher (due to
higher wages) in the classroom.
                                                    20
                                 Table 2: Wage Bonus and Student Achievement
Panel A: Spanish Test (z-score)
                                (1)                                    (2)                         (3)                (4)
                          No vacancy                              Any vacancy              Permanent vacancy Short-term vacancy
Above cutoff                  0.014                                  0.298                       -0.057             0.317
                             (0.157)                                (0.127)                     (0.190)            (0.137)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)          -0.471                                 -0.470                      -0.382             -0.491
BW                           124.095                                108.453                     175.257            114.883
Schools                        372                                     691                        292                 622
Observations                   3948                                   9700                        3409               8966
Panel B: Math Test (z-score)
                                (1)                                    (2)                         (3)                (4)
                          No vacancy                              Any vacancy              Permanent vacancy Short-term vacancy
Above cutoff                  0.039                                  0.350                       -0.047             0.470
                             (0.174)                                (0.142)                     (0.248)            (0.159)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)          -0.416                                 -0.416                      -0.296             -0.417
BW                           126.632                                112.196                     163.972            101.761
Schools                        381                                    710                         275                 561
Observations                   4046                                  10013                        3205               8146
Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on student achievement in Math and Spanish. In all columns, the outcome
variable is the standardized 2018 test scores in Spanish (Panel A) and Math (Panel B) for students in fourth grade. The sample in Columns (1)
and (2) is split based on whether the school had an open vacancy (of any type) in the 2015 and/or 2017 centralized recruitment drives. In Column
(3) and (4), the sample is further restricted to schools that had vacancies for permanent or contract teachers, respectively. Each cell reports the
bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined
within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom of the table. The table also reports the mean of the dependent
variable computed within the intervals (0, +BW ) (right-hand-side of the cutoff) and (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). Standard errors are
clustered at the school×year level.




drives. Column (1) shows the RD estimate of the total policy effect for this sample of schools.
The point estimates are very small and statistically insignificant, suggesting that there is
no effort response to higher wages of incumbent teachers. In Column (2), we focus on the
subsample of schools with an open vacancy in 2015 and/or 2017, for either permanent or
contract teacher positions. Students in these bonus-eligible schools performed much better
in Spanish and math, with effect sizes of 0.3-0.35 standard deviations.
    The evidence in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 2 suggests that the recruitment effects
of the wage bonus documented in Section 4.3 are the main drivers of the observed increase
in student test scores. Accordingly, Column (3) documents that the effect of higher wages
on student performance is very small and statistically insignificant for schools with open
vacancies only for permanent teachers, for whom there is no evidence of a higher wage on
assignment outcomes (see Panel A of Table 1).25
    Finally, in Column (4) of Table 2 we consider the sample of schools with an open va-
cancy for short-term teaching positions in the 2015 and/or 2017 centralized recruitment
  25
    As most of the permanent positions that remain unfilled in the assignment process are later posted as
vacancies for a contract teacher (see section 3.2), the sample that we use in Column (3) of Table 2 excludes
schools that, besides having had a vacancy for a permanent position, also had an opening for a short-term
position.

                                                                       21
drives. Consistent with the substantial increase in the competency level of newly recruited
contract teachers, students in schools that receive higher wages perform much better in the
Spanish and math achievement tests relative to students in schools that had contract teacher
vacancies but were not eligible for the wage bonus. The effect sizes on student performance
are very similar to the effect of higher wages on teacher competency scores, as shown in
Panel B of Table 1.26
    We report additional evidence on the channels through which the wage bonus may affect
student outcomes in Online Appendix B. While there may still be an effort margin due to
the wage incentives for the newly recruited teachers, the evidence reported in Table B.6 on
the lack of selection effects along observable characteristics suggests that selection based on
unobserved traits such as intrinsic or extrinsic motivation is unlikely to operate in this setting.
In principle, wage bonuses could also affect student achievement by changing the size of the
teaching staff. However, Table B.8 shows that the wage reform has small and statistically
insignificant effects on the number of teachers, the relative share of permanent and contract
teachers, and student-to-teacher ratios. Teachers' retention may be another channel through
which schools with higher wages improve learning outcomes, although Table B.9 shows that
wage bonuses do not have an effect on retention rates during the study period.
    The analysis presented in this Section documents causal evidence that higher wages
increase the number of teachers interested in working at those positions, which in turn leads
to a substantial increase in the average quality of the newly recruited teachers. This inflow
of more competent teachers mostly explains the large improvements in learning outcomes for
the students enrolled in higher-paying schools. We do not find evidence for other channels
through which higher wages may affect the behavior of teachers and hence student outcomes
in our setting, such as efficiency wages or other margins of adjustment at the school-level.


5      An Empirical Model of Teacher Preferences
The RD estimates discussed in the previous Section provide only a partial assessment of
the effect of higher wages on the allocation of public-sector teachers in Per´
                                                                             u. The evidence
on teacher sorting is necessarily "local" and hence difficult to extrapolate away from the
population cutoffs that partly determine eligibility for the rural bonus. This feature may
  26
    Additional evidence displayed in Figure B.7 in the Online Appendix documents that the results shown
in Columns (2) and (4) of Table 2 are robust to alternative specifications. Figure B.8 in the Online Appendix
displays the estimated RD coefficients and the confidence intervals for separate regressions where the depen-
dent variables are indicators for whether or not students belong to discrete categories of achievement used
by the Ministry of Education to classify students based on their scores in the standardized test. For Spanish
scores, the effects of a higher wage bonus are more pronounced for students at the bottom of the ability
distribution. For math scores, instead, the size of the effect is symmetric along the ability distribution.
                                                     22
be important in our setting given the heterogeneity across locations within the Extremely
Rural category of schools. Relatedly, the wage bonus policy currently in place does not take
into account teachers' heterogeneous preferences across job postings and hence it can be
modified to further incentivize teacher sorting toward disadvantaged locations. We need to
better understand how teachers trade off school and local amenities with the compensation
offered at every specific job postings throughout the country in order to appreciate the
potential limitations of the recent reform to the wage bonus, as well as to be able to propose
and simulate the impact of alternative wage policies.


5.1     Teachers' Preferences
We specify an empirical model of teachers' preferences to predict how sorting patterns across
job postings would evolve under counterfactual wage policies or different configurations of
school and local characteristics. We start by defining the (indirect) utility that teacher i gets
from being matched with school j as:

                              vij = i wj + i zj +  dij +  mij +            ij ,                          (2)

where wj is the wage posted at school j in thousands of Peruvian Soles and zj is a vector
of locality and schools' characteristics that generate variation in preferences across teaching
positions. The vector zj contains a poverty index, an infrastructure score at the locality level
capturing the overall level of amenities associated to a given area, a flexible polynomial in the
population of the locality of the school and the time-to-travel (in hours) between the locality
of the school and the province's capital that jointly determine eligibility to the rural wage
bonus, as well as indicator variables for whether a given school belongs to specific regimes
such as multi-grade, single-teacher, bilingual, and/or to the specific geographic areas that
determine eligibility for the other wage bonuses.27
    We allow teachers' labor supply to be more or less elastic with respect to wages and
other school or locality characteristics depending on a variety of individual-level dimensions.
For example, men may be more sensitive to wages than women due to gender norms and/or
gender differences in outside options. Similarly, teachers at an early stage of their professional
life might be more or less sensitive to wages and other local amenities due to life cycle
considerations or career concerns. We flexibly capture such patterns through the parameters
  27
    The poverty index is an asset-based measure of poverty at the individual level (poverty score) com-
puted by the Ministry of Economy and Finance that we aggregate at the locality level. The infrastructure
score collapses a set of indicators measuring infrastructure quality at the locality level through a multiple
correspondence analysis (see Panel D of Table A.1).


                                                     23
i and i , which are defined as:

                                     i = 0 + 1 xi ,
                                     i = 0 + 1 xi + i ,

where xi is a vector of indicator variables for teachers' characteristics such as gender, expe-
rience, residential location, and competency. We also include i , a log-normally distributed
random coefficient capturing unobserved preference heterogeneity for wages which would not
be accounted for by xi . The presence of heterogenous preferences in our model generates
flexible substitution patterns between wages and other school and locality characteristics
that are key to interpreting the role of alternative wage schedules, as well as different values
of school and locality amenities in generating the counterfactual sorting patterns that will
be shown in Section 6.
    In addition to this fairly rich structure of preferences for the different school-level factors
specified above, the discrete choice model described by equation (2) features two different
sources of match-specific preference heterogeneity. Moving costs are captured by dij , a vector
of linear splines in the geodesic distance between school j and the current location of teacher
i, as measured by the location of the school where this teacher was working in 2015 from the
NEXUS data. For novice teachers we use the location of the university/institute from which
they recently graduated. For the remaining non-novice teachers who were not working in
a public school in 2015 we use the locality of residence in 2013. The vector mij contains
ethnolinguistic match effects, indicating whether teacher i's indigenous native language and
school j 's secondary language of instruction (if any) coincide. These capture language barri-
ers that teachers might face when working in a school from a different ethnolinguistic group
and, more broadly, any specific taste for living in a community from teacher i's own ethnic
group.
    All residual unobserved tastes of teacher i for school j are captured in the ij term,
which is assumed to be distributed iid across i and j through a Gumbel distribution with
normalized scale and location. Finally, we include all private schools that are not part of the
centralized assignment mechanism in the outside option, as well as any other labor market
opportunity that we do not observe in the data. We specify the utility of the outside option
as:

                                      vi0 = 0 + 1 qi +    i0 ,                                 (3)

where qi is a rich set of characteristics for teacher i. These characteristics include gender,
experience in both the public and the private sector, ethnicity, the competency score, the
                                                24
population of the place of residence, and the time-to-travel between the provincial capital
and the place of residence.


5.2     Identification and Estimation
We observe data on teachers' revealed preferences over job postings from two sources. The
first data source is the rank-order lists of applications for permanent positions. The second
source of information is the realized match for short-term positions given teachers' compe-
tency scores and choice of school district. We choose to focus our analysis on the allocation of
short-term contracts for several reasons. First, the large majority of teachers are not eligible
for a long-term position and most of the vacancies in rural schools end up being filled by
short-term contract teachers. Additionally, wage bonuses had no effect on the sorting out-
comes of permanent positions, both at the extensive margin (i.e. whether or not the vacancy
is filled) and at the intensive margin (i.e. the competency score of the assigned teacher).
These arguments suggest that short-term contract teachers would be the most relevant group
to target in order to design a wage schedule that would be effective at reducing inequalities
in the allocation of public-sector teachers. Finally, the design of the assignment mechanism
for permanent positions gives rise to incentives for teachers not to report their preferences
truthfully. Our survey of teachers elicits preferences over job postings that are unconditional
on the constraints of the application system. Almost one third of the surveyed teachers do
not apply to their most preferred school, which clearly indicates the presence of strategic
considerations in our setting (see Table A.2 in the Online Appendix).28
     Recall from Section 3.2 that within each administrative unit (school district), teachers
are ranked based on their competency score and are sequentially assigned to their preferred
school among the options that still have open vacancies. This procedure is iterated until all
vacancies are filled and/or all teachers are assigned. Teachers who end up being unmatched
at the end of this first round can then re-apply through the centralized platform for the
remaining unfilled vacancies located in other administrative units. Given the structure of
the assignment mechanism, we assume that the realized matching equilibrium is stable,
meaning that teachers would not be accepted by a school that they strictly prefer with
respect to their current match. This implies that the observed match between schools and
teachers can be interpreted as the outcome of a discrete choice model with individual-specific
  28
     Learning about preferences from the available data on the ranked ordered lists would require a model
of teachers' application decision coupled with a model of schools' preferences. In addition, one would need
to take into account that teachers might have biased beliefs regarding their admission chances due to the
complex nature of the assignment process (Kapor et al., 2020). One would also need to model the dynamic
strategic considerations that would arise due to the sequential nature of the assignment mechanism. This
more involved exercise is left for future research.

                                                    25
choice sets that only depend on teachers' competency scores (Fack et al., 2019).29
    Under the distributional assumptions stated above (see Section 5.1), we can write the
following log-likelihood function:

                                   n              
                            1                            exp v~iµ(i)
                     L( ) =             log                                    dF (i ) ,                     (4)
                            n     i=1         0         k(si ){0} exp v
                                                                      ~ik

where µ(i) is the school assignment of each teacher i, (si ) is the feasible choice set, which
depends on teacher i's competency score si , and v         ~ij is the deterministic component of the
indirect utility function in (2). The term inside the brackets of equation (4) is the conditional
probability that teacher i chooses schools j from her feasible choice set, which is also a
function of the cumulative distribution function of the log normal distribution, F (·). We
compute the integral in (4) numerically using a Gaussian-Hermite quadrature (Conlon and
Gortmaker, 2020).
    In this model, preference parameters  are identified if (i) the observable characteristics
(wj , zj , dij , mij , xi , qi ) are independent of both taste shifters ij and the random coefficient
i and (ii) the feasible choice sets (si ) are independent from the taste shifters ij conditional
on observables. The first condition implies that the set of observables has to be rich enough
such that residual preference heterogeneity can be modeled as an exogenous shock. This
might be problematic if, for instance, we believe that we are omitting a set of relevant
variables that would be correlated with wages. However, given that wages are set exogenously
via deterministic rules and that we are controlling flexibly for all relevant wage determinants,
we are confident that this assumption is reasonable in our setting. The second condition may
not hold if there is a possibility that the decision by teacher i to accept or reject a given
job posting may trigger a chain of acceptance or rejections by other teachers that may feed
back into teacher i's set of feasible schools (Menzel, 2015). Preference cycles of this sort are
ruled out in our setting, since schools rank applicants according to the same criterion (i.e.
the competency score).30
  29
     The assignment mechanism directly implies that the match will be stable within each administrative
unit. Overall stability might be compromised if teachers do not correctly predict in which school district
their preferred feasible school will be. However, the presence of an aftermarket that assigns the remaining
unfilled vacancies mitigates these concerns.
  30
     Vertical preferences of the schools over applicants imply that if teacher i decides to rematch and displaces
teacher l who would in turn be matched with another school, then teacher l is by definition ranked below
teacher i. All the subsequent displacements will only affect the teachers who are ranked below teacher i.




                                                       26
5.3     Teacher Preference Estimation Results
Panel A of Table 3 reports selected preference estimates for relevant school and locality
characteristics such as wages, poverty, infrastructure, and indicators for whether a school is
multigrade or single teacher. We present the full set of estimated parameters of the model
described in Equation (2) in Table C.1 in the Online Appendix. The estimated preferences
for wages are heterogeneous along both observed and unobserved dimensions. Men applicants
are much more responsive to compensations than women. Applicants living in urban areas
and competent teachers (as defined in Section 3.1) are also more wage sensitive, which is
consistent with the higher cost of living in cities as well as with unobserved heterogeneity in
ability and/or effort that likely determines the competency score. The large and significant
standard deviation of the random coefficient indicates the presence of substantial unobserved
taste heterogeneity with respect to wages that is not explained by the observed teacher
characteristics included in the model.31
    To put the magnitude of these estimates into perspective, Figure 5 displays the wage
elasticities implied by the estimates of the model. These estimates combine both observed
and unobserved sources of preference heterogeneity with respect to the wages posted at each
vacancy, and they range from close to 0 to 6 with a global average of 2.19. Several interesting
patterns emerge from these distributions. For instance, increasing wages seems to be a more
prominent "pull" factor for attracting teachers in rural schools than in urban schools. This
can be explained by the fact that amenities are in general lower at rural schools and hence
wages enter more prominently into teachers' compensating differentials.
    Preference estimates for other job characteristics show that, while on average teachers
have a strong distaste for localities with high levels of poverty as well as for schools that are
multigrade or have a single teacher, competent and more experienced teachers seem to be
particularly sensitive to school-level characteristics. Although a combination of factors likely
explain these patterns of heterogeneity, this evidence suggests that complementary policies
aiming at improving school infrastructure may be effective in reducing spatial inequalities in
the allocation of public-sector teachers.
    Panel B displays the ethnolinguistic match effects and the effect of the geodesic distance
between teachers and schools. The magnitudes of the estimated parameters suggest that
both play a very important role in teachers' choices over schools. Figure C.1 in the Online
Appendix plots the implied wages needed to compensate teachers from moving farther away
  31
    We do not find any significant heterogeneity with respect to experience, suggesting that many different
channels may be at play that are potentially cancelling each other out. For instance, career concerns for
novice teachers may push down the wage coefficient while at the same time life-cycle considerations are
consistent with a positive correlation between experience and the wage coefficient.


                                                    27
                              Table 3: Preference Estimates ­ Selected Parameters
Panel A: School/Locality Characteristics
                                 Wage           Poverty Score                      Infrastructure           Multigrade           Single Teacher
                            0.815     (0.120) -0.201    (0.035)                   -0.054    (0.054)      -0.237   (0.119)       -0.786   (0.192)
× Male                      0.611     (0.157) 0.115     (0.032)                   -0.060    (0.048)      0.019    (0.099)        0.519   (0.137)
× Exp  4                    0.070     (0.053)  0.097    (0.036)                    0.132    (0.052)      -0.284   (0.118)       0.020    (0.181)
× Urban                     0.115     (0.061) -0.060    (0.044)                    0.036    (0.068)      0.009    (0.170)       -0.125   (0.242)
× Competent                 0.170     (0.067) -0.065    (0.047)                    0.198    (0.076)      -0.782   (0.185)       -0.752   (0.351)
Std. Deviation ( )          0.560     (0.053)
Panel B: Teacher-School Match Effects
                             Ethnolinguistic Match                                     Geographical Proximity (Spline)
Quechua × Quechua           1.488     (0.158)                                   Distance < 20km             -0.187    (0.003)
Aimara × Aimara             1.375     (0.537)                                   20km < Distance < 100km     -0.033    (0.001)
Ashaninka × Ashaninka       2.243     (0.558)                                   100km < Distance < 200km -0.018       (0.001)
Awajun × Awajun             2.086     (1.020)                                   200km < Distance < 300km -0.017       (0.002)
Amazonas × Amazonas         0.995     (0.113)                                   Distance > 300km            -0.002    (0.000)
 Notes. This table displays selected estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) of the parameters of the model described in Equation 2. Panel
A shows the estimated coefficients associated to a selected set of schools/locality characteristics while Panel B shows estimated preferences for
geographical proximity as well as the interaction between schools' language of instruction and teachers' own native language. The data used
contains choices of the pool of 59,949 applicants (note that 500 applicants are left out due to missing data) that participated in the allocation of
short-term contracts for public primary schools in 2015. Estimation is done via maximizing the likelihood described in Equation (4) where the
integral is computed numerically in an inner loop via a Gaussian-Hermite quadrature. Table C.1 in the Online Appendix displays the full set of
the estimated coefficients.



                                          Figure 5: Estimated Wage Elasticities




                a) Teacher Characteristics                                                  b) School Characteristics

Notes. This figure depicts the distribution of the wage elasticities which are computed using the estimates from Table 3. These elasticities give the
% change in the conditional probability that teacher i chooses school j , which we denote Pij , resulting from a 1% increase in the wage proposed
            P  ij w j
in school j : w       = i wj (1 - Pij ). Panel A plots the distribution of this elasticity for different groups of teachers (all, competent, and male)
                j Pij
while Panel B displays heterogeneity of this distribution with respect to the rurality of schools' locality.




from where they live (Panel A) and from being assigned to a school offering a bilingual
education that corresponds to their own ethnolinguistic group (Panel B). Moving costs are
estimated to be substantial in our context. This is consistent with previous evidence drawn
from the rank-order lists of permanent teachers in Per´
                                                      u (Bertoni et al., 2019). Our estimates
indicate it would take on average 2.75 times the current base wage to make teachers willing
                                                                         28
to move 50 km away from where they live.
    Similarly, Panel B shows that teachers from an ethnolinguistic minority would be willing
to pay up to the amount of the base wage in order to teach in a school from their own
ethnic group. Interestingly, we can see that the estimated willingness-to-pay is higher for
minority ethnic groups, such as Ashaninka and Awajun. To the extent that these ethnic
minorities are mostly located in rural areas with school vacancies that are in excess demand
for bilingual teachers, place-based policies aimed at leveraging these strong match-specific
effects (both ethnic and geographic) might be a promising alternative to wage incentives as
a way to enhance the local supply of teachers.


5.4       Model Validation
We close this Section by assessing how well our model predicts some key moments in the
data. In particular, it is important to test the empirical plausibility of the estimated wage
elasticity given that the counterfactual exercises will rely on that parameter. We check the
consistency between the sorting patterns predicted by the model and the estimated effects at
the 500-inhabitant population threshold for eligibility of the rural bonus discussed in Section
4. The predicted size of the effects in teacher sorting outcomes can be used for model
validation since its magnitude would be entirely explained by the estimated wage elasticity.
We thus simulate teachers' choices using the estimated preference parameters, replicate the
RD analysis on simulated data, and compare the resulting estimates with those obtained
with the actual data. In addition, we assess the overall fit of the model in terms of the global
sorting patterns across school attributes.32
    Figure 6 shows the corresponding estimates of this exercise along with the associated
95% confidence intervals. The evidence reported in Panel A documents that the estimated
model seems to predict very well the different sorting patterns triggered by the policy effects
due to the rural bonus that we observe in the data. This is even more reassuring given that
the rural bonus policy explains only a small portion (less than 10%) of the total variation in
wages across job postings that is used to identify the wage elasticity in the choice model. The
evidence shown in Panel B further confirms that our model seems to precisely replicate the
negative gradient by the degree of remoteness of the locality on the share of filled vacancies.
 32
      Additional measures of model fit are available in Figure C.3 and Figure C.4 in Online Appendix C.




                                                     29
           Figure 6: Comparing RD Estimates, Observed Sorting and Simulated Data




    a) Threshold Crossing Effects (pop.=500)                                b) Share of Filled Vacancies by Remoteness


Notes. Panel A in this figure shows the estimated RD jump in vacancy filled, teacher score and teacher rank at the 500 locality population
threshold both in the actual data and in the simulated data. The simulated assignment is generated by running the serial dictatorship algorithm
using predicted utilities computed from the estimates of Table 3 as well as a randomly drawn set of taste shocks ij . Panel B compares the share
of vacancies filled observed in the actual data and the simulated data depending on how far the schools posting the vacancies are located from the
provincial capital.




6        Counterfactual Analysis
6.1        Evaluation of the Wage Bonus
Public-sector teachers who work in schools with a specific set of locality and school charac-
teristics receive additional compensations that vary between 3% and 30% of the base wage
(see Figure A.3 in the Online Appendix). The rural wage bonuses studied in Section 4 are
part of this larger incentive scheme. We use the estimated preference parameters of the
model discussed in the previous Section to evaluate the effects of the overall system of wage
bonuses currently in place in Per´ u. The structure of the model allows us evaluate the policy
effects away from the population threshold and hence gain a broader perspective on how
wage bonuses affect teacher sorting globally.
    We run the serial dictatorship algorithm that is used to assign teachers into short-term
jobs under a counterfactual scenario where all wage bonuses are set to zero, including those
that are not specifically tied to rurality.33 Panel A of Figure 7 plots the percentile of desir-
  33
     The school-specific and locality-specific determinants of the other wage bonuses are highly correlated with
both dimensions of rurality (distance to provincial capital and population). Figures C.5-C.6 in the Online
Appendix separately show the impacts of the other wage bonuses (vis-a-vis the no-bonus scenario) and those
of the rural bonus (vis-a-vis the other-bonus scenario) along the support of the univariate distributions of
population and the time to the provincial capital. Results suggest that the bulk of the policy effects on
sorting outcomes are driven by the rural bonus.


                                                                       30
                                       Figure 7: Fitted Teacher Utility




                      a) No Bonus                                                  b) Wage Bonus
Notes. Panel A plots the average percentiles of the median predicted utility associated with each vacancy from the estimates
reported in Table C.1 for a fine grid in the population and distance to provincial capital space (each cell is 50×30). Panel B
reports the average percentage changes in the median utility between the status quo and the counterfactual scenario with no
wage bonuses.



ability, as measured by local averages in the median utility predicted by the model without
any wage bonus in each school.34 The desirability index monotonically decreases with the
distance to the provincial capital whereas it is only weakly correlated with the population
of the locality. The figure shows that schools located close to the cutoffs for eligibility to the
rural bonus are not the least desirable, suggesting that some (if not most) of the effect of the
wage bonus may actually manifest away from these cutoffs. This is confirmed by Panel B,
which displays the cell-averages of the percentage changes in predicted utility between the
status quo and the "no bonus" counterfactual scenario. Changes in utility are heterogenous
within the Extremely rural category, indicating large differences in the initial conditions of
the schools that receive the same S/ 500 rural bonus.
    Figure 8 displays heat plots of the simulated policy effects of the wage bonuses. In each
cell, defined by discrete values of population and time-to-travel, we compute the average
difference in the share of filled vacancies (Panel A) and the difference in the average stan-
dardized competency scores of the assigned teachers between the counterfactual scenario
(where we remove all wage bonuses) and the status quo (with the usual wage bonuses in
place). Consistent with the targeting and the magnitudes of the rural bonus, most of the
positive effects of the wage-incentive policy seem to manifest in schools that are in localities
  34
    The difference in predicted utility between a school located in the first and the last percentiles of
desirability is around 3.9. It would take an amount that is 3.5 times larger than the base wage in order to
compensate teachers for such a gap.


                                                             31
                                 Figure 8: Policy Effects on Teacher Sorting




             a) Share of Filled Vacancies                                     b) Teacher Competency Score


Notes. This Figure uses simulated assignment data that is generated by running the serial dictatorship algorithm with predicted
utilities computed from the estimates from Table 3 as well as a randomly drawn set of taste shocks ij . Panel A plots cell-
average differences in the share of filled vacancies in the population and distance-to-provincial-capital space (each cell is 100×60)
between the assignment simulated under the current policy and a counterfactual scenario with no wage bonuses. Panel B plots
the mean differences in the standardized competency score at the vacancy level in the population and distance to provincial
capital space between the assignment simulated under the current policy and a counterfactual scenario with no wage bonuses.



with less than 500 inhabitants and that are farther than 120 minutes away from provincial
capitals. However, while for teacher scores most of the effect is concentrated in localities that
are just below the population cutoff and near the time-to-travel cutoff, much of the effect on
the share of filled vacancies is actually located away from the discontinuities induced by the
rural bonus policy, which is consistent with the evidence shown in Figure 7.35
    The analysis presented here confirms previous estimates shown in Section 4 that the wage
bonuses have been partly effective in reducing the large inequality in the allocation of public-
sector teachers across different areas of the country. However, it also shows some limitations
of the current wage bonus policy, which features limited variation for all schools that are
categorized as Extremely Rural. As such, it may be too rigid to appropriately incentivize
teacher sorting at the extensive margin.
  35
    Figure C.2 in the Online Appendix documents the selection effects of the wage bonus policy. Panel
A shows the CDF of the wage elasticities for the assigned teachers under the no-bonus scenario and the
corresponding CDF for the "marginal" teachers (i.e. those who choose a position within the assignment
mechanism under the current system of wage bonuses while they would have chosen the outside option
under the no-bonus scenario). As expected, the latter distribution first order stochastically dominates the
former, indicating that the applicants who are drawn into short-term teaching jobs due to the wage incentives
are more sensitive to compensations. Panel B illustrates the composition effects of the wage bonus policy in
terms of observable teacher characteristics.




                                                                32
6.2       Optimal Wage Policies
We combine the estimated preference parameters of the teachers' school choice model with
a wage-setting protocol that allows us to flexibly characterize a menu of counterfactual wage
schedules aimed at reducing inequality in the allocation of public-sector teachers in our
context. In particular, we consider two independent objectives: (i) to fill every vacancy with
any teacher irrespective of her/his quality, and (ii) to assign in each school with one or more
open vacancies one teacher that is at least as competent as the average urban teacher (as
measured by the competency score).36
    We define contracts as teacher-wage pairs and embed our two redistributive objectives
into the preferences of schools over contracts. We next use the estimated teacher preferences
to implement a school-proposing generalized deferred-acceptance algorithm (Hatfield and
Milgrom, 2005) that works as follows. First, schools propose to the highest ranked teacher
at the lowest wage. This teacher is tentatively assigned to her preferred school. Depending
on the objective, all schools with unfilled vacancies--or, alternatively, that are not filled
with a more competent teacher--start proposing to either the next ranked teacher at the
same wage or at the highest ranked teacher at a slightly higher wage, if the first option
is not possible. We then iterate this procedure until each objective is reached. Given the
structure of the algorithm, each iteration gives the allocation of teachers that maximizes our
redistributive objectives under the constraint that wages cannot exceed the proposed wages
at that round.37
    Figure 9 shows the distribution of wage bonuses under the current policy (Panel A) and
the distribution of the wage bonuses that maximizes the share of filled vacancies under the
same budget as the current policy (Panel B). The optimal wage schedule puts relatively more
weight on the remoteness of the locality and relatively less weight on its population. This
takes into account that school vacancies in localities that are far away from the provincial
capital are much harder to fill irrespective of the population of the locality (see Figure 7).
    Figure 10 quantifies the total cost, in terms of the wage bill, of reaching our redistributive
objectives. The shaded area illustrates the set of feasible allocations, while the dots show
the allocation achieved under the current policy. The wage bonus policy lies inside the area
of feasible contracts and is therefore sub-optimal compared to the optimal compensation
achieved by the algorithm described above (purple lines). The gap with a balanced budget
is approximately 7 percentage points for the share of filled vacancies (Panel A), whereas it is
4 percentage points for the share of schools with more competent teachers (Panel B). This
result is consistent with previous evidence shown in Figure 8 that documents that most of
 36
      About 25% of the applicants for short-term teaching positions satisfy this criterion.
 37
      See Online Appendix D for a more formal discussion.

                                                       33
                              Figure 9: Current Vs. Optimal Wage Bonus Policy




                     a) Current Policy                                                      b) Optimal Policy

Notes. This figure shows the distribution of wage bonuses under the current policy (Panel A) and the distribution of the wage bonuses resulting
from our algorithm that maximizes the share of filled vacancies under the same budget as the current policy (Panel B).




the policy effect at the intensive margin of teacher sorting lies close to the population thresh-
old, suggesting that the current rural bonus is sufficiently well targeted in that dimension.
Regarding the objective of filling vacancies, the current policy is less effective and hence
there is a clear margin of improvement for the optimal policy.
    Attracting competent teachers is significantly more costly than merely filling vacancies.
With approximately double the current budget in terms of the total wage bill (eight million
Soles), the algorithm is able to fill almost every vacancy but at best it can fill a bit more
than half of the schools with a more competent teacher. It would take a total wage bill that
is 6 times the current budget to equalize teacher quality across the country.
    We finally use our matching with contract framework to assess the relative cost-effectiveness
of additional policy instruments that may complement wage incentives in reducing spatial
inequalities in the allocation of public-sector teachers. We remove all structural inequalities
by considering a scenario where all the locality and school characteristics that potentially ex-
plain teachers' preferences are equalized across the country. The blue lines in Figure 10 show
that the cost-efficiency frontiers are significantly shifted outwards due to these demand-side
incentives, reaching more than 80% of vacancies filled and about half of the schools with a
competent teacher at the same wage bill as the current policy. Investing in local infrastruc-
tures in our setting would entail saving almost 20% of the wage bill in order to achieve either
of the two redistributive objectives.
    An alternative policy consists in training prospective teachers so as to increase the pool

                                                                     34
                                           Figure 10: Cost Efficiency Frontiers




              a) Share of Filled Vacancies                                b) Share of Schools with Competent Teachers

Notes. The Figure plots the cost-efficiency frontiers derived by the algorithm described in the text (see also Online Appendix D) for both the
objective of filling every vacancy with any teacher irrespective of quality (Panel A) and filling every school with a teacher who is at least as
competent as the average teacher in urban areas (Panel B). The shaded area represents the set of feasible allocations. The purple lines show
the optimal allocations under the current distribution of teachers and local amenities. The blue lines refer to a counterfactual scenario where all
the locality/school characteristics are equalized across all the job postings throughout the country. Finally, the green lines refer to a different
counterfactual scenario where we increase the local pool of applicants by 3% in a neighborhood of the most disadvantaged communities.




of local applicants in the most disadvantaged locations. The counterfactual depicted by the
green lines in Figure 10 mimics this policy by duplicating the four teachers who are most
closely located to each of the 500 schools that propose the highest wages according to our
algorithm, which results in a total of 2000 new teachers. A small and targeted increase in
the supply of teachers (3% increase with respect to the overall number of applicants) would
outperform at balanced budget the counterfactual with no structural inequalities. Place-
based incentives aimed at enhancing the local supply of teachers would entail saving between
30% and 35% of the wage bill that is necessary to achieve our two redistributive objectives.
This last result highlights the predominant roles of moving costs and of the ethnolinguistic
match effects in explaining teachers' preferences over job postings in our setting.38


7        Conclusion
Teachers are a central input to the education production function and better teachers can
have long-term influences on students' labor market outcomes. Therefore, interventions that
reduce inequality in access to qualified teachers should be a crucial component of any policy
agenda aimed at reducing structural inequality overall. In this paper, we use a combination
  38
   Table C.2 in the Online Appendix shows the realized sorting across ethnolinguistic groups of the newly
matched teachers for different percentage increases in the local supply of applicants.

                                                                       35
of methods, rich administrative data, and policy changes to empirically assess the role of
teachers' compensation on teacher sorting in equilibrium and its potential effects on student
outcomes. Moreover, we show how to use application and assignment data to incorporate
information from demand and supply and set wage bonuses more efficiently.
    There are four distinctive features of our setting in Per´
                                                             u that makes it a unique context
to study teacher compensation policies and their potential to mitigate structural inequal-
ities. First, the government uses a centralized matching platform that acts as a market
clearinghouse between prospective teachers and school vacancies. Second, high-quality ad-
ministrative data that link information on (i) job openings for all public schools in the
country, (ii) detailed records on job applications for the universe of public-sector teachers,
and (iii) student achievement in standardized tests allow us to study the matching mech-
anism. Third, the introduction of a wage bonus policy for positions in hard-to-staff areas
with replicable and arbitrary cutoff rules provides a credible source of variation to study the
effects of financial compensation on geographic sorting. Fourth, the context of Per´     u pro-
vides a wide array of heterogeneity in geography, language, and ethnicity and has significant
historical inequality dating back to colonial times.
    Our first contribution is to show causal evidence that increasing teacher pay at disad-
vantaged locations has both recruitment and productivity effects. Specifically, we find that
unconditional wage increases are successful in effectively attracting more competent contract
teachers to public schools. We also document that students in schools that pay higher wages
perform better in standardized achievement tests. The observed increase in productivity is
highly correlated with the inflow of new teachers across schools. In fact, the policy effect
on student outcomes is entirely driven by students in schools that had openings during the
period when the policy was in place, while it is estimated to be a precise zero in schools
where no new openings were available.
    Our second contribution is to quantify the way teachers trade off wages with local school
and community amenities by leveraging geocoded data on applications and job postings from
a centralized assignment system. The model estimates shed light on the channels through
which teachers sort across locations and provide key insights on alternative policy levers
beyond wage incentives that may be highly effective in reducing inequality in access to
qualified teachers. Teachers are allowed to have heterogeneous preferences for locality and
school amenities that are unequally distributed throughout the country. While wage profiles
are rigid and do not fully take take into account these trade offs, more competent teachers
seem to be more sensitive to compensation. These features suggest that policymakers can
increase equity in the market for public-sector teachers through wage policies that take into
account teachers' heterogenous preferences.

                                              36
    We empirically implement this insight by recasting the current matching algorithm in
a more general framework in which schools can sequentially post higher wages in order to
attract more qualified teachers or to fill their vacancies irrespective of teacher quality. This
allows us to characterize the wage schedule that would maximize the allocation of teachers
across schools under a given redistributive objective while keeping the same budget as the
current policy. Targeting less desirable places more accurately, this alternative wage schedule
would increase the share of filled vacancies by 7 percentage points and the share of schools
with higher quality teachers by 4 percentage points.
    The presence of high moving costs for teachers and the sizable ethnolinguistic match
effects between schools and teachers imply that other place-based policies can act as com-
plements to wage incentives in order to reduce the spatial inequality in the allocation of
public-sector teachers. We show that policies that increase the local supply of teachers at
specific job postings (e.g., by providing scholarships and training to prospective teachers)
may be highly effective when compared to other targeted demand-side interventions such as
investments in school infrastructure.
    The evidence we have presented has important implications for teacher compensation
policy. Unconditional wage increases targeted at specific job postings can significantly spur
teacher sorting and productivity over a relatively short time span. This effect seems to be
explained by the fact that a large proportion of the school vacancies targeted by the wage
reform are filled by contract teachers. This feature generates significant flexibility in the
labor market through which the sorting channel of wage incentives can play an important
role in improving the quality of teachers and, consequently, student outcomes. This result is
promising as it complements the existing evidence on pay-for-performance incentive schemes,
which are in general less politically viable in the public sector than unconditional wage
increases.
    Finally, we have shown how the estimated model of teacher preferences can be used to
inform effective wage policies. We believe that this procedure can be fruitfully implemented
in a variety of market-design applications in which policymakers can leverage knowledge of
preferences of one side (or both sides) of the market in order to design effective policies that
incentivize sorting along specific dimensions.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, "The Colonial Origins
 of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review,
 December 2001, 91 (5), 1369­1401.
                                              37
Agarwal, Nikhil and Paulo Somaini, "Revealed Preference Analysis of School Choice
 Models," Annual Review of Economics, 2020, 12 (1), 471­501.

Ajzenman, Nicol´    as, Eleonora Bertoni, Gregory Elacqua, Luana Marotta, and
 Carolina M´   endez Vargas, "Altruism or money? Reducing teacher sorting using behav-
 ioral strategies in Peru," 2021.

Araujo, M Caridad, Pedro Carneiro, Yyann´      u Cruz-Aguayo, and Norbert Schady,
 "Teacher quality and learning outcomes in kindergarten," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 2016, 131 (3), 1415­1453.

Araujo, Maria Daniela, Guido Heineck, and Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo, "Does Test-
 Based Teacher Recruitment Work in the Developing World? Experimental Evidence from
 Ecuador," IZA Discussion Papers 13830, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA) October
 2020.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe and Dhushyanth Raju, "Teacher performance pay: Experimen-
 tal evidence from Pakistan," Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 148 (C), 75­91.

Bau, Natalie and Jishnu Das, "Teacher value added in a low-income country," American
 Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2020, 12 (1), 62­96.

Bertoni, Eleonora, Gregory Elacqua, Carolina Mendez, and Humberto Santos,
 "Teacher Hiring Instruments and Teacher Value Added: Evidence from Peru," IDB Pub-
 lications (Working Papers) 11118, Inter-American Development Bank March 2021.

  , , Diana Hincapie, Carolina Mendez, and Diana Paredes, "Teachers' Prefer-
  ences for Proximity and the Implications for Staffing Schools: Evidence from Peru," IDB
  Publications (Working Papers) 01073, Inter-American Development Bank October 2019.

  , , Luana Marotta, Mat´     ias Martinez, Humberto Santos, and Sammara Soares,
  "Is School Funding Unequal in Latin America? A Cross-Country Analysis. CEPA Working
  Paper No. 20-11.," Stanford Center for Education Policy Analysis, 2020.

Biasi, Barbara, Chao Fu, and John Stromme, "Equilibrium in the Market for Public
  School Teachers: District Wage Strategies and Teacher Comparative Advantage," NBER
  Working Papers 28530, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc March 2021.

Bo, Ernesto Dal, Frederico Finan, and Martin A. Rossi, "Strengthening State Ca-
 pabilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (3), 1169­1218.
                                            38
Bold, Tessa, Deon Filmer, Gayle Martin, Ezequiel Molina, Brian Stacy,
 Christophe Rockmore, Jakob Svensson, and Waly Wane, "Enrollment without
 Learning: Teacher Effort, Knowledge, and Skill in Primary Schools in Africa," Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, November 2017, 31 (4), 185­204.

  , Mwangi Kimenyi, Germano Mwabu, Alice Ng'ang'a, and Justin Sandefur,
  "Experimental evidence on scaling up education reforms in Kenya," Journal of Public
  Economics, 2018, 168 (C), 1­20.

Brown, Christina and Tahir Andrabi, "Inducing positive sorting through performance
 pay: Experimental evidence from Pakistani schools," University of California at Berkeley
 Working Paper, 2020.

Buhl-Wiggers, Julie, Jason Kerwin, Jeffrey Smith, and Rebecca Thornton, "The
 impact of teacher effectiveness on student learning in Africa," in "Centre for the Study of
 African Economies Conference" 2017.

Cabrera, Jose Maria and Dinand Webbink, "Do Higher Salaries Yield Better Teachers
 and Better Student Outcomes?," Journal of Human Resources, 2020, 55 (4), 1194­1221.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik, "Robust Nonpara-
 metric Confidence Intervals for Regression?Discontinuity Designs," Econometrica, Novem-
 ber 2014, 82, 2295­2326.

  ,  , and     , "Optimal Data-Driven Regression Discontinuity Plots," Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, December 2015, 110 (512), 1753­1769.

Cattaneo, Matias D., Michael Jansson, and Xinwei Ma, "Simple Local Polynomial
 Density Estimators," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2020, 115 (531),
 1449­1455.

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff, "Measuring the Impact of Teach-
 ers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood," American Economic
 Review, 2014, 104(9), 2633­2679.

Clotfelter, Charles, Elizabeth Glennie, Helen Ladd, and Jacob Vigdor, "Would
  Higher Salaries Keep Teachers in High-Poverty Schools? Evidence from a Policy Interven-
  tion in North Carolina," Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (5), 1352­1370.

Conlon, Christopher and Jeff Gortmaker, "Best practices for differentiated products
 demand estimation with pyblp," The RAND Journal of Economics, 2020, 51 (4), 1108­
 1161.
                                            39
de Ree, Joppe, Karthik Muralidharan, Menno Pradhan, and Halsey Rogers,
  "Double for Nothing? Experimental Evidence on an Unconditional Teacher Salary Increase
  in Indonesia," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (2), 993­1039.

Dell, Melissa, "The persistent effects of Peru's mining mita," Econometrica, 2010, 78 (6),
 1863­1903.

Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer, "School governance, teacher in-
 centives, and pupil­teacher ratios: Experimental evidence from Kenyan primary schools,"
 Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 123, 92­110.

Estrada, Ricardo, "Rules versus Discretion in Public Service: Teacher Hiring in Mexico,"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2019, 37 (2), 545­579.

Evans, David K., Fei Yuan, and Deon P. Filmer, "Are Teachers in Africa Poorly Paid?
 : Evidence from 15 Countries," Policy Research Working Paper Series 9358, The World
 Bank August 2020.

Fack, Gabrielle, Julien Grenet, and Yinghua He, "Beyond Truth-Telling: Preference
  Estimation with Centralized School Choice and College Admissions," American Economic
  Review, April 2019, 109 (4), 1486­1529.

Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, "Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary
  Incentives on Quality and Performance," NBER Working Papers 14906, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc April 2009.

Finan, Frederico, Benjamin A. Olken, and Rohini Pande, "The Personnel Economics
  of the State," in Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo, eds., Handbook of Field Experiments,
  Volume II, North Holland, December 2017.

Gallegos, Sebastian, Christopher Neilson, and Franco Calle, "Screening and Re-
 cruiting Talent At Teacher Colleges Using Pre-College Academic Achievement," 2019.

Gerard, Fran¸  cois, Miikka Rokkanen, and Christoph Rothe, "Bounds on treatment
 effects in regression discontinuity designs with a manipulated running variable," Quanti-
 tative Economics, 2020, 11 (3), 839­870.

Gilligan, Daniel O., Naureen Karachiwalla, Ibrahim Kasirye, Adrienne M. Lu-
 cas, and Derek Neal, "Educator Incentives and Educational Triage in Rural Primary
 Schools," NBER Working Papers 24911, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc Au-
 gust 2018.
                                            40
Glewwe, P. and K. Muralidharan, "Chapter 10 - Improving Education Outcomes in
 Developing Countries: Evidence, Knowledge Gaps, and Policy Implications," in Eric A.
 Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., Handbook of the Economics of
 Education, Vol. 5, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 653­743.

Hatfield, John William and Paul R. Milgrom, "Matching with Contracts," American
 Economic Review, September 2005, 95 (4), 913­935.

Jackson, C. Kirabo, "What Do Test Scores Miss? The Importance of Teacher Effects on
  Non-Test Score Outcomes," Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (5), 2072­2107.

Jackson, C Kirabo, Jonah E Rockoff, and Douglas O Staiger, "Teacher effects and
  teacher-related policies," Annu. Rev. Econ., 2014, 6 (1), 801­825.

Kapor, Adam J, Christopher A Neilson, and Seth D Zimmerman, "Heterogeneous
 beliefs and school choice mechanisms," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (5), 1274­
 1315.

Leaver, Clare, Owen Ozier, Pieter Serneels, and Andrew Zeitlin, "Recruitment,
  Effort, and Retention Effects of Performance Contracts for Civil Servants: Experimental
  Evidence from Rwandan Primary Schools," CEPR Discussion Papers 15333, C.E.P.R.
  Discussion Papers October 2020.

Menzel, Konrad, "Large Matching Markets as Two-Sided Demand Systems," Economet-
 rica, 2015, 83 (3), 897­941.

Mizala, Alejandra and Hugo Nopo ~    , "Measuring the relative pay of school teachers in
 Latin America 1997­2007," International journal of Educational development, March 2016,
 47 (1), 20­32.

Muralidharan, Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman, "Teacher Performance Pay:
 Experimental Evidence from India," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 39­77.

Pugatch, Todd and Elizabeth Schroeder, "Teacher pay and student performance: evi-
 dence from the Gambian hardship allowance," Journal of Development Effectiveness, April
 2018, 10 (2), 249­276.

Tincani, Michela M., "Teacher labor markets, school vouchers, and student cognitive
  achievement: Evidence from Chile," Quantitative Economics, 2021, 12 (1), 173­216.

World Bank, "World Development Report 2018 : Learning to Realize Education's
 Promise," Technical Report, Washington, DC: World Bank 2018.
                                           41
Appendices
A         Descriptive Evidence

                                  Table A.1: School and Locality Characteristics
                                                                       Rural schools                                 Urban Schools
                                                                     Mean      Std. Dev.                            Mean     Std. Dev.
Panel A: School characteristics
Number of students                                                   40.16         (45.89)                         339.9           (262.0)
Bilingual school                                                     0.249         (0.432)                        0.00864         (0.0926)
Single-teacher school                                                0.393         (0.488)                        0.0151           (0.122)
Multigrade school                                                    0.466         (0.499)                        0.0868           (0.282)
Number of teachers                                                   5.092         (4.050)                         24.59           (13.58)
% of permanent teachers                                              0.677         (0.468)                          0.807          (0.394)
% of certified contract teachers                                     0.164         (0.371)                          0.114          (0.317)
% of non-certified contract or other teachers                        0.158         (0.365)                         0.0790          (0.270)
% of competent teachers                                              0.210         (0.407)                          0.386          (0.487)
Panel B: Student characteristics
Math test scores (std)                                              -0.438         (1.005)                          0.125          (0.962)
Math test scores: % Below basic                                     0.233          (0.423)                         0.0681          (0.252)
Math test scores: % Proficient                                      0.147          (0.354)                          0.285          (0.452)
Spanish test scores (std)                                           -0.568         (0.924)                          0.162          (0.961)
Spanish test scores: % Below basic                                  0.223          (0.416)                         0.0513          (0.221)
Spanish test scores: % Proficient                                   0.141          (0.348)                          0.368          (0.482)
Panel C: School infrastructure
No water                                                            0.311           (0.463)                        0.0355         (0.185)
No electricity                                                      0.233           (0.423)                        0.0127         (0.112)
Cafeteria                                                           0.284           (0.451)                         0.211         (0.408)
Computer                                                            0.619           (0.486)                         0.932         (0.252)
Kitchen                                                             0.392           (0.488)                         0.372         (0.483)
Internet                                                            0.186           (0.389)                         0.912         (0.283)
Library                                                             0.207           (0.405)                         0.564         (0.496)
Sport facility                                                       0.190          (0.392)                         0.614         (0.487)
Gym                                                                 0.0126          (0.111)                         0.118         (0.323)
Stadium                                                            0.00268         (0.0517)                        0.0419         (0.200)
Panel D: Locality infrastructure
Electricity                                                          0.803         (0.398)                         0.997          (0.0553)
Sewage                                                               0.259         (0.438)                         0.915           (0.279)
Library                                                             0.0166         (0.128)                         0.430           (0.495)
Doctor                                                               0.324         (0.468)                         0.869           (0.338)
Internet access point                                               0.0554         (0.229)                         0.845           (0.362)
Village phone                                                       0.0498         (0.218)                         0.0928          (0.290)
Drinking water                                                       0.582         (0.493)                         0.945           (0.228)
  Notes. This table reports the summary statistics for the universe of rural and urban primary schools in Peru over the period 2016-2018. The
first panel describes the baseline characteristics of each type of school (size, bilingual spanish/indigenous language curriculum) for the year 2016,
and the teaching staff composition (pooling together the post-recruitment drives years 2016 and 2018). The second panel summarizes students'
achievement in the 2016 and 2018 standardized test. The third and the fourth panel describes the quality and quantity of school infrastructures
and locality amenities, as measured by the 2016 school census.




                                                                         I
                          Table A.2: Applicant Survey (Most Relevant Attributes)
                                                                        All Teachers                             Score in Top Quartile
                                                                       Rank                                         Rank

                                                             1st        2nd        3rd     In Top 3       1st        2nd         3rd     In Top 3
Question A: Most important characteristic?
Close to House                                             44.17       11.66       8.00      63.83       49.77      13.22        8.76      71.75
Safe                                                       10.66       24.19      19.25      54.10        7.65      24.50       19.35      51.50
Well Connected                                             9.69        20.62      20.20      50.51       8.23       18.70       19.67      46.60
Prestige                                                   17.92       14.12      12.29      44.33       21.13      15.77       12.68      49.58
Cultural Reasons                                           10.61        9.67      12.31      32.59        7.58       9.45       12.61      29.64
Good Infrastructure                                        2.02         8.40      12.86      23.28       1.81        7.23       11.83      20.87
Good Students                                              1.24         4.52       6.08      11.84       0.84        4.36        5.95      11.15
Possibility other Jobs                                     1.93         3.72       4.90      10.55       1.62        4.10        4.71      10.43
Career                                                     1.76         3.10       4.09      8.95        1.36        2.67        4.44       8.47
 Notes. This table displays the share of the 5,553 survey respondents that chose the corresponding answers to Question A. The
first three columns show which answer they chose and how they ranked them (by order of importance) while column 4 shows
the share of respondents that listed the corresponding choice in their top 3 reasons. The last four columns display the same
results for respondents that scored above the top quartile of the test score distribution for tenured teachers.




                               Figure A.1: Determinants of Teacher Competency




Notes: This figure shows OLS estimates and the associated 95 percent confidence intervals of the effect of individual teacher characteristics on the
standardized competency score undertaken by all the applicants for a primary school vacancy in the context of the national recruitment drive in
2015 (see Section 3.2).




                                                                        II
 Figure A.2: Geographic Distribution of Teacher Competency and Student Achievement




                  a) % Competent Teachers                                           b) % of Proficient Students

Notes: This figure depicts the geographical variation in the share of competent teachers (panel A) and the share of proficient students (panel B)
within each province of Peru. Proficient students are defined as those who attain a proficient (Satisfactorio ) achievement level in Math and/or
Spanish. Similarly, competent teachers are defined as those who attain at least 60% of correct answers in the curricular and pedagogical knowledge
module of the standardized test. The reported shares are obtained by pooling the data across two school years (2016 and 2018).




                 Figure A.3: The Different Wage Bonuses for Disadvantaged Schools




Notes. This figure shows the monetary amount in Peruvian Soles for the different wage bonuses implemented by the Government
as of December 2015. Vraem correspond to schools located in the Valle de los Rios Apurimac, Ene y Mantaro which is extremely
poor and under the control of drug cartels. Frontera categorizes schools that are close to the frontier of the country.



                                                                      III
       Figure A.4: The Distribution of Rural Schools over Population and Remoteness




                                        a) Schools with Vacancies in 2015-2017




                                      b) Schools without Vacancies in 2015-2017

Notes: This figure shows the spatial distribution of rural primary schools along the two dimensions that determine the assignment of the wage
bonus. Extremely Rural schools are the purple dots, Rural are light blue and Moderately Rural schools are green.




                                                                    IV
B       RD Evidence




                                       Figure B.1: Manipulation charts




                   a. Population (2015)                                     b. Population (2017)




                 c. Time-to-travel (2015)                                 d. Time-to-travel (2017)
Notes. The figure displays the empirical densities with the corresponding confidence intervals for two running variables
(population and time-to-travel) for each of the years in which the teacher recruitment drive was conducted (2015 and 2017).
The density is computed using the local-polynomial estimator proposed in Cattaneo et al. (2020), and the figures show the 95%
confidence intervals. The sample includes all schools with a permanent or contract teacher opening in the corresponding year.




                                                             V
                                 Figure B.2: Manipulation Charts - Schools with a Vacancy for Permanent Teachers




            a. Population (2015)                       b. Population (2017)                      a. Time-to-travel (2015)                   b. Time-to-travel (2017)

     Notes. The figure displays the empirical densities with the corresponding confidence intervals for two running variables (population and time-to-travel) for each of the years
     in which the teacher recruitment drive was conducted (2015 and 2017). The density is computed using the local-polynomial estimator proposed in Cattaneo et al. (2020), and
     the figures show the 95% confidence intervals. The sample includes only schools with a permanent teacher opening in the corresponding year.
VI




                                  Figure B.3: Manipulation Charts - Schools with a Vacancy for Contract Teachers




            a. Population (2015)                       b. Population (2017)                      a. Time-to-travel (2015)                   b. Time-to-travel (2017)

     Notes. The figure displays the empirical densities with the corresponding confidence intervals for two running variables (population and time-to-travel) for each of the years
     in which the teacher recruitment drive was conducted (2015 and 2017). The density is computed using the local-polynomial estimator proposed in Cattaneo et al. (2020), and
     the figures show the 95% confidence intervals. The sample includes only schools with a contract teacher opening in the corresponding year.
                 Figure B.4: First Stage for Different Years and Treatment Status




    a. Treatment 2017; RV: population 2015                         b. Treatment 2015; RV: population 2017




  c. Treatment 2015; RV: time-to-travel 2017 d. Treatment 2017; RV: time-to-travel 2015
Notes. The figures show the probability that a school is classified as Extremely Rural in each year (2015 and 2017) plotted
against the two different running variables (Population and time-to-travel) for the opposite year (2017 and 2015, respectively).
The regression lines are computed using linear and quadratic polynomials.




                                                             VII
                 Figure B.5: Wage Bonuses and the Selection of Quality Teachers




                 a. Permanent teacher                                                b. Contract teacher
Notes. The figure displays the effect of crossing the population threshold on different measures of the demand for teaching
positions and the quality of recruited teachers. Circles in panel (a) indicate the point estimates from a set of regression of
the form of Equation 1 where the dependent variable is either a dummy equal to one if a school was not mentioned in any
application for a permanent teaching position or a set of binary indicators for whether the school was mentioned by at least
a teacher whose score falls into the quintile of the test score distribution reported on the x-axis. Similarly, diamonds in panel
(a) and (b) are the point estimates from a set of regressions where the dependent variable is either a dummy equal to one if a
teaching position remained unfilled, or was filled by a non-qualified teacher, or a set of binary indicators for whether the vacancy
is filled by a teacher whose score falls into the decile of the score distribution reported on the x-axis. Non qualified teachers are
defined as teachers who did not pass the minimum required grade for a permanent position (panel a), and teachers without a
score in the standardized test (panel b). Markers and vertical lines indicate the robust bias-corrected regression-discontinuity
estimates and confidence interval (at the 90% level) obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014).
Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth.




                                                               VIII
    Figure B.6: Robustness to Alternative RD Specifications ­ Preferences and Sorting




          a. In ROL, Permanent teachers                               b. Teacher rank, Contract teachers




      c. Teacher score, Permanent teachers                           d. Teacher score, Contract teachers
Notes. The figure shows how the applicants' preferences and quality vary based on the distance from the population threshold.
Panels A and C focus on the assignment process of permanent teachers. In Panel A the outcome variable is a dummy equal
to one if a school was mentioned in at least one application, while in Panel C the outcome variable is the standardized (total)
score obtained in the centralized test by the newly-assigned permanent teacher. Panels B and D are analogous to A and C for
the assignment process of contract teachers. Panel B uses as outcome variable the rank in which a vacancy was chosen in the
serial dictatorship mechanism (normalized so that it takes value from zero to one), while Panel D uses the standardized score
obtained in the centralized test by the newly-assigned contract teacher. Markers indicate the robust bias-corrected regression-
discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined within
different specifications for the optimal bandwidths. These are: i. one common mean-square error (MSE) optimal bandwidth
(BW: mserd); ii. two different MSE-optimal bandwidths, above and below the cutoff (BW: msetwo); iii. one common MSE-
optimal bandwidth for the sum of regression estimates (BW: msesum); iv. one common coverage error rate (CER) optimal
bandwidth (BW: cerrd); v. two different CER-optimal bandwidths, above and below the cutoff (BW: certwo); vi. one common
CER-optimal bandwidth for the sum of regression estimates (BW: cersum). Vertical lines indicate confidence intervals (at
the 95% level) obtained from different estimation procedures: heteroskedasticity-robust plug-in residuals (CLUSTER: no);
cluster-robust plug-in residuals (CLUSTER: plug-in); cluster-robust nearest neighbor (CLUSTER: NN). The vertical dotted
line separates estimates based on whether they are obtained from regressions where the unit of observation is the student (on
the left) or the school (on the right). In the latter case, the outcome variables are school-level averages




                                                             IX
      Figure B.7: Robustness to Alternative RD Specifications ­ Student Achievement




          a. Spanish scores, Any vacancy                                    b. Math scores, Any vacancy




     c. Spanish scores, Short-Term vacancy                            d. Math scores, Short-Term vacancy
Notes. This figures shows the effect of crossing the population threshold on student achievement under different specifications.
The outcome variable is the average of the standardized 2018 test scores in Math and Spanish for students in the fourth grade.
The sample includes schools that had an open vacancy for contract teachers the 2015 or 2017 centralized recruitment drive.
Markers indicate the robust bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator proposed in
Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined within different specifications for the optimal bandwidths. These are: i. one
common mean-square error (MSE) optimal bandwidth (BW: mserd); ii. two different MSE-optimal bandwidths, above and
below the cutoff (BW: msetwo); iii. one common MSE-optimal bandwidth for the sum of regression estimates (BW: msesum);
iv. one common coverage error rate (CER) optimal bandwidth (BW: cerrd); v. two different CER-optimal bandwidths, above
and below the cutoff (BW: certwo); vi. one common CER-optimal bandwidth for the sum of regression estimates (BW: cersum).
Vertical lines indicate confidence intervals (at the 95% level) obtained from different estimation procedures: heteroskedasticity-
robust plug-in residuals (CLUSTER: no); cluster-robust plug-in residuals (CLUSTER: plug-in); cluster-robust nearest neighbor
(CLUSTER: NN). The vertical dotted line separates estimates based on whether they are obtained from regressions where
the unit of observation is the student (on the left) or the school (on the right). In the latter case, the outcome variables are
school-level averages




                                                               X
                         Figure B.8: Wage Bonus and Students' Achievement Level




                           a. Spanish                                                                     b. Math
Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on student achievement in Spanish (on the left side)
and Math (on the right side) classified according to four categories. These are below basic (Previo al inicio ), basic (En inicio ),
intermediate (En proceso ), and proficient (Satisfactorio ). Bars and vertical lines indicates the estimated regression-discontinuity
coefficients and confidence intervals (at the 90, 95 and 99% level) from a set of regression where the outcome variable is a dummy
equal to one if a (fourth-grade) student falls into the corresponding category. The sample includes schools with an open position
for contract teachers. Point estimates and confidence intervals are obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et
al. (2014). Standard errors are clustered at the school×year level.




                           Table B.1: Wage increases around the population cutoff
Panel A: Permanent teacher
                                                             (1)                                 (2)                                (3)
                                                          Low bonus                          High bonus                           Average
Above cutoff                                               26.108***                         397.479***                          241.171***
                                                            (6.796)                            (5.540)                            (20.553)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                                       1702.391                            1754.379                           1726.681
BW                                                          155.394                            186.237                            233.538
Schools                                                       380                                 536                               1263
Observations                                                  625                                1194                               2536
Panel B: Contract teacher
                                                             (1)                                 (2)                                (3)
                                                          Low bonus                          High bonus                           Average
Above cutoff                                               29.885***                         406.376***                          248.968***
                                                            (1.816)                            (2.844)                            (22.646)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                                       1681.324                            1757.923                           1711.724
BW                                                          115.300                             90.887                            197.547
Schools                                                       377                                255                                1184
Observations                                                  683                                758                                2759
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on the wages of permanent (Panel A) and contract teachers (Panel B). In
all columns, the outcome variable is the gross salary, which includes both the baseline wage and the bonuses. In Column (1), the sample includes
only schools in rural locations whose travel time to the provincial capital is between 30 and 120 minutes, so that crossing the 500 inhabitant cutoff
from above implies moving from a Moderately Rural to a Rural area. Similarly, in Column (2) the sample includes only schools in rural locations
whose travel time to the provincial capital is above 120 minutes, so that crossing the 500 inhabitant cutoff from above implies moving from a
Rural to an Extremely Rural area. In Column (3), the sample is the union of that in Column (1) and (2): it includes all schools in rural locations
whose travel time to the provincial capital is above 30 minutes. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using
the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at
the bottom part of the table. The table also reports the mean of the dependent variable computed within the intervals (0, +BW ) (right-hand-side
of the cutoff) and (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). SE are clustered at the school level. *** p< 0.01, ** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




                                                                        XI
                     Table B.2: Covariate Smoothness around the Population Cutoff
                                                                        2015                                          2017
                                                        (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                      Any vac.      Permanent        Contract       Any vac.       Permanent       Contract
School characteristics
Number of students                                      -2.912           5.555        -18.543         -1.045          -4.498         -3.479
                                                      (10.290)        (11.990)       (11.635)        (6.499)         (8.513)        (6.736)
Indigenous language students                            -0.038          -0.052         -0.056          0.017          -0.042          0.014
                                                       (0.097)         (0.143)        (0.108)        (0.067)         (0.087)        (0.075)
% indigenous language students                          -0.022           0.028         -0.030         -0.008          -0.040         0.015
                                                       (0.085)         (0.112)        (0.103)        (0.046)         (0.066)        (0.065)
% proficient students (math)                             3.863          -0.939          4.796          1.331          -4.160         2.993
                                                       (3.144)         (7.601)        (3.305)        (3.477)         (3.511)        (3.722)
% proficient students (spanish)                          6.294           5.182       8.202**          -2.264          -5.437          0.278
                                                       (4.070)         (5.609)        (4.114)        (3.775)         (4.073)        (4.049)
Village amenities
Electricity                                              0.062          0.011          0.012           0.026          -0.043          0.058
                                                       (0.090)        (0.126)        (0.083)         (0.053)         (0.064)        (0.068)
Drinking water                                         0.260**          0.231        0.309**           0.110           0.174          0.144
                                                       (0.132)        (0.173)        (0.150)         (0.083)         (0.115)        (0.101)
Sewage                                                   0.179         0.067          0.171           -0.022          -0.030         -0.001
                                                       (0.115)        (0.153)        (0.127)         (0.070)         (0.097)        (0.080)
Medical clinic                                           0.056          0.030          0.066          0.000           -0.069          0.001
                                                       (0.107)        (0.151)        (0.122)         (0.082)         (0.100)        (0.091)
Meal center                                            0.186**        0.246**          0.146           0.069           0.113          0.075
                                                       (0.087)        (0.117)        (0.101)         (0.081)         (0.093)        (0.085)
Community phone                                         -0.007         -0.059         -0.036          -0.034          -0.033         -0.086
                                                       (0.093)        (0.135)        (0.114)         (0.069)         (0.091)        (0.075)
Internet access point                                    0.054        0.153*           0.070          0.022           -0.004          0.024
                                                       (0.058)        (0.084)        (0.079)         (0.051)         (0.059)        (0.062)
Bank                                                   0.023*           0.000        0.031*           0.010            0.005          0.013
                                                       (0.013)        (0.000)        (0.016)         (0.007)         (0.008)        (0.009)
Public library                                           0.018         -0.059          0.019          -0.004          0.002           0.006
                                                       (0.032)        (0.049)        (0.043)         (0.023)         (0.030)        (0.016)
Police                                                  -0.079         -0.161         -0.094          -0.056          -0.124         -0.078
                                                       (0.082)        (0.118)        (0.097)         (0.063)         (0.089)        (0.067)

School amenities
Distance from district municipality (min.)             -27.579         99.432        -17.468          78.389         83.076         101.385
                                                      (112.029)      (171.377)      (128.940)       (138.805)      (173.709)       (169.936)
Teachers room                                           -0.033          0.016         -0.095          -0.074        -0.177**         -0.069
                                                       (0.072)        (0.095)        (0.084)         (0.066)         (0.075)        (0.072)
Sport pitch                                             -0.033          0.023         -0.041           0.002          -0.033         0.020
                                                       (0.087)        (0.098)        (0.090)         (0.059)         (0.067)        (0.069)
Courtyard                                               -0.061         -0.010         -0.096          -0.116          -0.074         -0.104
                                                       (0.092)        (0.107)        (0.100)         (0.080)         (0.087)        (0.081)
Administrative office                                   -0.010         -0.130         -0.094           0.056           0.032         0.048
                                                       (0.101)        (0.155)        (0.128)         (0.077)         (0.102)        (0.094)
Courtyard                                                0.002          0.001          0.001          -0.009          -0.025         0.002
                                                       (0.004)        (0.001)        (0.005)         (0.014)         (0.023)        (0.004)
Computer lab                                            -0.004         -0.023         -0.048           0.050          0.006          0.070
                                                       (0.087)        (0.122)        (0.113)         (0.074)         (0.099)        (0.083)
Workshop                                                -0.002         -0.006         -0.020           0.010          -0.013         0.002
                                                       (0.036)        (0.066)        (0.037)         (0.029)         (0.033)        (0.033)
Science lab                                              0.030          0.043          0.029          0.040           0.006           0.049
                                                       (0.062)        (0.090)        (0.076)         (0.042)         (0.043)        (0.050)
Library                                                  0.044         -0.115         0.007           0.094           0.076          0.044
                                                       (0.104)        (0.159)        (0.134)         (0.071)         (0.102)        (0.095)
At least a personal computer                            0.030          0.045          0.043           0.075           0.125          0.103
                                                       (0.082)        (0.118)        (0.094)         (0.073)         (0.091)        (0.074)
Electricity                                              0.173          0.145         0.179           0.106           0.072           0.124
                                                       (0.114)        (0.147)        (0.132)         (0.075)         (0.093)        (0.083)
Water supply                                           0.276**          0.239        0.346**          0.079           0.050           0.132
                                                       (0.128)        (0.168)        (0.144)         (0.077)         (0.084)        (0.095)
Sewage                                                  0.183*          0.089          0.214          -0.007          0.029          0.058
                                                       (0.102)        (0.120)        (0.131)         (0.070)         (0.107)        (0.081)
 Notes. This table studies whether schools in localities just above or below the population threshold differ in terms of village and school amenities
(as of 2013). Columns (1) to (3) focus on the 2015 assignment process, with schools split based on whether they had at least a permanent (column
2) or contract (column 3) vacancy (the sample in column 1 is the union of column 2 and 3). Columns (4) to (6) are the analogous of columns (1)-(2)
but focus on the 2017 assignment process. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator
proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth. Robust SE in parentheses.*** p< 0.01,
** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




                                                                       XII
                   Table B.3: Probability of Openings around the Population Cutoff
                                                   All                             Permanent teacher                          Contract teacher

                                        (1)                    (2)               (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)
                                      Vacancy            N. of vacancies       Vacancy          N. of vacancies         Vacancy          N. of vacancies
Above cutoff                           -0.007                -0.114              0.008               -0.042               -0.007              -0.113
                                      (0.040)               (0.138)             (0.041)             (0.091)              (0.044)             (0.135)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                   0.476                 0.960              0.252                0.463                0.397               0.764
BW                                    245.255               185.331            166.599              172.265              221.811             184.597
Observations                           6196                  4244               3793                 3904                 5365                4221
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on the probability that vacancy is posted (and their number) in the 2015
or 2017 assignment process. In column (1) the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the school had at least a vacancy (of any type), while in
column (2) is the number of open vacancies. Columns (3)-(4) and (5)-(6) are the analogous of columns (1)-(2) but focus only on permanent and
contract teachers vacancies, respectively. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator
proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of
the table. The table also reports the mean of the dependent variable computed within the intervals (0, +BW ) (right-hand-side of the cutoff) and
(-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). SE are clustered at the school level. *** p< 0.01, ** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




                       Table B.4: Monetary Incentives and Teacher Selection (2015)
Panel A: Permanent teacher
                                               (1)                                 (2)                                (3)
                                             In ROL                           Vacancy filled                   Teacher score (std)
Above cutoff                                   0.071                               -0.182                              0.419
                                              (0.083)                             (0.122)                             (0.414)
Bounds                                     [.085; .194]                         [-.149; -.07]                       [.266; .266]
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                          0.795                                0.508                               0.277
BW                                           247.770                              219.949                             134.609
Schools                                        590                                  488                                 148
Observations                                   590                                  661                                 189
Panel B: Contract teacher
                                              (1)                                  (2)                                  (3)
                                          Teacher rank                        Vacancy filled                       Teacher score
Above cutoff                                 -0.132**                              0.097                             0.644***
                                              (0.060)                             (0.068)                             (0.196)
Bounds                                     [-.166; -.097]                       [.089; .089]                        [.482; .722]
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                          0.391                                0.869                               -0.104
BW                                           170.605                              198.155                             150.920
Schools                                        441                                  583                                 392
Observations                                   720                                  971                                 651
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on different outcomes. Panel A uses the sample of permanent teachers.
In Column (1) the outcome variable is a dummy equal to one if a school was mentioned in at least one application, while in Column (2) is an
indicator for whether the vacancy was filled by a certified teacher in the assignment process for permanent teachers. The regression displayed in
the last column uses as outcome variable the standardized total score obtained by the teachers in the centralized test. In Columns (3) the sample
is restricted to vacancies that were actually filled by a certified teacher. Panel B focuses on the selection process of contract teachers. Column (1)
shows the effects on the rank in which a vacancy was chosen in the deferred acceptance mechanism (normalized so that it takes value from zero
to one), while Columns (2) to (3) are analogous to those from Panel A. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained
using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014) and their bounds estimated using the procedure developed in Gerard et al. (2020).
Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of the table. The table also reports
the mean of the dependent variable computed within the interval (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). Standard errors are clustered at the
school×year level. *** p< 0.01, ** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




                                                                       XIII
                       Table B.5: Monetary Incentives and Teacher Selection (2017)
Panel A: Permanent teacher
                                               (1)                                  (2)                               (3)
                                             In ROL                            Vacancy filled                  Teacher score (std)
Above cutoff                                 0.252***                              0.069                                 -0.085
                                              (0.087)                             (0.082)                               (0.209)
Bounds                                     [.199; .382]                         [.035; .113]                        [-.508; .402]
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                          0.743                                0.330                                 -0.177
BW                                           157.073                              170.460                               164.311
Schools                                        626                                  681                                   338
Observations                                   626                                 1261                                   456
Panel B: Contract teacher
                                              (1)                                   (2)                                 (3)
                                          Teacher rank                         Vacancy filled                      Teacher score
Above cutoff                                -0.121***                              0.021                                0.375**
                                             (0.042)                              (0.056)                               (0.150)
Bounds                                     [-.113; -.113]                       [.021; .021]                        [.362; .362]
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                          0.361                                0.911                                 0.166
BW                                           165.878                              155.386                               185.069
Schools                                        815                                  787                                   906
Observations                                  1401                                 1407                                  1545
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on different outcomes. Panel A uses the sample of permanent teachers.
In Column (1) the outcome variable is a dummy equal to one if a school was mentioned in at least one application, while in Column (2) is an
indicator for whether the vacancy was filled by a certified teacher in the assignment process for permanent teachers. The regression displayed in
the last column uses as outcome variable the standardized total score obtained by the teachers in the centralized test. In Columns (3) the sample
is restricted to vacancies that were actually filled by a certified teacher. Panel B focuses on the selection process of contract teachers. Column (1)
shows the effects on the rank in which a vacancy was chosen in the deferred acceptance mechanism (normalized so that it takes value from zero
to one), while Columns (2) to (3) are analogous to those from Panel A. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained
using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014) and their bounds estimated using the procedure developed in Gerard et al. (2020).
Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of the table. The table also reports
the mean of the dependent variable computed within the interval (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). Standard errors are clustered at the
school×year level. *** p< 0.01, ** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




               Table B.6: Monetary Incentives and the Selection of Contract Teachers
                                                                                                                  Years as public school teacher

                                 (1)            (2)               (3)         (4)          (5)                    (6)               (7)         (8)
                               Female           Age         Other language University Novice Teacher               0                1-3         >3
Above cutoff                   0.098*          -1.309            -0.006          0.078            0.035          0.053             0.075      -0.145**
                               (0.059)        (0.849)           (0.064)         (0.053)          (0.031)        (0.035)           (0.047)      (0.059)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)            0.581          37.363           0.348           0.294            0.083           0.151             0.389       0.388
BW                             147.765        157.516          131.986         182.385          129.025         152.043           210.154     128.455
Schools                          854            925              757            1072              742             893              1278         738
Observations                    1890            2108             587            2306             1658            2084              2891        1752
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on several teachers' characteristics. These are a female dummy (column
1), age (column 2), a dummy equal to 1 if the teacher speaks a Peruvian indigenous language (column 3), an indicator for university or technical
institute education (column 4), and a dummy equal to 1 if the teacher has no previous teaching experience, neither in the public nor private sector
(column 5). In column 6 the outcome variable is a binary indicator for the number of years the teacher was observed in the teacher occupation and
payroll system (NEXUS ) before the assignment process. The sample includes all contract teacher vacancies assigned in the 2015 and 2017 processes,
regardless of whether they were assigned to a certified or non-certified teachers. In column (3) the sample includes only vacancies assigned to
certified teachers in 2015, as the same information is not available for the 2017 assignment process. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-
discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined within a mean-square error
optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of the table. The table also reports the mean of the dependent variable computed within
the intervals (0, +BW ) (right-hand-side of the cutoff) and (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). SE are clustered at the school×year level. ***
p< 0.01, ** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




                                                                         XIV
            Table B.7: Monetary Incentives and the Origin of Newly Recruited Teachers
                  Unfilled v.                                                        Filled vacancy

                      (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)     (9)     (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)
                                New entr. Same sch.     0-99     100-199 200-299 300-399 400-499 500-599 600-699 700-799 800-2000 Urban
Above cutoff          -0.043      0.049       -0.002    -0.023    -0.009    0.037     0.032     0.006     0.003     -0.027    -0.035*      0.026     -0.008
                     (0.045)     (0.041)     (0.039)   (0.027)   (0.035)   (0.032)   (0.026)   (0.019)   (0.022)   (0.018)    (0.018)     (0.019)   (0.028)
Mean dep. var.       0.102        0.216       0.154     0.051   0.075   0.087   0.047   0.044   0.049   0.025   0.024   0.056   0.066
BW                  160.098      122.583     163.318   144.407 129.042 154.888 124.410 211.734 173.911 162.758 123.568 155.949 143.211
Schools               943          693         969       826     742     905     711    1281    1018     961     700     911     822
Observations         2218         1692        2278      1975    1795    2146    1729    2962    2366    2263    1708    2154    1966
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on a set of indicators for the teachers' location in the year before the
assignment process. These are a dummy equal to one if the vacancy is filled by a teacher already in the same school (column 3), or is filled by a teacher
whose previous location falls into the population bin indicated in the column header (columns 4-13). Urban schools are those in localities above 2000
inhabitants. The table also reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on the probability that the vacancy remains unfilled (column 1),
or is filled by a new entrant in the public education system (column 2). Teachers' previous school is determined based on the teacher occupation and
payroll system (NEXUS ). The sample includes all contract teacher vacancies assigned to a certified teacher in the 2015 and 2017 processes. Cells report
the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined
within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of the table. The table also reports the mean of the dependent
variable computed within the intervals (0, +BW ) (right-hand-side of the cutoff) and (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). SE are clustered at the
school×year level. *** p< 0.01, ** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




                    Table B.8: Monetary Incentives and Teaching Staff Composition
                                                  Permanent Vacancy                                          Short-term Vacancy

                                      (1)                (2)              (3)                     (4)                (5)                  (6)
                                N. of teachers     Student/Teacher % of permanent t.        N. of teachers     Student/Teacher      % of contract t.
Above cutoff                        0.189               -0.111             0.082*               -0.541               0.048                 -0.039
                                   (0.352)             (0.184)             (0.043)             (0.373)              (0.184)               (0.038)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                6.617               2.667               0.543               6.548                2.598                 0.409
BW                                 177.285             145.189             243.788             145.863              168.266               182.564
Observations                        1068                 841                1648                1120                 1304                  1441
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on the number and the composition of teaching staff in schools that had
an open vacancy in the 2015 or 2017 assignment process. The sample in columns (1) to (3) includes schools that had vacancies for permanent
teachers. In column (1) the outcome variable is the total number of teachers, in column (2) is the students to teachers ratio, while in column (3) is
the share of permanent teachers. Columns (4) to (6) are the analogous of columns (1)-(3) for schools that had vacancies for contract teachers. Cells
report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions
are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of the table. The table also reports the mean of
the dependent variable computed within the intervals (0, +BW ) (right-hand-side of the cutoff) and (-BW, 0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). SE
are clustered at the school level. *** p< 0.01, ** p<0.05, and *p<0.10.




                            Table B.9: Monetary Incentives and Teachers' Retention
                                                 Permanent teachers                                        Contract teachers

                                         (1)                          (2)                          (3)                            (4)
                                     Within-year                 Between-years                 Within-year                   Between-years
Above cutoff                            0.013                        0.010                        0.004                          -0.003
                                       (0.020)                      (0.026)                      (0.007)                        (0.013)
Mean dep. var. (LHS)                    0.905                        0.098                        0.970                          0.919
BW                                     198.481                      149.719                      170.668                        143.062
Schools                                 1354                          989                          1974                           1624
Observations                            5572                         4161                         19142                          16015
 Notes. This table reports the effect of crossing the population threshold on the within- and between-years retention of contract and permanent
teachers. In column (1) the outcome variable is a dummy equal to one if the teaching position is filled by the same permanent teacher at the
beginning (March) and the end (December) of a school year. In column (2) it is a dummy equal to one if the position is filled by the same teacher
for two consecutive years (the teacher in school year t is the same teacher observed in year t - 1). Columns (3) and (4) are the analogous of
columns (1) and (2) for contract teaching positions. The sample includes all the teaching positions in rural Peru over the period 2016-2018 that are
observed for at least two consecutive years. Cells report the bias-corrected regression-discontinuity estimates obtained using the robust estimator
proposed in Calonico et al. (2014). Regressions are defined within a mean-square error optimal bandwidth (BW), reported at the bottom part of
the table. The table also reports the mean of the dependent variable computed within the interval (?BW,0] (left-hand-side of the cutoff). SE are
clustered at the school×year level. * p¡ 0.01, p¡0.05, and *p¡0.10.



                                                                       XV
C        Evidence from the Model of Teacher Sorting

                                        Table C.1: Preference Estimates
Panel A: School/Locality Characteristics
                                       Wage                Poverty Score       Infrastructure        Multigrade       Single Teacher
                                0.815       (0.120)      -0.201    (0.035)    -0.054    (0.054)   -0.237   (0.119)   -0.786   (0.192)
× Male                          0.611       (0.157)      0.115     (0.032)    -0.060    (0.048)    0.019   (0.099)   0.519    (0.137)
× Exp  4                        0.070       (0.053)       0.097    (0.036)     0.132    (0.052)   -0.284   (0.118)   0.020    (0.181)
× Urban                         0.115       (0.061)      -0.060    (0.044)     0.036    (0.068)   0.009    (0.170)   -0.125   (0.242)
× Competent                     0.170       (0.067)      -0.065    (0.047)     0.198    (0.076)   -0.782   (0.185)   -0.752   (0.351)
Std. Deviation                  0.560       (0.053)
                                     Bilingue                Vraem            Frontera
                               -0.747       (0.123)     -0.409   (0.284)  -0.747   (0.123)
× Male                          0.011       (0.113)     -0.234   (0.187)   0.270   (0.142)
× Exp  4                       -0.290       (0.112)      0.009   (0.247)   0.047   (0.155)
× Urban                        -0.050       (0.166)      0.017   (0.404)  -0.135   (0.319)
× Competent                    -0.732       (0.473)     -0.233   (1.063)  -0.048   (0.299)
× Lives in Vraem                                         0.521   (0.208)
                                         Rural Wage     Bonus Determinants (polynomial)
log(Pop)                        0.228       (0.301)                      Time3                             -0.000    (0.000)
Time                           -0.207       (0.097)                      Time × log(Pop)                   -0.002    (0.028)
log(Pop)2                      -0.054       (0.031)                      Time2 × log(Pop)                  -0.002    (0.000)
Time2                           0.011       (0.003)                      Time × log(Pop)2                   0.007    (0.002)
log(Pop)3                       0.002       (0.001)
Panel B: Teacher-School Match Effects
                             Ethnolinguistic Match                              Geographical Proximity (spline)
Quechua × Quechua               1.488       (0.158)                          Distance < 20km              -0.187     (0.003)
Aimara × Aimara                 1.375       (0.537)                          20km < Distance < 100km      -0.033     (0.001)
Ashaninka × Ashaninka           2.243       (0.558)                          100km < Distance < 200km -0.018         (0.001)
Awajun × Awajun                2.086        (1.020)                          200km < Distance < 300km -0.017         (0.002)
Other × Other                   0.995       (0.113)                          Distance > 300km             -0.002     (0.000)
Panel C: Outside Option
Constant                        2.740       (1.197)                          Quechua                        0.527    (0.116)
Male                            0.840       (0.271)                          Aimara                         0.214    (0.454)
Score                          -0.205       (0.036)                          Ashaninka                     -0.564    (0.646)
Age                            0.019        (0.005)                          Awajun                        -0.026    (0.913)
Experience                     -0.043       (0.005)                          Other Amazonas                -0.473    (0.067)
Private Exp > 0                0.195        (0.054)                          Time                          -0.059    (0.008)
                                                                             log(Pop)                       0.115    (0.011)
 Notes. This table displays estimates and standard errors (in parentheses) of the parameters of the model described in Equation 2.
Panel A shows the estimated coefficients associated to a selected set of schools/locality characteristics while Panel B shows estimated
preferences for geographical proximty as well as the interaction between schools' language of instruction and teachers own native
language. The data used contains choices of the pool of 59,949 applicants (note that 500 applicants are left out due to missing data)
that participated in the allocation of short-term contracts for public primary schools in 2015. Estimation is done via maximizing the
likelihood described in Equation 4 where the integral is computed numerically in an inner loop via a Gaussian-Hermite quadrature.




                                                             XVI
                         Table C.2: Counterfactuals: Increase in Local Supply
                                                                                                                       Other
                                                          Castel-
                                                                     Quechua Aimara                       Awajun       Ama-
                                                           lano                              Ashaninka
                                                                                                                       zonas
Objective 1: At least one competent teacher in each school
New Teachers (1% increase)                         0.666               0.016       0.002       0.004       0.000       0.312
New Teachers (3% increase)                         0.814               0.013       0.001       0.001       0.000       0.171
Overall Pool                                       0.710               0.235       0.030       0.004       0.003       0.017
Objective 2: Fill every vacancy
New Teachers (1% increase)                         0.424               0.034       0.002       0.040       0.124       0.376
New Teachers (3% increase)                         0.438               0.038       0.001       0.046       0.112       0.365
Overall Pool                                       0.819               0.151       0.026       0.001       0.000       0.003
 Notes. This table displays in which ethno-linguistic groups the new teachers selected to augment the total pool of applicants
belong to. These teachers are selected based on their proximity to the schools for which we need to pay the most in order to
attract either a high quality teacher (social objective 1) or to fill its vacancies (social objective 2).




                                           Figure C.1: Match Effects




              a) Ethnolinguistic Match                                        b) Disutility of Distance


Notes. Panel A interprets the estimates of Table 3 in terms of moving cost. It shows how much money we would need to
give teachers on average in order to make them indifferent between a school located where they live and school located x km
away keeping other observables constant. The dashed line displays this relationship for the average teacher. The other lines
display the average for specific groups of teachers (male and competent). The shaded areas around each line displays how
the unobserved wage preference heterogeneity affects this relationship by showing confidence bands of the size of one standard
deviation of the wage coefficient. Panel B reinterprets the estimated match effects in terms of willingness to pay.




                                                           XVII
            Figure C.2: The Effect of the Wage Bonus on the Selection of Teachers




                                           a) CDF of Wage Elasticities




                                            b) Teacher Characteristics


Notes. Panel A of this Figure plots the CDF of the wage elasticity for the assigned teachers in the counterfactual scenario
where all wage bonuses would be removed along with the distribution of the wage elasticity of the new teachers that chose
to be matched rather than the outside option under the current policy. Panel B then plots the average characteristics of the
individuals belonging to these two groups.




                                                         XVIII
                                   Figure C.3: Model Fit: Teacher Score




Notes. This figure uses simulated assignment data which is generated by running the serial dictatorship algorithm using
predicting utilities computed from the estimates from Table 3 as well as a randomly drawn set of taste shocks ij . It then
compares the average score of teachers assigned to vacancies observed in the actual data and the simulated data depending on
the associated school's distance to the provincial capital and locality population.




                                   Figure C.4: Model Fit: Vacancy Filled




Notes. This figure uses simulated assignment data which is generated by running the serial dictatorship algorithm using
predicting utilities computed from the estimates from Table 3 as well as a randomly drawn set of taste shocks ij . It then
compares the share of vacancies filled observed in the actual data and the simulated data depending on the associated school's
distance to the provincial capital and locality population.




                                                            XIX
                         Figure C.5: Global Policy Evaluation: Vacancy Filled




Notes. This figure uses simulated assignment data which is generated by running the serial dictatorship algorithm using
predicting utilities computed from the estimates from Table 3 as well as a randomly drawn set of taste shocks ij . It then
compares, along the population and distance to provincial capital dimension, the average score of teachers assigned to vacancies
under three counterfactual scenarios: (a) under the current policy, (b) in the absence of all wage bonuses, (c) in the absence of
rural wage bonuses only.




                          Figure C.6: Global Policy Evaluation: Teacher Score




Notes. This figure uses simulated assignment data which is generated by running the serial dictatorship algorithm using
predicting utilities computed from the estimates from Table 3 as well as a randomly drawn set of taste shocks ij . It then com-
pares, along the population and distance to provincial capital dimension, the share of vacancies filled under three counterfactual
scenarios: (a) under the current policy, (b) in the absence of all wage bonuses, (c) in the absence of rural wage bonuses only.




                                                              XX
D      Matching with contracts: Theory
Let us consider a framework where we have a set of teachers T , a set of schools S and a set
of possible wages W . We define a contract as a school, a teacher and a wage where the set
of possible contracts is denoted X = T × S × W . We leverage the seminal result in Hatfield
and Milgrom (2005) that, under some regularity conditions on preferences, a stable set of
contracts always exist. This means that there exists an allocation such that there is no pair
of school and teacher that would want to deviate and break their current match to match
together instead, whatever the wage proposed. In a traditional labor market, this framework
would typically be used in order to take into account that other dimensions such as wages or
amenities can be leveraged as an additional market clearing device. However, in most labor
markets for public servants, wages usually act as a tool for the central planner to achieve a
given social objective. There is thus scope for using this framework to guide policy makers
in finding the most cost effective way to achieve such an objective. We will thus show that,
by encoding a given social objective in schools' preferences, the matching with contracts
framework can indeed be used to find the most cost effective stable set of contracts which
would reach this objective.
     We start by defining agents' preferences over contracts. Teachers' preferences over each
school-wage pair were already identified and estimated in the previous section. We thus
need to specify schools' preferences such that the school proposing matching with contracts
algorithm will give us the most cost effective wage schedule that would reach our social
objective under the assignment mechanism currently in place in Peru. We define our social
objective as reaching an allocation under the current assignment mechanism in place in Peru
where every school would have at least one teacher with a score above a given threshold s   ¯.
We thus assume that all schools rank contracts for their first open slot such that:

    · {(i, w1 ) : si  s
                      ¯}                     ¯} (i, l, w1 , w2 )  T 2 × W 2
                            {(l, w2 ) : sl < s

    · {(i, w1 ) : si  s
                      ¯}                    ¯} (i, l)  T 2 and for any w1 < w2
                            {(l, w2 ) : sl  s

    · {(i, w1 ) : si < s
                       ¯}                    ¯} (i, l)  T 2 and for any w1 < w2
                            {(l, w2 ) : sl < s

    · {(i, w)}     {(l, w)} (i, l, w)  T 2 × W  si > sl

The first requirement states that a school would prefer any teacher with a score above s¯ to a
teachers below s ¯ irrespective of the wage. This makes sure that schools will increase wages
until at least one good quality teacher is willing to accept their offer. The second and third
requirement state that among teachers with a score above s    ¯ and among the teachers below
s
¯ schools would always prefer to hire at the cheapest cost. The fourth requirement allows to
break ties by stating that for a given wage, schools would prefer the highest quality teacher.
This last requirement also makes sure that the final allocation can be reached by using the
same assignment mechanism as the one currently used in Peru. For the remaining slots, we
assume that schools instead use the following ranking:

    · {(i, w1 )}   {(l, w2 )} (i, l)  T 2 and for any w1 < w2

    · {(i, w)}     {(l, w)} (i, l, w)  T 2 × W  si > sl
                                                XXI
This makes sure that schools will stop increasing wages to compete for good quality teachers
once they managed to attract one. Given that good quality teachers are scarce, schools would
never stop increasing wages without this requirement and the algorithm will never converge.
Of course this can be adjusted depending our the objective function. An alternative objective
that we will consider will be to fill every vacancy with any teacher irrespective of quality.
In that case, schools' preferences need to be adjusted such that they would be willing to
increase wages until they fill all their vacancies irrespective of the quality of the teachers
they attract. We can now state our main result.

Proposition 1. Under the preferences and social objectives described above: (i). The out-
come of the school-proposing matching with contracts algorithm gives the lowest wage schedule
that achieves these social objectives.
(ii). Each iteration of the algorithm gives the allocation maximizing our social objectives
under the constraint that wages cannot exceed the proposed wages at this round.

Sketch of Proof:
Proposition 1.(i) is a direct implication of stability and that the outcome reached is school-
optimal. Given how schools' preferences are defined, stability implies that a given school
would always prefer to pay less to attract a teacher irrespective of its quality. This implies
that in a stable allocation schools cannot lower their wages or they will lose their current
match. If they could lower their wages and still keep their slots filled, this would contradict
stability. On top of this, we know from that the school-optimal set of contracts maximizes
schools' surplus which implies, given schools' preferences that it will minimize the equilibrium
wages. Following the same argument, Proposition 1.(ii) is a direct implication of stability
under the constraint that the wages proposed cannot exceed a given threshold.

Let us now describe the school-proposing matching with contracts algorithm:

Round 1 : Each school proposes to its most preferred teacher-wage pair. Teachers are ten-
tatively assigned to the proposing schools at the wage specified in the contract. All schools
which did not fill at least one vacancy move to the next round.

Round k : Each unassigned school proposes to its next preferred teacher-wage pair. Teachers
choose their preferred offer from those made in all rounds up to k . All unfilled schools move
to the next round.

The algorithm stops once all schools are filled or once all unfilled schools run out of of-
fers. However, given our assumptions on schools' preferences, we can show that we can
rewrite this algorithm and simplify it significantly. Indeed, given that all schools have the
same preferences and that, for a given wage, teachers with a score below s¯ are dominated by
teachers with a score above s
                            ¯, we can decompose the algorithm in two stages. First, start by
running the algorithm only with above s¯ teachers. Then run the serial dictatorship algorithm
with the remaining slots and the remaining teachers using the wages resulting from the first
round. We thus describe here the algorithm which allocates the n teachers which have a

                                             XXII
score above s
            ¯.

Round 1: Each school proposes to the highest quality teacher at the lowest wage possi-
ble. This teacher is tentatively assigned to its preferred school. All schools which still have
an unfilled vacancy move to the next round.

Round n: Each school with remaining vacancies proposes to the lowest quality teacher at
the lowest wage possible. This teacher is tentatively assigned to its preferred school. All
schools which still have an unfilled vacancy move to the next round.

Round n + 1: Each school with all vacancies empty start proposing to the highest quality
teacher at a slightly higher wage. This teacher chooses its preferred offer from those made in
all rounds up to n +1. All schools which still have an unfilled vacancy move to the next round.

Round k > n + 1: Each school with all vacancies empty start proposing either to their
next preferred teacher at the same wage or to the highest quality teacher at a slightly higher
wage. Teachers choose their preferred offer from those made in all rounds up to k . All
schools which still have an unfilled vacancy move to the next round.

The algorithm stops once every school has at least one of its slot filled. We can also show
that this algorithm is equivalent to iterating the serial dictatorship algorithm taking teach-
ers' score as priorities and only letting the unfilled schools increase their proposed wages at
each round which makes it very easy to implement.
    From the description of the algorithm, we can see that at each iteration the sum of the
wages proposed is weakly increasing while the share of unfilled school is weakly decreasing.
We can thus use Proposition 1 to draw a cost efficiency frontier showing us, for a given budget,
what would be the allocation minimizing the share of schools without a good quality teacher
or, for a given objective, what would be the cheapest way of reaching it.




                                            XXIII
