                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             INEQUALITY IN LIFE AND DEATH

                                     Martin S. Eichenbaum
                                        Sergio Rebelo
                                      Mathias Trabandt

                                      Working Paper 29063
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29063


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank Laura Murphy and Federico Puglisi for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Martin S. Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inequality in Life and Death
Martin S. Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt
NBER Working Paper No. 29063
July 2021
JEL No. E1,H0,I1

                                         ABSTRACT

We argue that the Covid epidemic disproportionately affected the economic well-being and
health of poor people. To disentangle the forces that generated this outcome, we construct a
model that is consistent with the heterogeneous impact of the Covid recession on low- and high-
income people. According to our model, two thirds of the inequality in Covid deaths reflect pre-
existing inequality in comorbidity rates and access to quality health care. The remaining third,
stems from the fact that low-income people work in occupations where the risk of infection is
high. Our model also implies that the rise in income inequality generated by the Covid epidemic
reflects the nature of the goods that low-income people produce. Finally, we assess the health-
income trade-offs associated with fiscal transfers to the poor and mandatory containment policies.


Martin S. Eichenbaum                            Mathias Trabandt
Department of Economics                         Goethe University Frankfurt
Northwestern University                         Theodor-W.-Adorno-Platz 3
2003 Sheridan Road                              60323 Frankfurt am Main
Evanston, IL 60208                              Germany
and NBER                                        and IWH
eich@northwestern.edu                           mathias.trabandt@gmail.com

Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and CEPR
and also NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu
1         Introduction
It is widely believed that the Covid epidemic disproportionately a¤ected the economic well
being and health of poor people. Authors like Chetty et al. (2020) show that during the
Covid recession employment fell the most for low-income workers. We show that there is a
strong, robust correlation between pre-Covid measures of income inequality and Covid deaths
across U.S. states. This relation holds even when we control for di¤erences in demography
and access to health care. Taken together, these ...ndings support the view that the Covid
epidemic created more inequality in life and death.
        To interpret these statistical ...ndings, we develop a quantitative model of the Covid epi-
demic. The model articulates a simple mechanism by which Covid exacerbated pre-existing
inequality in income and health. The basic idea is that low-wage workers are dispropor-
tionately employed in occupations that require a high level of social contact, making them
susceptible to becoming infected. The demand for the types of goods produced by these
workers fell dramatically relative to the goods produced by high-income workers. The net
e¤ect was that many low-wage workers lost their job. Those who retained their job were
more likely to become infected than high-wage workers. An exacerbating factor is that low-
wage workers, at least in the U.S., have more limited access to high-quality health care than
high-wage workers. In our model, these forces generate the strong, positive relation between
ex-ante income inequality and Covid deaths observed in the data.
        A key challenge in designing our model is the requirement that it be consistent with the
fact, documented by Chetty et al. (2020), that low-income workers su¤ered larger drops in
employment than high-income workers but expenditures by low-income workers fell by less
than those of high-income workers. This task is challenging because conventional business
cycle models generally embody strong consumption smoothing behavior.1
        The reason our model can account for these facts is as follows. The behavior of high-
income people is governed by two key considerations. First, they are much less prone to
becoming infected at work than low-income people. Second, they have a higher lifetime utility
than low-income people which makes them more sensitive to the dangers of becoming infected
through market activity. In conjunction with our other assumptions, these considerations
imply that employment falls by less for high-income people than for low-income people. But
high-income people cut their consumption by more than low-income people.
    1
    A potentially important exception are business cycle models with wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers of
the type emphasized by Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner (2014).


                                                   1
   The behavior of low-income people is governed by the following considerations. Consis-
tent with the data, we assume that the goods produced by low-income people are more in-
fectious that those produced by high-income people. So, the decline in consumption demand
is concentrated in sectors that employ low-income people. As a result, the employment of
low-income people falls disproportionately. Low-income people are closer to the subsistence
level of consumption, so they reduce their consumption by less than high-income people.
Moreover, consistent with the data, low-income people receive government transfers during
the pandemic. Taken together, these forces imply that the employment of low-income people
falls by more than that of high-income people, but their consumption falls by less.
   To articulate these mechanisms in a transparent way, we focus our analysis on the ...rst
wave of the epidemic (from March to July 2020). After the ...rst wave, expectations about
possible vaccinations and changes in ...scal policy associated with the presidential election
arguably played a larger role in a¤ecting people'
                                                s behavior. By focusing on the ...rst wave,
we are able to abstract from these complications.
   We show that our model is consistent with three key features of the data. First, it
accounts reasonably well for Covid deaths during the ...rst wave. Second, it accounts for the
facts document by Chetty et al. (2020). Third, it accounts for the strong statistical relation
between pre-Covid income inequality and Covid deaths that we document.
   We then turn to the question: how was inequality in life and death during the ...rst wave
of the epidemic a¤ected by containment policies and government transfers to low-income
people? According to our model, containment disproportionately reduced the employment
and income of low-income workers, magnifying income disparities. Containment also dra-
matically reduced mortality rates for all income groups. Evidently, containment policies
involve sharp trade-o¤s between health and income inequality.
   Turning to ...scal policy, we ...nd that government transfers during the ...rst wave of the
epidemic increased employment and income of low-income workers, reducing income inequal-
ity. But it did not substantially increase the death toll from the epidemic. So, in the context
of the Covid epidemic, government transfers do not involve sharp trade-o¤s between health
and income inequality.
   To focus our analysis, we abstract from three important issues that have received exten-
sive attention in the literature. The ...rst is the impact of ethnicity and racial background
per se on Covid infections and death (see e.g. Benitez, Courtemanche, and Yelowitz (2020),
Desmet and Wacziarg (2020) and McLaren (2020)). The second is the impact of the Covid

                                              2
recession on gender equality (see e.g. Alon, Doepke, Olmstead-Rumsey, and Tertilt (2020),
Jin et al. (2020)). The third is the di¤erential impact of Covid on young and old (see e.g.
Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, Werning, and Whinston (2020), Brotherhood, Kircher, Santos,
and Tertilt (2020), Eichenbaum, Godinho de Matos, Lima, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020),
Giagheddu and Papetti (2020), and Glover, Heathcote, Krueger, and Ríos-Rull (2020)).
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briey reviews the economics literature on
the impact of the epidemic in models with heterogeneity. Section 3 contains the empirical
evidence we use as the background for our analysis. Section 4 describes the model. Section
5 discusses the quantitative properties of our model and its implications for the impact of
containment measures and ...scal transfers. Section 6 concludes.


2     Related literature
There is by now a large literature on the macroeconomic impact of epidemics. Examples
include Acemoglu, et al. (2020), Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2021), Brotherhood, et al.
(2020), Buera, et al. (2020), Faria-e-Castro (2020), Farboodi, Jarosch, and Shimer (2020),
Gonzalez-Eiras and Niepelt (2020), Krueger, Uhlig, and Xie (2020), Jones, Philippon, and
Venkateswaran (2020), Guerrieri, Lorenzoni, Straub, and Werning (2020), Piguillem and Shi
(2020), and Toxvaerd (2020). We do not attempt to survey this literature here. Instead, we
discuss the papers most closely related to ours.
    In this paper, we build on our prior work which features an explicit two-way interaction
between epidemic and economic dynamics (Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2021)). The
epidemic creates a recession because people cut back on their economic activities to reduce
the probability of being infected. At the same time, the recession reduces the rate at which
the virus spreads throughout the population.
    Our model is closely related to the work of Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020). These
authors study epidemics in a model where people are heterogeneous along a variety of dimen-
sions. Two key forms of heterogeneity in their environment are di¤erences in the probability
of becoming infected at work and the extent to which liquidity constraints are binding. We
view our results as complementary to theirs. Our contribution is twofold. First, we em-
phasize the importance of pre-existing inequality in case-fatality rates between high- and
low-income people. Second, we highlight in a simple setting the key forces that generate the
observed unequal health and economic consequences of the epidemic.


                                               3
   Glover, et al. (2020) analyze a two-sector model (essential and luxury) with young workers
and retirees. The epidemic creates important distributional e¤ects because the luxury sector
contracts by more than the essential sector. In addition, containment measures redistribute
welfare from the young to the old. The old bene...t from the reduced risk of infection produced
by containment, while the young su¤er the adverse employment consequences. Carnap, et al.
(2020) explore how optimal containment policy varies across countries, depending on demo-
graphic factors, the prevalence of comorbidities, and the strength of the health-care system.
Rubini (2020) studies a model with a subsistence level of consumption and heterogenous
work-at-home possibilities. These elements generate substantial heterogeneity in the impact
of the epidemic across countries. Crucini and O'
                                               Flaherty (2020) emphasize the importance
of regional heterogeneity in epidemic dynamics. In their model, each location initially expe-
riences an idiosyncratic virus shock. The virus then spreads within locations, through both
consumption and employment activities. It also spreads across locations through travel. En-
gler, Pouokam, Guzman, and Yakadina (2020) analyze the interactions between inequality
and the epidemic in an open economy context.
   Finally, there is a large literature relating the empirical relation of socio-economic status
with the incidence of Covid and health outcomes. Below, we discuss three key ...ndings that
provide independent support for the mechanisms at work in our model.
   First, there is strong evidence that the Covid case fatality rate is substantially higher for
poor people. Chen and Krieger (2020) and Krieger, Waterman, and Chen (2020) ...nd that, in
the U.S., case fatality rates are higher in lower-income counties and zip codes. While useful,
those studies do not link individual incomes to health outcomes. Drefahl et al. (2020)
overcome this limitation. These authors use data that link all recorded Covid deaths in
Sweden to highly-accurate individual-level administrative data. They ...nd a sharp, negative
correlation between case fatality rates and income levels.
   Second, the probability of dying from Covid is highly correlated with comorbidity con-
ditions and lack of access to high-quality health care. The Center for Disease Control and
Prevention (2020) provides a thorough review of the comorbidities that increase the risk
of severe illness and death from Covid. There is substantial evidence that the relevant co-
morbidities are negatively related to income, see for example Hosseinpoor et al. (2012),
Price-Haywood et al. (2020), Raifman and Raifman (2020), and Williamson, et al. (2020).
   Third, there is substantial evidence that high-contact industries disproportionately em-
ploy low-skill, low-wage workers. Other studies provide evidence that high-contact industries

                                               4
disproportionately employ low-skill, low-wage workers. For example, Leibovici, Santacreu
and Famiglietti (2020) combine individual-level data from the 2017 American Community
Survey with the O*NET index of occupational contact-intensity. These authors show that
the workers in high-contact occupations have on average lower incomes. The fact that in-
fections through work are much more likely for low-income than for high-income people is
consistent with evidence in Dingel and Neiman (2020). Finally, Kaplan, Moll and Violante
(2020) provide micro evidence that low-income people work in occupations that are more
contact intensive than those of high-income people.


3     Empirical evidence
In this section, we provide the empirical background for our analysis. First, we present
cross-section evidence from the U.S. on the relation between pre-existing income inequality
and Covid deaths. Second, we display the time-series for consumption expenditures and
employment by income groups in the U.S. using data provided by Chetty et al. (2020).
    A successful theory of the relation between inequality and Covid deaths needs to be
consistent with both the cross-sectional and the time-series evidence. As it turns out, the
latter evidence plays a crucial role in disciplining the way we model the forces governing the
interaction between the Covid epidemic and income inequality.

3.1    Cross-sectional correlations
We begin by discussing our data sources. The number of Covid deaths per million is from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Gini coe¢ cient is from the 2019 Census
Bureau'
      s American Community Survey. Data on real personal income per capita (purchasing-
power-parity adjusted) is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis for 2019, quarter 4. Data on
the fraction of the population aged 65 or older is from the 2019 Census Bureau'
                                                                              s American
Community Survey. Data on the share of the population in urban areas is from the 2010
Census. Data on the number of physicians per one thousand people is from the American
Association of Medical Colleges.
    Our analysis is conducted using cross-sectional data for states in the U.S. We consider
two samples both of which begin on January 22, 2020. The full sample period ends on June
13, 2021 while the `
                   ...rst-wave'sample period ends on June 30, 2020. Figure 1 displays new
deaths per million in the U.S. over the full-sample period, with the red vertical line drawn


                                              5
at the end of the ...rst-wave sample. Table 1 reports the average levels of the variables used
in our empirical analysis, as well as their standard deviations. By construction, the right-
hand side variables in the regressions are the same in the two sample periods. Note that
total deaths per million is roughly ...ve times higher in the full sample than in the ...rst-wave
sample. For both sample periods, there is a great deal of cross-sectional variability in total
deaths per million across U.S. states. For the ...rst-wave sample the standard deviation of
the logarithm of deaths per million is roughly 108 percent. The corresponding ...gure for the
full sample is 76 percent.
                                              Table 1: Data: Summary Statistics




      Panel A: Predetermined Variables


                                                                Levels                                       Percent Logs
                                                     Mean                        Standard                    Standard
                                                                                 Error                       Deviation
      Gini coe cient                                 46.3                        0.3                         4.1
      Real Income per capita                         50387.7                     770.1                       11
      (PPP adjusted)
      65 or older, share of pop                      16.9                        0.3                         12.7
      Urban share                                    73.8                        2.1                         22
      Pysicians per 1000                             2.8                         0.1                         25


      Panel B: Dependent Variable, Cumulative Deaths per million


                                                     Mean                        Standard                    Standard
                                                                                 Error                       Deviation
      Full sample
      (01/22/2020 - 06/13/2021)                      1658.7                      85.5                        76
      First wave sample
      (01/22/2020 - 06/30/2020)                      308.68                      48.8                        108
     Note:
     
       Means pertain to the level of the variables.
     
       Standard Errors pertain to estimates of the mean.
     
        Standard Deviations pertain to the distribution of the log of the variable, across states, expressed in percentage points.
     Data sources are discussed in the main text.




                                                                  1
                                                                    6
                                     Table 2: Baseline Regressions for US States.

                             Dependent variable: Log of cumulative deaths per million
                                                               (1)                    (2)
                                                        Jan '20 - Jun '21      Jan '20 - Jun '20


                             Gini coe cient                    7.67***             12.76***
                                                                (1.47)                (3.54)
                             Real personal income               1.70**                 2.61
                                                                (0.79)               (1.67)
                             65 or older pop share             0.86**                 1.27
                                                                (0.43)               (1.16)
                             Urban share                         0.44                 1.15
                                                                (0.35)               (0.75)
                             Physicians per 1000              -1.07***                0.31
                                                                (0.28)               (0.67)
                             Constant                        -43.71***             -80.75***
                                                               (11.86)              (23.39)

                             Observations                        50                    50
                             R-squared                          0.53                  0.48
                                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

    Note: All variables included in the regression are in logs. Sources are outlined in the main text. Summary statistics are
    provided in Table 1. Robust Standard Errors are reported in parenthesis. Real personal income is in per capita terms.




   Table 2 presents our empirical results. All independent variables are measured prior to
the onset of the Covid epidemic. Three results are worth noting. First, the Gini coe¢ cient
is statistically signi...cant at the one-percent signi...cance level for both sample periods. A
one standard deviation increase in the Gini coe¢ cient increases the number of Covid deaths
per million by 31 and 52 percent, in the full and ...rst-wave sample, respectively.
   Second, for the full sample, physicians per 1000 people are statistically signi...cant at the
one-percent level. The fraction of the population 65 and older and the level of real personal
income per capita are signi...cant at the 5 percent level. A more elderly population and
higher real personal income per capita are associated with more Covid deaths. Presumably
the latter result reects that a higher her per
                                            2 capita GDP is associated with more trade,
commerce and social interactions. As expected, a higher number of physicians per 1000 is
associated with fewer deaths from Covid. In contrast, for the ...rst-wave sample, the only
statistically signi...cant variable in the regression is the Gini coe¢ cient. Of course, the fact
that certain right-hand side variables are not statistically signi...cant variables could reect



                                                                 7
multicollinearity issues.2
        10
        8
        6
        4
        2
        0                              Figure 1:   New deaths per million
              20

                   20

                               20


                          M 0
                               20

                               20


                          Au 0

                          Se 0
                               20


                          N 0

                          D 0
                               20

                               21

                          M 1
                               21


                          M 1
                               21

                               21


                          Au 1
                               21
                             r2




                              l2

                               2



                               2

                               2




                               2


                             r2




                              l2
          n

                  b
                      ar



                           ay

                             n



                             g

                             p

                            ct

                           ov

                           ec

                             n

                             b
                            ar



                           ay

                             n



                             g
                           Ju




                           Ju
                          Ap




                          Ap
         Ja

               Fe




                          Ju




                          Ja

                          Fe




                          Ju
                          O
                      M




               Note: 7-day moving average is displayed



       The key takeaway from Table 2 is that pre-epidemic income inequality is a robust ex-
planatory variable for Covid deaths. A di¤erent way to see the strong statistical relation
between these variables is a scatter diagram. The ...rst column of Panels A and B in Figure 2
present scatter diagrams of the logarithm of the Gini coe¢ cient and the logarithm of Covid
deaths per million in the two samples. The raw correlation between these variables is 0.56
and 0.57 in the full and ...rst-wave sample, respectively. The second column of Panels A and
B in Figure 2 shows the partial correlation between the Gini coe¢ cient and Covid deaths per
million based on the controls included in Table 2. The correlation between these variables
is 0.67 and 0.53 in the full and the ...rst-wave sample, respectively.
       In sum, there is a strong and clear statistical relationship between pre-existing inequality
                                                         3
and Covid deaths across U.S. states.
   2
    Our ...rst-wave and full-sample results are robust to including other variables, like average winter tem-
perature, in the regression.




                                                             8
                                                                                    Figure 2:    Raw and Partial Correlations

                       8
                                                                                      Panel A: Full Sample Period Jan '20 - Jun '21




                                                                                                                                   1
      Cumulative Deaths per million




                                                                                                                  Cumulative Deaths per million
                                                                                                                                         .5
                          7.5




                                                                                                                                0
                 7




                                                                                                                      -.5
      6.5




                                                                                                                                   -1
                       6




                                                                                                                                   -1.5
                                      3.75                   3.8            3.85           3.9       3.95                                         -.1                   -.05                     0           .05   .1
                                                                       Gini coefficient                                                                                                   Gini coefficient
                                       Correlation Coefficient= 0.56                                                                              Partial Correlation Coefficient= 0.67



                                                            (a) Raw Correlation                                                                                (b) Partial Correlation

                                                                                      Panel B: First Wave Sample Period Jan '20 - Jun '20
                       8




                                                                                                                                   2
      Cumulative Deaths per million




                                                                                                                  Cumulative Deaths per million
                                                                                                                                        1
                       6




                                                                                                                     -1        0
        4




                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                   -3
                       2




                                      3.75                   3.8            3.85           3.9       3.95                                         -.1                   -.05                     0           .05   .1
                                                                       Gini coefficient                                                                                                   Gini coefficient
                                       Correlation Coefficient= 0.57                                                                              Partial Correlation Coefficient= 0.53



                                                            (c) Raw Correlation                                                                                      (d) Partial Correlation




3.2                       U.S. employment and consumption expenditures during the
                          Covid recession
In this subsection, we review three important ...ndings documented by Chetty et al. (2020).
                                        4
   Figure 3 displays weekly U.S. employment and consumption expenditures, relative to
January 4-31, 2020, for three income groups. Panel A displays consumption expenditures
for people in ZIP codes with low (bottom quartile) median (two middle quartiles), and high
income (top quartile). Panel B displays employment levels for workers with low (bottom
quartile) median (two middle quartiles), and high income (top quartile). Our sample period
is January 14 to May 30, 2021. The data are aggregated to a weekly frequency from daily
data provided by Chetty et al. (2020).




                                                                                                             9
                                         Figure 3: Spending and Employment by Income
                                                                Spending by income

                                   20
            % Dev. from Jan 2020

                                     0


                                   -20
                                                                                             Data: Low Income
                                                                                             Data: Middle Income
                                   -40
                                                                                             Data: High Income

                                         Apr 2020    Jul 2020               Oct 2020   Jan 2021



                                                           Employment by income
                                                                                         Data: Low Income
                                   20
            % Dev. from Jan 2020




                                                                                         Data: Middle Income
                                                                                         Data: High Income

                                     0


                                   -20


                                   -40

                                         Apr 2020    Jul 2020               Oct 2020   Jan 2021




   Six features emerge from Figure 3. First, employment and consumption expenditures fell
for all groups in the beginning of the crisis and then recovered during the summer. Second,
employment fell the most for workers in the bottom quartile of the income distribution, with a
peak-to-trough decline of roughly 37 percent in the ...rst wave of the epidemic. The analogue
decline for workers in the top-income quartile was only 13 percent. Third, consumption
expenditures fell the most for people in high-income ZIP codes, with a peak-to-trough decline
of 34 percent. The analogue decline for consumers in low-income ZIP codes is 26 percent.
Fourth, consumption expenditures of low-income people recover more quickly than those of
high-income people. Five, the percentage decline in employment for high-income workers was
much smaller than the percentage decline in consumption expenditures. So, for this group
income was smoother than consumption. Sixth, the extent to which employment recovered
varies by income group. At the end of the sample employment of high income people actually
exceeded its pre-Covid level. For middle income people, employment recovered to 2 percent
below its pre-Covid level. In sharp contrast, employment of low-income people recovered
after the ...rst wave but substantially declined again during the second wave that began
roughly in December of 2020.

                                                                 10
    The spending patterns documented by Chetty et al. (2020) have been corroborated by
other authors using data for the U.S. (Cox et al. (2020)), the U.K. (Hacioglu, et al. (2020)),
Spain (Carvalho et al. (2020)), and Portugal (Eichenbaum et al. (2020)), respectively.


4     Model
Our model is designed to articulate a simple mechanism by which Covid exacerbated pre-
existing inequality in income and health. The basic idea is that low-wage workers are dis-
proportionately employed in occupations that require a high level of social contact, making
them susceptible to Covid. The demand for the types of goods produced by these workers
fell dramatically relative to the goods produced by high-income workers. The net e¤ect was
that many low-wage workers lost their job while those that retained their job were suscep-
tible of becoming infected. An exacerbating factor is that low-wage workers, at least in the
U.S., have more limited access to high-quality health care than high-wage workers. Taken
together, these forces can generate the empirical relation between ex-ante inequality and the
disproportionate health and economic impact of Covid on low-wage workers.
    A key challenge in modeling this mechanism is the requirement that the model be con-
sistent with the Chetty et al. (2020) facts: low-income workers su¤ered larger drops in
employment than high-income workers but expenditures by low-income workers fell by less
than those of high-income workers. It turns out that these observations are an important
discipline on our model. To make clear the essential features necessary to account for both
the Chetty et al. (2020) and the inequality facts, we focus on two types of workers as opposed
to the richer speci...cation considered in Kaplan et al. (2020). For ease of exposition, we refer
to low- and high-income workers as being occupied in the non-tradable and tradable goods
sectors, respectively.
    In principle, it would be straightforward to have a closed-economy version of the model
in which all the goods have to be produced domestically. Using a small open economy lets
us highlight the mechanisms at work in our model with a minimum of complications.
    We assume that the nontradable good is associated with higher infection risk than the
tradable good, both in production and consumption. Our motivation is as follows: Ross
and Bateman (2019) show that low-wage workers are concentrated in sectors such as retail
sales, food and beverage service, cooks and food preparation, and other personal care and
service workers. These sectors are generally thought of as producing nontradable goods and


                                               11
services. Dingel and Neiman (2020) use the O*NET database to show that most of these
jobs cannot be performed from home. So workers in these industries must maintain high
levels of social contact that increase the chances of becoming infected. Broadly speaking,
we think of these workers as having occupations in sectors that Kaplan et al. (2020) classify
as "essential" or "social-rigid," that is sectors with a high degree of social interaction and
jobs that cannot be performed from home. Signi...cantly, Abel and Deitz (2021) show that,
regardless of occupation, low wage workers are less likely to work remotely.
   To generate income inequality in the model, we make the following assumptions. First,
people are specialized in the type of goods that they can produce. Second, there is a relatively
large supply of people who can produce the nontradable good. As a result of these two
assumptions, wages are much higher in the tradable goods sector than in the nontradable
goods sector. The model abstracts from income heterogeneity of workers within each sector.
   We assume that low-income people are "hand-to-mouth"consumers. This assumption is
consistent with evidence in Kaplan et al. (2020) that there is a high share of hand-to-mouth
consumers in the "essential" or "social-rigid" sectors. The government and high-income
people can borrow and lend in international capital markets.
   To simplify the analysis, we assume that the real interest rate is ...xed. In practice,
the U.S. real interest rate as measured by 10-year Treasury ination-indexed bonds fell by
roughly one percent after March 2020. This fall reected a host of considerations including
an initial ight to safety and the response of monetary policy to the pandemic. Modeling
these e¤ects would greatly complicate the analysis without changing our central message.
   Finally, for tractability, we assume that people are organized into high- and low-income
households, each of which has a continuum of identical members. This household structure
introduces limited sharing of health risks among people with the same income. Without the
household structure, the asset holdings of a person would depend on how long they had a
particular health status. So, as time goes by, we would have to keep track of an increasing
number of types of people.

4.1       Tradable and nontradable consumption goods
The price of the nontradable good, P1t , is determined in the domestic market. The price of
the tradable good, P2t , is determined in international markets by absolute purchasing power
parity:
                                         P2t = Xt Pt .

                                              12
Here, Pt is the price of the tradable good in foreign currency and Xt is the nominal exchange
rate, expressed as units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency. To simplify, we
normalize Xt and Pt to one, so
                                              P2t = 1.                                     (1)

   There is a measure-one continuum of competitive tradable and nontradable good ...rms.
Production of the nontradable good (Y1t ) is given by:

                                            Y1t = Al Nlt .

Production of the tradable good (Y2t ) is given by:

                                           Y2t = Ah Nht .

The variables Nlt and Nht denote the amount of labor used in the production of nontradable
and tradable goods, respectively.
   The pro...ts of nontradable and tradable goods producers are

                                    1t   = P1t Al Nlt    wlt Nlt ,

                                    2t   = P2t Ah Nht        wht Nht ,

where wlt and wht are the wages of workers in the nontradable and tradable sector, respec-
tively. Since people can only work in one sector, wlt is, in general, not equal to wht .
   Firms'...rst-order conditions are

                                            wlt = P1t Al ,                                 (2)

                                           wht = P2t Ah .                                  (3)

Since ...rm pro...ts are zero in equilibrium with both exible and sticky wages, it does not
matter who owns the ...rms.

4.2    Sticky wages
To prevent large counterfactual swings in the relative price of nontradables, we incorporate
nominal rigidities in the model. We assume that wages are sticky and equal to their pre-
epidemic levels. According to equation (2), sticky wages imply that P1t is sticky. Since P2t
is constant, the relative price of nontradables is constant.


                                                 13
      Our motivation is as follows. With the onset of Covid, the U.S. dollar initially appreciated
reecting a ight to safety. That appreciation was quickly reversed and the real exchange
rate remained similar to its pre-Covid value. For example, the broad trade-weighted U.S.
dollar index for goods and services was 115 in January 2020 and 111 in May 2021.3 In our
model, the real exchange rate is driven by the relative price of tradable to nontradable goods.
Given our assumption the real exchange rate is constant in our model.
      Our model also implies that ination is zero. This property captures the notion that
ination did not respond substantially to the Covid epidemic. Cavallo (2020) provides a
detailed analysis of ination during the Covid epidemic allowing for changes in expenditure
weights. Some categories like "food at home" show substantial ination. But the overall
behavior of ination was similar before and after Covid.
      Our assumption that wages are sticky captures the notion that ination did not respond
substantially to the Covid epidemic. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta uses microdata
from the Current Population Survey to compute median wage growth of high-, medium-
and low-skill workers. According to these data, for each skill category, the average monthly
median wage growth in the 12 months preceding February 2020 was about the same as in
the 12 months preceding February 2021. So Covid did not a¤ect the pattern of wage growth.
      From a modeling perspective, the assumption of sticky wages has no impact on the market
for high-income workers. The reason is that the equilibrium value of wht is constant and
equal to its pre-epidemic value (see equation (3)). The sticky-wage assumption does a¤ect
the equilibrium wages of low-income workers. As in standard in sticky-wage models (e.g.
Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000)), we assume that employment is demand determined. So,
the ...rst-order condition for hours worked does not hold for low-income people. In contrast,
the ...rst-order conditions for hours worked by high-income workers does hold.

4.3      Epidemic dynamics
Before the onset of the epidemic, the economy is in steady state. We normalize the size
of the initial population to one. Let sh and sl denote the share of the initial population
that has high and low income, respectively. As in the classic SIR model of Kermack and
McKendrick (1927), at the onset of the epidemic the population is divided into four groups:
susceptible (people who have not yet been exposed to the virus), infected (people who have
been infected by the virus), recovered (people who survived the infection and acquired im-
  3
      Series RTWEXBGS constructed by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.


                                                  14
munity), and deceased (people who died from the infection). We denote the fraction of the
initial population in each group by Sjt , Ijt , Rjt and Djt , respectively. The subscript j refers
to high (h) or low skill (l), j 2 fl; hg.
   At time zero, a fraction " of the population is infected by a virus. The initial infection is
distributed across high- and low-skill workers according to the weight of these groups in the
population,
                                                 Ij 0 = sj ",

j = l; h. The rest of the population is susceptible to the virus,

                                              Sj 0 = sj (1        ") .

   Social interactions occur at the beginning of the period (infected and susceptible people
meet). Then, changes in health status unrelated to social interactions (recovery or death)
occur. At the end of the period, the consequences of social interactions materialize and                jt

susceptible people of type j become infected.
   As in Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2021), we assume that susceptible people can
become infected in three ways: purchasing consumer goods, working, and through random
interactions unrelated to economic activity.
   The variables (cs      i      r           s     i     r
                   jgt , cjgt , cjgt ) and (njt , njt , njt ) denote the consumption of good g and

hours worked by a person of type j (high- or low-income) who is susceptible, infected and
recovered, respectively.
   Recall that a person of type j belongs to a household of type j . The shares of people in
household type j who are susceptible (sjt ), infected (ijt ), recovered (rjt ), and deceased (djt )
evolve according to

                                     sjt+1 = sjt       jt ,                                            (4)
                                      ijt+1 = (1       jr         jd ) ijt   +   jt ,                  (5)
                                     rjt+1 = rjt +     jr ijt ,                                        (6)
                                     djt+1 = djt +     jd ijt .                                        (7)

   In every period, t,     jt   people who are susceptible become infected at time t + 1 (equations
(4) and (5)). A fraction        jr   of type-j people who are infected at time t become recovered at
time t + 1 (equations (5) and (6)). A fraction              jd   of type-j people who are infected at time
t die at time t + 1 (equations (5) and (7)).

                                                      15
   The fraction of the initial population that is of type-j and becomes infected at time t is
                                                  s          I
               jt      = (1          t ) [ 1 sjt cj 1t (Iht Ch1t     + Ilt ClI1t ) +          s          I
                                                                                       2 sjt cj 2t (Iht Ch2t   + Ilt ClI2t )          (8)
                                        s       I
                          +    j 3 sjt njt Ijt Njt   +      4 sjt   (Iht + Ilt )].
      I         I
Here Cj 1t and Cj 2t is the total consumption by infected people type j of good 1 and 2,

respectively. The variables Iht and Ilt denote the aggregate number of high- and low-income
people who are infected, respectively.
   The probability of a type-j person getting infected by consuming goods one and two is
        s          I         I                      s          I         I                                                       s       I
 1 sjt cj 1t (Iht Ch1t +Ilt Cl1t )   and     2 sjt cj 2t (Iht Ch2t +Ilt Cl2t ),      respectively. The term             j 3 sjt njt Ijt Njt

represents the probability of a type-j person becoming infected at work. Equation (8) em-
bodies the assumption that type-j people only interact with other type-j people at work.
The term       4 sjt   (Iht + Ilt ) represents the probability of a type-j person being infected due to
interactions that are unrelated to consumption or work.
   The term 1             t   in equation (8) represents time variation in the probability of becoming
infected. This variation comes from two sources. First, there is seasonality in rates of
infection. When the weather is hot, people spend less time indoors, reducing the chances
of infection. Also, it is possible that summer conditions, such as warm temperatures and
abundant UV light, make it harder for the virus to propagate (see e.g. Merow and Urban
(2020)). Second, businesses reorganized to reduce the probability that workers and customers
will get infected. This reorganization includes home delivery of food, installation of Plexiglas
dividers at retail outlets, and implementation of social distancing rules and mask usage in
consumption and production activities.

4.4      Households
High-income people can save in international bond markets at a ...xed interest rate, r .
Consistent with evidence in Kaplan et al. (2020), we assume that low-income people are
"hand to mouth,"i.e. their consumption and income coincide.
   The nontradable good is essential in the sense that people have to consume at least c units
of it. The tradable good is not essential, so there is no minimum consumption requirement.
   The momentary utility function of a person with health status x is given by
                                                                                                                               2
          u(cx       x       x
             j 1t ; cj 2t ; njt ) = m + (1
                                                         c
                                                         t ) [(1       ) log(cx
                                                                              j 1t   , c) + log(cx
                                                                                                 j 2t )]              nx
                                                                                                                       jt
                                                                             2
where x can take the values s, i, and r, corresponding to susceptible, infected and recovered,
                                                     c
respectively. We use the variable                    t   to model exogenous variations in consumption demand

                                                                      16
associated with containment measures imposed by the government. We discuss the motiva-
tion for this way of modeling containment in the calibration section. As in Hall and Jones
(2007), momentary utility includes a constant (m) that a¤ects the value of life. We use this
constant to ensure that lifetime utility is positive so that people prefer living to dying.
         Type-j households maximize their lifetime utility,
                         X
                         1
                               t
                  Uj =             sjt u(cs       s       s             i       i       i             r       r       r
                                          j 1t ; cj 2t ; njt ) + ijt u(cj 1t ; cj 2t ; njt ) + rjt u(cj 1t ; cj 2t ; njt ) .
                         t=0

Here, sjt , ijt , and rjt denote the measure of family members who are susceptible, infected,
and recovered.
         The budget constraint for high-income households, expressed in units of local currency,
is

                    Xt bht+1 + P1t sht cs          i          r              s          i          r
                                        h1t + iht ch1t + rht ch1t + P2t sht ch2t + iht ch2t + rht ch2t                           (9)
              = wht sht ns         i         r
                         ht + iht nht + rht nht + (1 + r ) Xt bht +                          ht .


Here bht denotes the household'
                              s holdings of a foreign-currency bond and                                           ht   is government
lump-sum transfers.4 Recall that Xt is the spot exchange rate which is equal to one. There
is no sign restriction on bht . The household is subject to the non-Ponzi scheme condition,

                                                             bht+1
                                                        lim          = 0.
                                                       t!1 (1 + r )t


There is no expectation operator in this expression because the household has a continuum
of members, so, the law of large numbers applies.
         The nominal budget constraint for low-income households is,

                               P1t slt cs          i          r               s          i          r
                                        l1t + ilt cl1t + rlt cl1t + P2t (slt cl2t + ilt cl2t + rlt cl2t )                       (10)
                          = wlt (slt ns         i         r
                                      lt + ilt nlt + rlt nlt ) +           lt ,


where        lt   is government lump-sum transfers.
         The household takes into account the probability of its susceptible members becoming
infected when consuming or working. The household takes as given the total number of
high- and low-income people infected in the economy, as well as aggregate consumption and
hours worked.
     4
    To simplify the notation, we omit the pro...ts from the budget constraint since these are always zero in
equilibrium.


                                                                   17
   The variables            jst ,      jit ;        jrt   and          j t   denote the Lagrange multipliers associated with
equations (4), (5), (6) and (8). The variable                                        jbt    denotes the Lagrange multiplier associated
with the budget constraint for household type j .
   The ...rst-order conditions for the consumption of good one and two by people with health
status j are:
                             c       1                                                                           i
                  (1         t)                       = P1 t       bjt         j t   (1            t)    1 (Iht Ch1t    + Ilt Cli1t )Ij ,
                                    cx
                                     j 1t       c

                                  c                                                                         i
                      (1          t)            = P2 t           bjt         j t   (1        t)     2 (Iht Ch2t       + Ilt Cli2t )Ij .
                                       cx
                                        j 2t
Here, the indicator function Ij takes the value one if a person of type j is susceptible and
zero otherwise.
   The ...rst-order condition for the labor supply of high-income susceptible people is:

                                            ns
                                             ht = wht             hbt    +     h t j3       (1                   i
                                                                                                        t ) Iht Nht Ih .

Recall that the ...rst-order conditions for hours worked by low-income people do not hold
because of sticky wages. Hours worked by low-income people are demand determined. To
simplify, we assume that all low-income people supply the same hours of work independently
of their health status.
   The ...rst-order conditions with respect to sjt+1 , ijt+1 , rjt+1 and                                                       jt    are:
                                       c
                m+ 1                   t+1      (1           ) log(cs
                                                                    j 1t+1              c) + 1                 c
                                                                                                               t+1     log(cs
                                                                                                                            j 2t+1 )
                                       2
                        ns
                         jt+1              +        j t+1     1          t+1       [ 1 cs              i               i
                                                                                        j 1t+1 (Ijt+1 Cj 1t+1 + Ijt+1 Cj 1t+1 )
                    2
                + 2 cs              i               i
                     j 2t+1 (Ijt+1 Cj 2t+1 + Ijt+1 Cj 2t+1 )
                           s           i
                +     j 3 njt+1 Ijt+1 Njt+1                  +     4   (Ijt+1 + Ijt+1 )]
                +     jbt+1     wjt+1 ns
                                       jt+1                   P1t+1 cs
                                                                     j 1t+1                P2t+1 cs
                                                                                                  j 2t+1               jst =    +      jst+1   = 0,

                                       c
                m+ 1                   t+1      (1           ) log(ci
                                                                    j 1t+1              c) + 1                 c
                                                                                                               t+1     log(ci
                                                                                                                            j 2t+1 )
                                            2
                            ni
                             jt+1               +     jbt+1       wjt+1 ni
                                                                         jt+1               P1t+1 ci
                                                                                                   j 1t+1            P2t+1 ci
                                                                                                                            j 2t+1
                        2
                                                     jit =    +        jit+1   (1           rj          jd )   +     jrt+1 rj       = 0,

                                                    c
                            m+ 1                    t+1      (1          ) log(cr
                                                                                j 1t+1             c) + 1              c
                                                                                                                       t+1          log(cr
                                                                                                                                         j 2t+1 )
                  2
          nr
           jt+1       +                   r
                            jbt+1 [wjt+1 njt+1                         P1t+1 cr
                                                                              j 1t+1             P2t+1 cr
                                                                                                        j 2t+1 ]           jrt =      +     jrt+1   = 0,
      2
                                                                   j t         jst      +    jit   = 0.

                                                                                   18
4.5     Government budget constraint
We model the various income-stabilization programs implemented in the U.S. and in other
countries as follows. The government makes positive lump-sum transfers to low-income
workers (    lt   > 0) until period T . These transfers are ...nanced by issuing government debt,
bgt which yields an interest rate r . In every period after time T , the government levies
lump-sum taxes on high-income workers (                    ht   < 0) to ...nance interest on the accumulated
government debt. The ow government budget constraint is given by

                     bgt+1 =     lt   (Slt + Ilt + Rlt ) +      ht   (Sht + Iht + Rht ) + (1 + r )bgt ,       (11)

                       ht   = 0 for t < T ,      lt   = 0 for t       T,                                      (12)

                       ht   (Sht + Iht + Rht ) =        r bgt for t        T,                                 (13)

where Sjt , Ijt and Rjt denote the aggregate level of susceptibles, infected and recovered
people in group j . This formulation is consistent with a run up in government debt during
the epidemic. Equation (13) implies that the level of government debt remains stable after
period T . Equations (11), (12), and (13) satisfy the no-Ponzi scheme condition
                                                          bgt+1
                                                 lim              = 0.
                                                 t!1    (1 + r )t
   Ricardian equivalence holds for high-income households who can borrow and lend at the
same rate as the government. So, the precise path of                            ht   does not a¤ect consumption of
high-income households.

4.6     Equilibrium conditions
In equilibrium, households maximize their utility, ...rms maximize pro...ts, and the government
budget constraint holds. The markets for goods one and two clear,

                    Y1t = (Sht cs          i          r             s          i          r
                                h1t + Iht ch1t + Rht ch1t ) + (Slt cl1t + Ilt cl1t + Rlt cl1t ),


      bht+1 + (Slt cs          i          r            s          i          r
                    l2t + Ilt cl2t + Rlt cl2t ) + Sht ch2t + Iht ch2t + Rht ch2t = Y2t + (1 + r ) bht .

The labor market for high- and low-income people clear:

                                           Nlt = Slt ns         i         r
                                                      lt + Ilt nlt + Rlt nlt ,


                                         Nht = Sht ns         i         r
                                                    ht + Iht nht + Rht nht .



                                                            19
The fraction of people in household type j who are susceptible, infected and recovered is the
same as the corresponding fractions in the population:

                                   sjt = Sjt , ijt = Ijt , and rjt = Rjt .

Aggregate consumption (Ct ) and hours worked (Nt ) are given by

                Ct = P1t      Sht cs          i          r          s          i          r
                                   h1t + Iht ch1t + Rht ch1t + Slt cl1t + Ilt cl1t + Rlt cl1t

                          Sht cs          i          r          s          i          r
                               h2t + Iht ch2t + Rht ch2t + Slt cl2t + Ilt cl2t + Rlt cl2t   ,

                     Nt = Slt ns         i         r         s         i         r
                               lt + Ilt nlt + Rlt nlt + Sht nht + Iht nht + Rht nht .

        In the Technical Appendix we provide a list of the equations that de...ne the equilibrium.


5         Quantitative analysis
In this section, we describe the model calibration and discuss the model'
                                                                        s quantitative prop-
erties. We then discuss how containment policies and ...scal transfers impacted inequality in
life and death.

5.1        Model Calibration
We set the weekly discount factor             to 0:981=52 . We choose         so that weekly per-capita
hours worked are equal to 28, the average hours worked in the U.S. according to the Bureau
of Labor Statistics 2018 time-use survey. We set              = 1=2, which implies that the share of
good one in total consumption expenditures is roughly 50 percent (see Table 3 in Burstein,
Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005)).5 The constant in the utility function, m, is chosen so that
the weighted average value of a statistical life is 3:5 million.6 This value is in the range
discussed by Kniesner and Viscusi (2019).
        We set the share of high-income workers in the labor force to 18 percent. The subsistence
level, c, is chosen so that the share of high-skill workers in the total wage bill is 38 percent.
These shares are estimated by combining data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics on the
distribution of employment across sectors and the share of high-skill workers in each of these
sectors reported by Jaimovich et al. (2020). These authors de...ne high-skill workers in a
    5
      This is a conservative estimate of the importance of non-tradable goods because it abstracts from dis-
tribution costs associated with tradable goods.
    6
      The underlying value of life implied by our calibration for low and high-income individuals is 2 and 10
million dollars, respectively.

                                                     20
given industry as workers whose wage exceeds the average wage of college graduates in that
industry.
   We choose bond holdings in the initial steady state so that average household net worth
is equal to $68; 000, the estimate produced by the U.S. Census for 2010. Since low-income
families have zero bond holdings and high-income households represent 18 percent of the
population, bond holdings for high-income households are $68; 000=0:18 = $380; 000. We set
Al = Ah = A and choose A so that per capita income is $58; 000 in the pre-epidemic steady
state.
   Consistent with the evidence in Drefahl et al. (2020), we assume that the mortality rate
is roughly 40 percent higher for low-income people than for high income people. We obtain
this estimate by averaging the case fatality rates for men and women reported in Table 3
of Drefahl et al. (2020). In the last tercile of the income distribution the average mortality
rate across men and women is (0:76 + 0:26)=2 = 0:51. The analogue number for the second
to last tercile is (0:51               0:01)=2 = 0:25. The average of the latter two numbers is roughly
0:4; i.e. 40 percent. This evidence is based on Swedish data. We presume that the di¤erence
in mortality rates for low- and high-income people are larger in the U.S. because of the
high incidence of comorbidity amongst poor people and the absence of a universal health-
care system. So, our calibration provides a conservative estimate of the role of pre-existing
inequality in Covid-mortality rates.
   We set the four parameters that control recovery and death to satisfy four conditions.
First, consistent with the evidence in Drefahl et al. (2020) for households in the last tercile
of the income distribution, the case fatality rate for low-income households,                                    ld =( ld   +   lr ),

is 0:5 percent. Second,            ld = hd      = 1:4. Third, the average time to recovery or death for high-
income workers 1=(           hd   +      hr )   is two weeks. Fourth, the average time to recovery or death
for low-income workers 1=(                 ld   +   lr )   is also two weeks. We obtain the following parameter
values:     ld   = 0:0025,        hd   = 0:0018,           lr   = 0:4975, and   hr   = 0:4982.
   We set the initial seed of infection in January 2020 (") to 0.001. To ...t the data on
spending and employment, we choose the ...ve parameters                                 1,   2,   l3 ,   h3 ,   and   4     so that
the model matches ...ve features of the data: the peak-to-trough declines in consumption and
hours for the two groups, as well as the "Merkel scenario."By the latter we mean that in the
model eventually 60 percent of the population is infected in the absence of containment or
actions by households to reduce the chances of getting infected (see Eichenbaum et al. (2021)
for a discussion). These requirements imply that: (i) infections through work are about 20

                                                                     21
times more likely for low-income people than for high-income people, and (ii) consumption
of good one is 5 percent more contagious than consumption of good two. The resulting
parameters of the transmission function are:                       1   = 7:4040      10 9 ;   2   = 1:1457   10 7 ;   h3   =
8:3779   10 4 ;       l3   = 5:2498        10   4
                                                    and   4   = 0:3743 (see section C in the Technical Appendix
for more details).
    Recall that the term 1             t   captures the e¤ect on infection rates of seasonality and private
sector reorganization. We choose the time path for                            t   so that the model can capture the
fact that spending recovered in the 3rd quarter without a corresponding surge in the number
of Covid deaths. As a result, we assume that 1                            t   falls gradually until it declines by 70
percent between the middle and the end of April.
                  c
    The term      t    captures government-imposed containment measures. We choose the level
                            c
and time path for           t   with two objectives in mind. First, we want the model to be consistent
with the mid-March upsurge of workplace closings in the U.S. reported by Oxford University'
                                                                                          s
Coronavirus government response tracker. Second, we want the model to be consistent with
troughs for consumption and employment of di¤erent groups while not overshooting the
expansion that occurred in the 3rd quarter. These considerations led us to chose a value of
c
t   equal to 30 percent from mid-March on.
    Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act on
March 27, 2020. Under this law, the U.S. government distributed 267 billion dollars stimulus
payments to lower income households (Garner, Sa...r and Schild (2020)). This value implies
a transfer per low-income household of 267; 000=(260                              0:82), where 260 is the number of
people 16 and older in the U.S., measured in millions, and 0:82 is the share of low-income
workers in the population. Low-income workers received payments from the CARES act in
a lump sum manner and chose to smooth out the use of those funds over the time. This
assumption is consistent with ...ndings in Cox et al. (2020) who argue that transfers asso-
ciated with stimulus programs can explain the disproportionate increase in liquid balances
for low-income people. These balances were spent over time in a way that smoothed con-
sumption. To mimic the resulting consumption pattern in our model, we assume that per
capita government transfers to low income people were on average roughly $50 a week for
half a year, starting in mid April. So, in the model the government e¤ectively smooths
consumption of low income households over time.
    Finally, we model people'
                            s expectations as follows. The epidemic starts in the ...rst week
of January but people don'
                         t take it into account in their choices of consumption and labor

                                                                 22
until mid-March. So, all economic variables remain at their steady-state values until mid
March. But people'
                 s health status is evolving according to equations (4), (5), (6), (7), and
(8). In mid-March, people become aware of the epidemic as well as the path for government
transfers to low-income workers, taxes on high-income workers, containment measures, and
changes in transmission probabilities associated with business reorganization and seasonality.
This assumption is consistent with the patterns of searches for the word "Covid"in Google
trends.7 The number of searches prior to March relative to the peak number of searches
during the epidemic is less than one percent. The number of searches rose dramatically in
the middle of March 2020.

5.2      Quantitative properties of the model
We focus on the performance of the model in the ...rst sample (from March to July 2020) for
two reasons. First, our model abstracts from the possibility of vaccinations and of substantial
improvements in treatments. By the fall it became increasingly clear that vaccinations and
more e¤ective treatments were likely to arrive soon. This information is likely to have a¤ected
people'
      s behavior in ways that our simple model does not capture. Second, the results of the
November presidential election is likely to have a¤ected people'
                                                               s expectations about ...scal
policy. This e¤ect is likely to have changed people'
                                                   s behavior, particularly that of low income
people, in ways that our model abstracts from.
      Recall that, for tractability, our model has only two types of people. To map the data into
this framework, we convert Chetty et al. (2020)'
                                               s three income categories into two categories:
high income (the top quartile) and low income (the weighted average of the three bottom
quartiles). Figure 4 displays income and spending for these two groups as well as total Covid
deaths. The red and blue solid (dotted) lines correspond to the high- and low-income group
in the data (model), respectively.
      This ...gure shows that our model captures the key qualitative features of the data em-
phasized in the introduction. First, economic activity troughs in the spring of 2020 and then
partially recovers in the summer. Second, the spending by high-income people falls by in
percentage terms more than that of low-income people. Third, employment of high-income
people falls in percentage terms by less than that of low-income people. Fourth, consump-
tion of high-income people falls by more than employment, so that their income is smoother
than their consumption.
  7
      See https://trends.google.com/trends/explore?date=today%205-y&geo=US&q=covid .


                                                 23
                                                    Figure 4: Spending, Employment and Deaths

                                                    Spending by Income                                                                  Employment by Income
                                      10                                                                                      10

                                        0                                                                                       0
               % Dev. from Jan 2020




                                                                                                       % Dev. from Jan 2020
                                      -10                                                                                     -10

                                      -20                                                                                     -20

                                      -30                                                                                     -30

                                      -40                                                                                     -40

                                      -50                                                                                     -50
                                        Feb   Mar      Apr      May         Jun          Jul                                    Feb   Mar      Apr    May     Jun          Jul
                                                                                  2020                                                                              2020


                                                                                                                                               Total Deaths
                                                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                                                       Data
                                                                                                                                       Model




                                                                                               % of Initial Population
                                                       Data: Low Income
                                                       Model: Low Income                                                 0.03
                                                       Data: High Income
                                                       Model: High Income
                                                                                                                         0.02


                                                                                                                         0.01


                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                Feb   Mar      Apr    May     Jun          Jul
                                                                                                                                                                    2020




       In our model, the initial sharp decline in economic activity is fuelled by people'
                                                                                        s real-
ization in March that there is an ongoing epidemic. The behavior of high-income people is
governed by two key considerations. First, they are much less prone to becoming infected
at work than low-income people. Second, they have a higher value of life than low-income
people which makes them more sensitive to the dangers of becoming infected through mar-
ket activity. Taken together, these considerations imply that employment falls by less for
high-income people than for low-income people. High-income people cut their consumption
by more than low-income people. This result partially reects the fact that high-income
people have access to ...nancial markets, which they use to increase their savings.8
       The behavior of low-income people is governed by the following considerations. Wages in
the nontradable good sector are sticky, so employment is demand determined. Both high- and
low-income people cut back on all forms of consumption. Recall that nontradable goods are
more infectious than tradable goods, so, high-income people cut back on their consumption
   8
    In the data, savings also increased for low-income people. This increase primarily reected the pattern
of government transfers and consumption smoothing behavior, see Cox et al. (2020).


                                                                                     24
of nontradable goods relative to tradable goods by a large amount. Low-income people are
closer to the subsistence level, c, so they reduce their consumption of nontradable goods by
less than tradable goods. Since high-income people represent the bulk of spending in both
categories, their behavior dominates and there is a disproportionate decline in the demand
for nontradable goods. The result is a disproportionately large decline in the employment of
low-income people.
   The model is consistent with the partial recovery in economic activity during the summer.
This recovery is fueled by the assumed drop in infection rates during this period, the phasing
out of containment, and the implementation of government transfers.
   Finally, according to Figure 4, the model succeeds in accounting for the total number of
deaths during the ...rst wave of the epidemic.


The impact of c To quantify the impact of the subsistence level c, we re-solve the model
setting c to zero. Consistent with the intuition above, in the model with c = 0 the peak-
to-trough fall in spending is similar for low- and high-income people. So, this version of
the model is inconsistent with key facts about consumption documented by Chetty et al.
(2020). Since spending in nontradable goods falls by more in the model with c = 0, so too
does employment in the nontradable sector. This e¤ect moves the model'
                                                                     s implications for
employment of low-income people away from the data.


The impact of nominal rigidities To quantify the impact of nominal rigidities, we
resolve the model assuming that wages are fully exible. Under this assumption the price
of nontradable goods is no longer constant. The model'
                                                     s ability to account for the Chetty
et al. (2020) facts does not depend sensitively on the assumption of sticky wages. However,
the model'
         s quantitative performance is somewhat worse. The key impact of exible wages
is that the nontradable prices goods increases by about 25 percent between February and
April before declining.

5.3    Inequality in life and death
In this subsection we analyze the model'
                                       s implications for inequality in life and death. First,
we discuss the dynamics of income inequality and Covid deaths implied by the model. Sec-
ond, we ask whether the model can account for the empirical correlation across U.S. states
between preexisting inequality and cumulative Covid deaths.


                                             25
   Figure 5 shows that at the beginning of the epidemic, high-income people account for
18 percent of the population and 46 percent of total income. Their share of income is sub-
stantially higher at the peak of the epidemic in April. This result reects the sharp relative
decline in employment of low-income people and the presence of sticky wages. Consistent
with this intuition, much of the inequality wanes as the economy partially recovers in the
summer. In this precise sense, the model captures the rise in inequality induced by the
epidemic.

                                                                          Figure 5: Income Inequality and Deaths

                                                                      Income Inequality                                                         Deaths per Capita by Income
                                                         54                                                                             0.04
                                                                                                                                                 Model: Low Income
                                                                                                                                                 Model: High Income

                                                         53                                                                            0.035
             Income Share of High Income Households, %




                                                         52                                                  % of Initial Population    0.03



                                                         51                                                                            0.025



                                                         50                                                                             0.02



                                                         49                                                                            0.015



                                                         48                                                                             0.01



                                                         47                                                                            0.005



                                                         46                                                                               0
                                                          Feb   Mar     Apr     May       Jun          Jul                                Feb   Mar      Apr      May   Jun          Jul
                                                                                                2020                                                                          2020




   The second panel of Figure 5 displays Covid mortality rates for high- and low-income
people. The model is consistent with the unequal health impact of the epidemic. This
inequality reects two forces. The ...rst force is pre-existing inequality in comorbidity rates
and access to quality health care. This inequality would have led to a higher death toll
among low-income people, regardless of the economic impact of Covid. The second force is
the unequal impact of the Covid recession on di¤erent types of people. Low-income people
are more likely to become infected at work. In addition, they spend a higher fraction of



                                                                                                   26
their income on goods whose consumption is associated with higher infection rates. Taken
together, these considerations imply that their health is disproportionately impacted by the
epidemic.




                                                  Figure 6: Effects of Mortality Rate on Deaths
                                                                               Deaths per Capita by Income
                                               0.04
                                                                Baseline Model: Low Income
                                                                Baseline Model: High Income
                                              0.035             Same Mortality Rate Model: Low Income
                                                                Same Mortality Rate Model: High Income

                                               0.03
                    % of Initial Population




                                              0.025


                                               0.02


                                              0.015


                                               0.01


                                              0.005


                                                 0
                                                 Feb                  Mar             Apr                May   Jun          Jul
                                                                                                                     2020




   To isolate the e¤ect of pre-existing inequality in comorbidity rates and access to quality
health care, we solve the model assuming that the case fatality rate is the same for high-
and low-income people (                               ld   =     hd ).      Figure 6 displays the cumulative mortality rates in this
version of the model as well as in the benchmark model. Two key results emerge. First, the
death rate among low-income people would have been 30 percent lower if they had the same
case-fatality rate as high-income people. So, the model implies that pre-existing inequality
in access to quality health care is a powerful force generating inequality in death. Broadly
speaking, this ...nding is consistent with our empirical ...ndings summarized in Section 2 about
the link between pre-existing inequality and higher mortality rates across countries and U.S.
states.
   Second, even when                             ld   =        hd ,   the Covid mortality rate would have been 23 percent higher



                                                                                       27
for low-income people versus high-income people (0:0027 versus 0:0022 percent). The reason
is that low-income people work in jobs that expose them to a higher probability of infection.
The latter result is consistent with the health literature cited above as well as the economic
literature (e.g. Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2020)).
   We now turn to the striking statistical correlation across U.S. states between pre-Covid
income inequality and Covid deaths. To study whether our model can account for this
pattern, we solve it for di¤erent values of sh , the fraction of high-skill households in the
economy. To isolate the impact of pre-Covid income inequality we recalibrate Al so that the
relative price of nontradables is constant across economies. We also maintain the transfers
received by low-income households at the level of $1; 200 used in our baseline calibration.
For each value of sh , we compute the Gini coe¢ cient in the economy'
                                                                    s pre-Covid steady
state as well as the total number of Covid deaths of high- and low-income people.
   It is well-know that the Gini coe¢ cient is sensitive to the share of income received by
a set of very wealthy people that represent a small fraction of the population. Building
on Atkinson (2007), Alvaredo (2010) shows that if the very wealth receive a fraction S of
total income and are an in...nitesimal fraction of the population, the Gini coe¢ cient, G, is
approximately equal to G (1      S ) + S , where G is the Gini coe¢ cient for the rest of the
population. In our baseline calibration the Gini coe¢ cient is 0:3. According to Piketty, Saez,
and Zucman (2017), the top 1 percent income earners in the U.S. received 22 percent of total
income in 2015. Our model abstracts from the presence of these types of people. The Gini
coe¢ cient for the U.S. in 2019 is 0:48. Using the Atkeson-Alvaredo approximation to correct
for the presence of the top 1 percent income earners yields a Gini coe¢ cient of roughly 0:3.




                                              28
                                                                                                             Figure 7: Inequality in Life and Death

                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                              Terminal Deaths, Total
               Terminal deaths after epidemic (percent of initial total population)
                                                                                              Terminal Deaths, Poor (Low Skilled)
                                                                                              Terminal Deaths, Rich (High Skilled)

                                                                                      0.25




                                                                                       0.2




                                                                                      0.15




                                                                                       0.1




                                                                                      0.05




                                                                                        0
                                                                                        0.1           0.15                0.2              0.25              0.3   0.35   0.4
                                                                                                                          Gini index (pre-epidemic steady state)




       Figure 7 plots cumulative Covid deaths for high- and low-income people as well as total
Covid deaths for di¤erent Gini coe¢ cient values in our model. As background for interpreting
the ...gure, note that increasing sh , i.e. raising the fraction of the population that has high
income, reduces the Gini coe¢ cient.9 According to the graph, a smaller Gini coe¢ cient is
associated with a larger number of high-income people dying. This property is driven by
the fact that there are more high income people. The Covid mortality rate for high-income
person declines slowly as sh falls.
       A smaller Gini coe¢ cient is associated with fewer low-income people dying. This property
reects two forces that work in the same direction. First, there are fewer low income people
in economies with low Gini coe¢ cients. Second, in low-Gini economies, wages of low-income
people are higher so the value of their life is higher. So, low-income people reduce their labor
supply and consumption of high-contact goods. As a result their Covid-related mortality
falls.
       The relation between the Gini coe¢ cient and total deaths depends on whether low or
   9
    The Gini index re ects two forces: i) the relative income of rich and poor people and ii) the number of
rich and poor people. There would be perfect equality, if everyone was poor or everyone was rich. In our
parameterized model a larger share of the population becoming rich reduces the Gini index.


                                                                                                                                     29
high-income households dominate. For an empirically plausible range around a corrected Gini
coe¢ cient of 0.3, the behavior of low-income households dominates so that less inequality is
associated with fewer overall deaths. So, viewed overall, the model accounts for the positive
association between Covid deaths and income inequality documented in our empirical work.

5.4    Policy interventions
Our model embodies two important policies implemented during the ...rst phase of the epi-
demic: containment and ...scal transfers to low-income people. We use the model to assess
how these policies impacted inequality in life and death.
   The pink lines in column one and two of Figure 8 show how income inequality and deaths
per capita would have evolved in the absence of transfers to low-income people. Two key
results emerge. First, the rise in income inequality generated by the epidemic would have
been much more persistent absent ...scal transfers. The reason is that transfers increase the
demand for nontradable goods and employment of low-income people. Second, the mortality
rates would have been slightly lower for both income groups had there been no transfers.
Absent transfers economic activity would have been lower, resulting in lower infection rates.
Overall, transfers reduced income inequality and stimulated economic activity without having
a large impact on the death toll of the epidemic. So, according to our model there is not
much of a trade o¤ between using transfers to reduce Covid-related income inequality and
the adverse health outcomes of higher economic activity.
   The green lines in column one and two of Figure 8 shows how income inequality and deaths
per capita would have evolved in the absence of containment. Both groups consume more
in this scenario. Since wages are sticky in the nontradable good sector and the demand for
nontradable goods is higher, there is more employment for low-income workers. The spending
e¤ects are particularly strong in the mid summer since low-income workers continue to receive
...scal transfers and there is no containment. As a result, income inequality temporarily dips
below its pre-epidemic level.
   In sum, containment disproportionately reduced the employment and income of low-
income workers, magnifying income inequality. At the same time, containment dramatically
reduced mortality rates for all people. This reduction was roughly 31 percent for low-income
workers and 27 percent for high-income workers. So containment per se greatly increases
income inequality but saved many lives of both high- and low-income people.



                                             30
                                                                Figure 8: Sensitivity of Income Inequality and Deaths

                                                                      Income Inequality                                                        Deaths per Capita by Income
                                                         54                                                                            0.06
                                                                                                                                                No Containment: Low Income
                                                                                                                                                Baseline: Low Income
                                                                                                                                                No Transfers: Low Income
                                                                                                                                                No Containment: High Income
                                                         52                                                                            0.05     Baseline: High Income
                                                                                                                                                No Transfers: High Income
             Income Share of High Income Households, %




                                                         50                                                                            0.04




                                                                                                             % of Initial Population
                                                         48                                                                            0.03




                                                         46                                                                            0.02




                                                         44                                                                            0.01

                                                                 No Transfers
                                                                 Baseline
                                                                 No Containment
                                                         42                                                                              0
                                                          Feb   Mar     Apr       May     Jun          Jul                               Feb   Mar      Apr      May          Jun          Jul
                                                                                                2020                                                                                2020




6     Conclusion
In this paper, we develop a model that allows us to analyze why poor people su¤ered dis-
proportionately from the Covid epidemic. While simple, our model accounts for key aspects
of the Covid recession in the U.S.. First, economic activity steeply declined at the onset
of the epidemic and then partially recovered in the summer. Second, employment fell dis-
proportionately more and consumer spending disproportionately less for low-income people,
relative to high-income people. Finally, consumer spending by high-income people fell, in
percentage terms, by substantially more than their employment.
    For the U.S., our model suggests that pre-existing inequality in health conditions was a
key driver of the disproportionately high toll su¤ered by poor people. But inequality in the
nature of occupations contributed a great deal as well. Neither of these forces could have
been e¤ectively countered once the epidemic began. As a result, the poor paid a terrible price.



                                                                                                   31
References
 [1] Abel, Jaison R., and Richard Deitz. Some Workers Have Been Hit Much Harder than
     Others by the Pandemic. No. 20210209a. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2021.
 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning, and Michael D. Whinston. A
     multi-risk SIR model with optimally targeted lockdown. No. w27102. National Bureau
     of Economic Research, 2020.
 [3] Alon, Titan M., Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Michele Tertilt. The
     impact of COVID-19 on gender equality. No. w26947. National Bureau of Economic
     Research, 2020.
 [4] Alvaredo, Facundo. "A note on the relationship between top income shares and the Gini
     coe¢ cient." Economics Letters 110, no. 3 (2011): 274-277.
 [5] Alvarez, Fernando E., David Argente, and Francesco Lippi. A simple planning prob-
     lem for covid-19 lockdown, testing and tracing. American Economic Review: Insights
     (forthcoming), 2021.
 [6] Atkinson, Antony B., 2007. Measuring top incomes: methodological issues. Top incomes
     over the twentieth century: A contrast between continental European and English-
     speaking countries, 1, pp.18-42.
 [7] Benitez, J., Courtemanche, C. and Yelowitz, A., 2020. Racial and ethnic disparities
     in COVID-19: evidence from six large cities. Journal of Economics, Race, and Policy,
     3(4), pp.243-261.
 [8] Brotherhood, Luiz, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michèle Tertilt. "An economic
     model of the Covid-19 epidemic: The importance of testing and age-speci...c policies."
     (2020).
 [9] Buera, Francisco, Roberto Fattal-Jaef, A. Neumeyer, and Yongseok Shin. "The economic
     ripple e¤ects of COVID-19." Unpublished manuscript. Available at the World Bank
     Development Policy and COVID-19-- eSeminar Series (2020).
[10] Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. "Large Devaluations and the
     Real Exchange Rate." Journal of Political Economy 113, no. 4 (2005): 742-784.
[11] Carnap, Tillmann von, Ingvild Almås, Tessa Bold, Selene Ghisol... and Justin Sande-
     fur"The macroeconomics of pandemics in developing countries: An application to
     Uganda,"Working Paper 555, Center for Global Development, 2020.
[12] Carvalho, Vasco M., Stephen Hansen, Alvaro Ortiz, Juan Ramon Garcia, Tomasa Ro-
     drigo, Sevi Rodriguez Mora, and Pep Ruiz de Aguirre. "Tracking the Covid-19 crisis
     with high-resolution transaction data,"BBVA working paper 20/06, April 2020.
[13] Cavallo, Alberto "Ination with Covid Consumption Baskets," No. w27352. National
     Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[14] Center for Disease Control and Prevention "Evidence used to update the list
     of underlying medical conditions that increase a person'   s risk of severe ill-
     ness from COVID-19," 2020, https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-
     precautions/evidence-table.html



                                            32
[15] Chen, Jarvis T., and Nancy Krieger "Revealing the unequal burden of COVID-19 by
     income, race/ethnicity, and household crowding: US county versus zip code analyses."
     Journal of Public Health Management and Practice 27, no. 1 (2020): S43-S56.
[16] Chetty, Raj John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Oppor-
     tunity Insights Team "How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies A¤ect Spending
     and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data,"
     2020.
[17] Cox, Natalie, Peter Ganong, Pascal Noel, Joseph Vavra, Arlene Wong, Diana Farrell,
     and Fiona Greig. "Initial impacts of the pandemic on consumer behavior: Evidence from
     linked income, spending, and savings data," University of Chicago, Becker Friedman
     Institute for Economics Working Paper 2020-82 (2020).
[18] Crucini, Mario J. and Oscar O'
                                  Flaherty "Stay-at-Home Orders in a Fiscal Union,"
     NBER Working Paper No. 28182, December 2020.
[19] Dingel, Jonathan I. and Brent Neiman "How Many Jobs Can be Done at Home?,"
     NBER Working Paper No. 26948, April 2020.
[20] Desmet, Klaus, and Romain Wacziarg, 2021. "JUE Insight: Understanding spatial vari-
     ation in COVID-19 across the United States." Journal of Urban Economics, p.103332.
[21] Drefahl, S., Wallace, M., Mussino, E. et al. "A population-based cohort study of socio-
     demographic risk factors for COVID-19 deaths in Sweden." Nat Commun 11, 5097
     (2020).
[22] Eichenbaum, Martin S., Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt. The macroeconomics of
     epidemics. forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies, 2021.
[23] Eichenbaum, Martin S., Miguel Godinho de Matos, Francisco Lima, Sergio Rebelo,
     and Mathias Trabandt "How do people respond to small probability events with large
     negative consequences?,"NBER Working Paper No 27998, October 2020.
[24] Engler, P., Nathalie Pouokam, Diego Rodríguez Guzman, and Irina Yakadina. Forth-
     coming. "Fiscal Redistribution and Inequality in the Time of a Pandemic,"IMF Working
     Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.
[25] Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin. "Optimal Monetary
     Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts," Journal of Monetary Economics 46,
     no. 2 (2000): 281-313.
[26] Farboodi, Maryam, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer. Internal and external e¤ects of
     social distancing in a pandemic. No. w27059. National Bureau of Economic Research,
     2020.
[27] Faria-e-Castro, Miguel. "Fiscal policy during a pandemic." Journal of Economic Dy-
     namics and Control 125 (2021): 104088.
[28] Garner, Thesia I., Adam Sa...r, and Jake Schild "Receipt and use of stimulus payments in
     the time of the Covid-19 pandemic,"Beyond the Numbers, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
     August 2020.
[29] Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. Health
     versus wealth: On the distributional e¤ects of controlling a pandemic. No. w27046.
     National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.


                                             33
[30] Gonzalez-Eiras, Martín and Dirk Niepelt "On the Optimal "Lockdown" During an
     Epidemic,"manuscript, Study Center Gerzensee, 2020.
[31] Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning. Macroeco-
     nomic Implications of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Short-
     ages?. No. w26918. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[32] Giagheddu, Marta and Andrea Papetti "The Macroeconomics of Age-Variant Epi-
     demics,"manuscript, 2020.
[33] Hacioglu, Sinem, R Känzig, Paolo Surico "The Distributional Impact of the Pan-
     demic,"CEPR DP No. 15101, July 2020.
[34] Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. "The value of life and the rise in health spending."
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 1 (2007): 39-72.
[35] Hosseinpoor, Ahmad Reza, Nicole Bergen, Shanthi Mendis, Sam Harper, Emese Verdes,
     Anton Kunst, and Somnath Chatterji. "Socioeconomic inequality in the prevalence of
     noncommunicable diseases in low-and middle-income countries: results from the World
     Health Survey." BMC public health 12, no. 1 (2012): 474.
[36] Jaimovich, Nir, Sergio Rebelo, Arlene Wong, and Miao Ben Zhang. "Trading up and
     the skill premium." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 34, no. 1 (2020): 285-316.
[37] Jin, Jian-Min, Peng Bai, Wei He, Fei Wu, Xiao-Fang Liu, De-Min Han, Shi Liu, and
     Jin-Kui Yang. "Gender di¤erences in patients with COVID-19: Focus on severity and
     mortality." Frontiers in Public Health 8 (2020): 152.
[38] Jones, Callum J., Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran. Optimal mitigation
     policies in a pandemic: Social distancing and working from home. No. w26984. National
     Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[39] Kaplan, Greg, Giovanni L. Violante, and Justin Weidner. "The wealthy hand-to-
     mouth." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (2014): 77-153.
[40] Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. "Monetary policy according
     to HANK." American Economic Review 108, no. 3 (2018): 697-743.
[41] Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante "The Great Lockdown and
     the Big Stimulus: Tracing the Pandemic Possibility Frontier for the U.S.,"manuscript,
     University of Chicago, 2020.
[42] Kermack, William Ogilvy, and Anderson G. McKendrick "A Contribution to the Math-
     ematical Theory of Epidemics," Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, series A
     115, no. 772: 700-721, 1927.
[43] Kniesner, Thomas J., and W. Kip Viscusi. "The value of a statistical life." Oxford
     Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance (2019): 19-15.
[44] Krieger, Nancy, Pamela D. Waterman, and Jarvis T. Chen. "COVID-19 and overall
     mortality inequities in the surge in death rates by ZIP Code characteristics: Massa-
     chusetts, January 1 to May 19, 2020." American Journal of Public Health 110, no. 12
     (2020): 1850-1852.
[45] Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie. "Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallo-
     cation in an Epidemic: Evaluating the "Swedish Solution"," manuscript, University of
     Pennsylvania (2020).

                                              34
[46] Leibovici, Fernando, Ana Maria Santacreu and Matthew Famiglietti "Social Distancing
     and Contact-Intensive Occupations," Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
     2020.
[47] McLaren, John. Racial Disparity in Covid-19 Deaths: Seeking Economic Roots with
     Census data. No. w27407. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[48] Merow, Cory and Mark Urban "Seasonality and Uncertainty in Global COVID-19
     Growth Rates,"PNAS, 117 (44) November 3, 2020.
[49] Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman, "Distributional National Ac-
     counts: Methods and Estimates for the United States,"NBER working paper, December
     2016. Updated July 2017.
[50] Piguillem, Facundo, and Liyan Shi. "Optimal COVID-19 quarantine and testing poli-
     cies." (2020).
[51] Price-Haywood, Eboni G., Je¤rey Burton, Daniel Fort, and Leonardo Seoane. "Hospi-
     talization and mortality among black patients and white patients with Covid-19." New
     England Journal of Medicine (2020).
[52] Raifman, Matthew A., and Julia R. Raifman. "Disparities in the population at risk
     of severe illness from covid-19 by race/ethnicity and income." American Journal of
     Preventive Medicine (2020).
[53] Ross, Martha, and Nicole Bateman. "Meet the Low-wage Workforce." Metropolitan
     Policy Program at Brookings, 2019.
[54] Rubini, Loris "Can Social Distancing Work in Low Income Countries?," manuscript,
     2020.
[55] Toxvaerd, F. M. O. "Equilibrium social distancing." (2020).
[56] Williamson, E.J., Walker, A.J., Bhaskaran, K. et al. "Factors associated with COVID-
     19-related death using OpenSAFELY." Nature 584, 430­    436 (2020).




                                            35
                                       Technical Appendix


                     Inequality in Life and Death

             Martin Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, Mathias Trabandt




Appendix A                   Equilibrium equations
The model has the following 54 endogenous variables:

                               P1t ; P2t ; Ct ; Nt ; wlt ; wht ;                     lt ;    ht ; bht ;

                               sht ; iht ; rht ; dht ; slt ; ilt ; rlt ; dlt ; ns     i
                                                                                ht ; nht ;

                                                                                    gov
                               nr     s     i     r     s      i      r      s
                                ht ; nlt ; nlt ; nlt ; ch1t ; ch1t ; ch1t ; ch2t ; bt

                               ci        r        s        i        r        s        i        r
                                h 2 t ; ch 2 t ; cl 1 t ; cl 1 t ; cl 1 t ; cl 2 t ; cl 2 t ; cl 2 t ;     lbt ;   hbt ;


                                 l t;      h t;       lst ;    hst ;     lit ;       hit ;    lrt ;      hrt ; Cht ; Clt ;

                               Nlt ; Nht ;          ht ;      lt ; Ult ; Uht


   Exogenous variables:
                                                                          c
                                                                   t,     t,     t   ,

where    t   is an exogenous variable shifting government transfers to low-skilled people.
   We have the following 54 nonlinear equilibrium equations which we solve using a gradient-
based two-point boundary-value algorithm. See the replication ...les available on the authors'
websites for details.
   Market clearing good 1:

        sht cs          i          r          s          i          r             s         i         r
             h1t + iht ch1t + rht ch1t + slt cl1t + ilt cl1t + rlt cl1t = Al slt nlt + ilt nlt + rlt nlt .



                                                                         1
      Budget constraint high-skill household:

                P2t bht+1 + P1t sht cs          i          r              s          i          r
                                     h1t + iht ch1t + rht ch1t + P2t sht ch2t + iht ch2t + rht ch2t

             = wht sht ns         i         r
                        ht + iht nht + rht nht + (1 + r ) P2t bht +                                ht .


      Budget constraint low-skill household:

                            P1t slt cs          i          r               s          i          r
                                     l1t + ilt cl1t + rlt cl1t + P2t (slt cl2t + ilt cl2t + rlt cl2t )

                      = wlt (slt ns         i         r
                                  lt + ilt nlt + rlt nlt ) +                lt .


Good 2 is the numeraire, so:
                                                               P2t = 1.

Labor is paid its marginal product:

                                                          wlt = P1t Al ,

                                                          wht = P2t Ah .

      Aggregate consumption and labor:

                Ct = P1t          sht cs          i          r          s          i          r
                                       h1t + iht ch1t + rht ch1t + slt cl1t + ilt cl1t + rlt cl1t

                          +P2t       sht cs          i          r          s          i          r
                                          h2t + iht ch2t + rht ch2t + slt cl2t + ilt cl2t + rlt cl2t                             ,

                       Nt = slt ns         i         r         s         i         r
                                 lt + ilt nlt + rlt nlt + sht nht + iht nht + rht nht .

      First-order condition (FOC) foreign Bond:
                                                                         P2t+1
                                                 hbt   = (1 + r )                       hbt+1 .
                                                                          P2t
      Population dynamics:
                            s         i
 lt   = (1     t)    1 slt cl1t (iht ch1t   + ilt ci
                                                   l 1t ) +
                                                                      s         i
                                                               2 slt cl2t (iht ch2t      + ilt ci
                                                                                                l 2t ) +
                                                                                                                    s       i
                                                                                                            l3 slt nlt ilt nlt   +   4 slt   (iht + ilt ) ,
                            s         i
 ht   = (1      t)   1 sht ch1t (iht ch1t    + ilt ci
                                                    l 1t ) +
                                                                        s         i
                                                                 2 sht ch2t (iht ch2t         + ilt ci
                                                                                                     l 2t ) +
                                                                                                                        s       i
                                                                                                                h3 sht nht iht nht    +       4 sht   (iht + ilt ) .

      For j 2 fl; hg :

                                            sjt+1 = sjt              jt ,

                                            ijt+1 = (1              jr             dj ) ijt   +   jt ,

                                            rjt+1 = rjt +            jr ijt ,

                                        djt+1 = djt +                dj ijt ,


                                                                    2
                                    c
              mj + 1                t+1       (1            ) log(cs
                                                                   j 1t+1                    c) + 1               c
                                                                                                                  t+1         log(cs
                                                                                                                                   j 2t+1 )
                                    2
                        ns
                         jt+1           +     j t+1         1             t+1      [ 1 cs              i              i
                                                                                        j 1t+1 (iht+1 ch1t+1 + ilt+1 cl1t+1 )
                  2
              + 2 cs              i              i
                   j 2t+1 (iht+1 ch2t+1 + ilt+1 cl2t+1 )

                           s           i
              +       j 3 njt+1 ijt+1 njt+1            +        4   (iht+1 + ilt+1 )]

              +       jbt+1    wjt+1 ns
                                      jt+1                  P1t+1 cs
                                                                   j 1t+1                   P2t+1 cs
                                                                                                   j 2t+1                jst =     +     jst+1   = 0,


                                    c
             mj + 1                 t+1       (1           ) log(ci
                                                                  j 1t+1                    c) + 1                c
                                                                                                                  t+1     log(ci
                                                                                                                               j 2t+1 )
                                         2
                           ni
                            jt+1             +     jbt+1        wjt+1 ni
                                                                       jt+1                   P1t+1 ci
                                                                                                     j 1t+1             P2t+1 ci
                                                                                                                               j 2t+1
                       2
                                                 jit =      +         jit+1     (1            rj          jd )    +     jrt+1 rj       = 0,


                                                 c
                       mj + 1                    t+1     (1               ) log(cr
                                                                                 j 1t+1               c) + 1             c
                                                                                                                         t+1        log(cr
                                                                                                                                         j 2t+1 )
                  2
          nr
           jt+1       +                  r
                           jbt+1 [wjt+1 njt+1                       P1t+1 cr
                                                                           j 1t+1                P2t+1 cr
                                                                                                        j 2t+1 ]               jrt =    +      jrt+1   = 0,
      2



                                                                    j t         jst     +     jit     = 0.

   Consumption ...rst-order conditions (FOCs), susceptibles:

                               c     1                                                                                 i
                      (1       t)                      = P1 t         jbt            j t    (1           t)    1 (iht ch1t     + ilt ci
                                                                                                                                      l1t ),
                                    cs
                                     j 1t          c


                                    c                                                                             i
                          (1        t)            = P2 t            jbt         j t     (1          t)    2 (iht ch2t    + ilt ci
                                                                                                                                l2t ).
                                         cs
                                          j 2t

   Labor supply high skilled, susceptibles:

                                             ns
                                              ht = wht               hbt   +       h t h3        (1                    i
                                                                                                              t ) iht nht .


Sticky wages, low skilled:
                                                                           wlt = wl .

   Further FOCs:
                                                                     c      1
                                                       (1            t)                      = P1 t       jbt ,
                                                                           ci
                                                                            j 1t        c

                                                                                    3
                                                    c
                                          (1        t)            = P2 t               jbt ,
                                                         ci
                                                          j 2t

                                                ni
                                                 ht = wht                      hbt ,




                                                    ni     s
                                                     lt = nlt ,




                                               c     1
                                       (1      t)                          = P1 t         jbt ,
                                                    cr
                                                     j 1t         c


                                                    c
                                          (1        t)            = P2 t               jbt ,
                                                         cr
                                                          j 2t



                                                nr
                                                 ht = wht                      hbt ,


                                                    nr     s
                                                     lt = nlt .


   Government transfers to low-skill people:

                                                         lt   =        t   ,

where   t   is an exogenous shifter of transfers to low-skill people.
   Government budget with international borrowing by the government and lump-sum tax
rule:

                 bgov
                  t+1     ht   (sht + iht + rht ) =               lt   (slt + ilt + rlt ) + (1 + r )bgov
                                                                                                     t ,

                                               ht    = 0 for t = 1:::104,

                          ht   (sht + iht + rht ) =               r bgov
                                                                     t   for t                    104.

   Total consumption expenditures and total labor supplied by high- and low-skill people:

             Cht = P1t sht cs          i          r              s          i          r
                            h1t + iht ch1t + rht ch1t + P2t sht ch2t + iht ch2t + rht ch2t ,


                Clt = P1t slt cs          i          r              s          i          r
                               l1t + ilt cl1t + rlt cl1t + P2t slt cl2t + ilt cl2t + rlt cl2t ,




                                       Nlt = slt ns         i         r
                                                  lt + ilt nlt + rlt nlt ,



                                                              4
                                 Nht = sht ns         i         r
                                            ht + iht nht + rht nht .


   Utility:

                                c                                                                               2
     Ujt = sjt mj + (1          t ) (1     ) log(cs
                                                  j 1t      c) + (1     c
                                                                        t)        log(cs
                                                                                       j 2t )             ns
                                                                                                           jt
                                                                                                  2
                                  c                                                                                 2
              +ijt mj + (1        t ) (1     ) log(ci
                                                    j 1t      c) + (1    c
                                                                         t)         log(ci
                                                                                         j 2t )            ni
                                                                                                            jt
                                                                                                      2
                                  c                                                                                 2
              +rjt mj + (1        t ) (1     ) log(cr
                                                    j 1t      c) + (1        c
                                                                             t)     log(cr
                                                                                         j 2t )            nr
                                                                                                            jt
                                                                                                      2
              + Ujt+1 .

By Walras'law, the market clearing condition for good 2 is redundant and hence not included
in the above system of equilibrium equations:

                  bht+1 + (slt cs          i          r            s          i          r
                                l2t + ilt cl2t + rlt cl2t ) + sht ch2t + iht ch2t + rht ch2t

              = Ah sht ns         i         r
                        ht + iht nht + rht nht + (1 + r ) bht .




Appendix B                Pre-Epidemic Steady state
Assuming no containment and no transfers in the pre-epidemic steady state we obtain:

                                             sl = 1        sh ,


                                                    1
                                             r =            1,



                                                P2 = 1.

   After repeated substitutions we obtain the following system of seven core steady-state
equations with seven unknowns:

                                     sh c s        s            s
                                          h1 + sl cl1 = Al (sl nl ) ,


                          P1 s h c s           s               s
                                   h1 + P2 sh ch2 = P2 Ah (sh nh ) + r P2 bh ,




                              P1 (sl cs              s                 s
                                      l1 ) + P2 (sl cl2 ) = P1 Al (sl nl ) ,


                                                    5
                                                            1           P2
                                            ns
                                             h = Ah                        ,
                                                           cs
                                                            h1        c P1
                                                               1
                                              ns
                                               l = Al                         ,
                                                              cs
                                                               l1         c
                                              1         P2
                                                           = s ,
                                             cs
                                              h1      c P1  c h2

                                             1
                                                          = P1                    .
                                            cs
                                             l1      c              P2 c s
                                                                         l2

   Substituting out yields the following three equations:

                                            P2      A2
                                                     h 1                P2                         r P2 b h
                         (cs
                           h1     c) =                                                     cs
                                                                                            h1 +            ,
                   1                        P1         cs
                                                        h1            c P1                          s h P1

                                                      Al 1
                                sl c s
                                     l 1 = Al s l                                     sh c s
                                                                                           h1 ,
                                                         cs
                                                          l1          c

                                                                       A2
                                                                        l (1                )
                                cs
                                 l1 +              (cs
                                                     l1       c) =                            .
                                        1                                 cs
                                                                           l1               c
   We solve these equations numerically for cs     s
                                             l1 ; ch1 and P1 : Using this information we, cal-

culate the remaining steady state variables:

                                                   wl = P1 Al ,


                                                          1 1
                                            ns
                                             l = wl                               ,
                                                          P 1 cs
                                                               l1             c
                                                     P 2 Ah 1
                                            ns
                                             h =                                  ,
                                                        P1 cs
                                                            h1                c


                                               cs
                                                l2 =      P2 1
                                                                       ,
                                                          P1 cs
                                                              l1 c




                                              cs
                                               h2 =       P2 1
                                                                          ,
                                                          P1 cs
                                                              h1 c




                         C = P1 (sh cs        s              s        s
                                     h1 + sl cl1 ) + P2 (sh ch2 + sl cl2 ),


                                             N = sl n s     s
                                                      l + n h sh ,


                                                          6
                                                                    1 1
                                                          bj   =                    ,
                                                                    P1 c s
                                                                         j1     c
                                                         ci      r      s
                                                          j 1 = cj 1 = cj 1 ,

                                                         ci      r      s
                                                          j 2 = cj 2 = cj 2 ,

                                                          ni    r    s
                                                           j = nj = nj .

Finally,

                                                                   ij = 0,

                                                                   rj = 0,

                                                               dj = 0,

                                                                    j   = 0,


                    s                1               mj + (1 ) log(cs
                                                                    j1                  c) + log(cs j2)
                    j   =                                s 2                                                      ,
                             1=           1           2
                                                        nj + bj wj ns j                 P1 c j 1 P2 c s
                                                                                             s
                                                                                                      j2

                    r                 1              mj + (1     ) log(cr
                                                                        j1              c) + log(cr   j2)
                    j    =                                 r 2            r                                       ,
                                1=        1           2
                                                         n j   +  bj [w n
                                                                       j j              P1 c j 1 P 2 c r
                                                                                             r
                                                                                                       j2]

    i                       1                                  mj + (1 ) log(ci
                                                                              j1 c) + log(ci j2)
    j   =                                                       i 2        i     i       i                                    r      ,
            1=      (1           rj           jd )       2
                                                               nj + bj wj nj P1 cj 1 P2 cj 2 +                                j rj



                                                                        i      s
                                                               j   =    j      j.

where j 2 fh; lg :


                                               Ch = P1 (sh cs              s
                                                            h1 ) + P2 (sh ch2 ) ,




                                                     Cl = P1 sl cs             s
                                                                 l 1 + P2 sl c l 2 ,

                                                               Nl = s l n s
                                                                          l,

                                                             Nh = s h n s
                                                                        h,



                            1                                                                                         2
                 Uj =                sj mj + (1                ) log(cs
                                                                      j1       c) + log(cs
                                                                                         j2)                 ns
                                                                                                              j           .
                        1                                                                              2

                                                                        7
Appendix C                                    Calibration of transmission parameters
The parameters of the transmission functions are pinned down as follows:

 t    =        lt   +      ht   =    1   (slt cs          s           i          i
                                               l1t + sht ch1t ) (iht ch1t + ilt cl1t ) +                          2   (slt cs          s           i          i
                                                                                                                            l2t + sht ch2t ) (iht ch2t + ilt cl2t )

                                s       i                    s       i
           +            l3 slt nlt ilt nlt    +      h3 sht nht iht nht          +       4   (slt + sht ) (iht + ilt ) ,

     or

           0           (sl0 cs  l1 + sh0 ch1 ) (ih0 ch1 + il0 cl1 ) + 2 (sl0 cl2 + sh0 ch2 ) (ih0 ch2 + il0 cl2 )
                                     1
                                               s         i               i           s          s          i i
                  =
     (ih0 + il0 )                                                     (ih0 + il0 )
                      ( l 3 s l 0 n l il 0 n l + h 3 s h 0 n h i h 0 n i
                                    s        i               s
                                                                       h ) + 4 (sl0 + sh0 ) (ih0 + il0 )
                    +                                                                                    .
                                                            (ih0 + il0 )
     Note that:
                                                                      ih0 = sh ",il0 = sl ",



                                                             sh0 = sh             sh ",sl0 = sl               sl ",

                                                                              1 = sh + sl .

So that

                    0
                                =         1   (sl cs          s          i         i
                                                   l 1 + sh c h1 ) (sh c h1 + sl c l 1 ) +                   2   (sl cs          s          i         i
                                                                                                                      l 2 + sh c h2 ) (sh c h2 + sl c l 2 )
          (1        ") "
                                                           s      i                s      i
                                      +           l 3 sl n l sl n l   +    h3 sh n h sh n h        +        4.


     We impose the following conditions to calibrate the transmission function parameters
(see the main text for more details):
                                                                                                                                 1=12
                                                                      z                                            }|                                                             {
                                                                                  s        s          i        i                                   s        s          i        i
                                                                          1 (s  c
                                                                               l l1 + s  c
                                                                                        h h1 ) ( s  c
                                                                                                   h h1 + s l l1 +
                                                                                                             c   )                         2 (s  c
                                                                                                                                                l l2 + s  c
                                                                                                                                                         h h2 ) ( s  c
                                                                                                                                                                    h h2 + s  c
                                                                                                                                                                             l l2 )
                                                        1 =                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                 (1 ")"
                                                                                       s      i                   s      i
                                                                          (   l 3 sl n l sl n l   +       h3 sh n h sh n h )                4
                                                                      +                               0
                                                                                                                                 +          0
                                                                                                (1 ")"                                   (1 ")"
                                                                          |                       {z                         }       | {z }
                                                                                                  5=12                                   6=12
                                                  s      i                                s      i
                                         l 3 sl n l sl n l    = 20                h3 sh n h sh n h


 1   (sl cs        s         i        i
          l1 + sh ch1 ) (sh ch1 + sl cl1 ) = 1:05                                    2   (sl cs          s          i         i
                                                                                              l 2 + sh c h2 ) (sh c h2 + sl c l 2 )

                    dlt + dht + rlt + rht = 0:6 for t ! 1.


                                                                                      8
