                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     VACCINE HESITANCY, PASSPORTS AND THE DEMAND FOR VACCINATION

                                        Joshua S. Gans

                                      Working Paper 29075
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29075


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




Thanks to Ajay Agrawal, Avi Goldfarb and Richard Holden for helpful discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Vaccine Hesitancy, Passports and the Demand for Vaccination
Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 29075
July 2021
JEL No. I12,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

Vaccine hesitancy is modelled as an endogenous decision within a behavioural SIR model with
endogenous agent activity. It is shown that policy interventions that directly target costs
associated with vaccine adoption may counter vaccine hesitancy while those that manipulate the
utility of unvaccinated agents will either lead to the same or lower rates of vaccine adoption. This
latter effect arises with vaccine passports whose effects are mitigated in equilibrium by reductions
in viral/disease prevalence that themselves reduce the demand for vaccination.


Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
joshua.gans@rotman.utoronto.ca
1       Introduction
Vaccine hesitancy, whereby individuals elect not to be vaccinated, has been a long-standing
issue in public health. During the Covid-19 pandemic, such factors have meant that the
adoption of vaccines has been short of what might generate lasting herd immunity in many
populations. This has led to the creation of incentives to stimulate adoption, education
campaigns to provide information on vaccine safety and calls for vaccine passports.
    One factor that has been documented to counter vaccine hesitancy has been the preva-
lence of the relevant virus/disease itself. Oster (2018) found that an outbreak in a county in
the year prior led to a 28 percent increase in childhood vaccinations. This raises an interest-
ing question: If vaccine adoption reduces prevalence, does that very adoption drive observed
vaccine hesitancy? And if there is an endogenous behavioural effect, does this change the
impact of proposed policies to counter hesitancy?
    This paper examines this issue. In so doing, vaccine adoption is endogenously driven by
prevalence and vice versa. In addition, the underlying model is a behavioural epidemiolog-
ical model where individuals can take costly social distancing actions to manage their own
infection risk if they remain unvaccinated. The simple model presented here demonstrates
that this can have a significant impact on the efficacy of various interventions to counter
hesitancy. Blanket incentives/education for vaccination involve infra-marginal effects that
are costly which limit their desirability as a means of encouraging vaccination. More crit-
ically, it is demonstrated that vaccine passports are ineffective (in this model, completely
ineffective) at improving vaccination rates and may reduce them as the restrictions imposed
by passports reduce prevalence. This implies that while vaccine passports (or credentials)
may be useful in assuring others that someone has a lower risk of being infectious, they are
unlikely to be useful as a punitive tool to counter vaccine hesitancy.
    The literature on the economics of vaccines has proven more subtle than the textbook
treatments of vaccination would suggest. These often state that vaccine adoption is, liter-
ally, a textbook example of a positive externality and so requires government intervention to
encourage adoption and reduce free-riding. But as Francis (1997) demonstrated, when em-
bodied within an epidemiological model of viral spread, those externalities do not necessarily
manifest themselves in terms of socially suboptimal vaccinations. Indeed, he shows that with
homogeneous agents and a perfect vaccination but for their personal cost of vaccination, the
decentralised and socially optimal vaccination outcomes coincide.1
    This paper builds on Francis (1997) and present a model with his underlying structure
    1
      Chen and Toxvaerd (2014) demonstrate that when agents are heterogeneous and vaccination is imper-
fect, this equivalence not longer holds. See also Gersovitz (2003) and Toxvaerd and Rowthorn (2020).



                                                  2
of homogeneous agents but for vaccination costs and the introduction of a perfectly effec-
tive vaccine. But as policies such as vaccine passports involve costly restrictions on agent
activity, a behavioural model is built where agents endogenously choose their activity/social
distancing (using a similar structure to Toxvaerd (2020) but with discrete time).2 Auld and
Toxvaerd (2021) present preliminary evidence that vaccinations did impact on people's social
activity in the Covid-19 pandemic. The focus here is not on the social optimality of any
policies per se but their impact on total vaccination take-up.
    The paper proceeds as follows. First, the standard susceptible-infected-recovered (or SIR)
model is presented followed by its behavioural analog. Second, vaccines are introduced and
the equilibrium with both endogenous activity and vaccine adoption is analysed. To resolve
technical issues associated with non-stationarity, the analytical shortcut outlined in Gans
(2020b) is utilised. Finally, various policies are explored and their impact on vaccination rates
is characterised. A final section concludes with a list of the paper's obvious shortcomings in
the hope of infecting someone to overcome them.


2       The Standard SIR Model
Let {S (t), I (t), R(t)} denote the shares (and levels) of the population (normalised to be of
size 1 over a continuum of agents) who are either susceptible to the virus, infected with the
virus or removed (i.e., recovered or dead) from the virus at time t  0. It is assumed that
time is discrete. In the SIR model, these variables are assumed to evolve according to the
following dynamic equations:

                                     S (t + 1) - S (t) = -S (t)I (t)

                                   I (t + 1) - I (t) = (S (t) -  )I (t)

                                        R(t + 1) - R(t) = I (t)

Here  is the probability that an infected person will be removed in any given period while
 is the probability that a susceptible person will become infected by an infected person in
a given period. Observe that the number of infections in the population will be falling (i.e.,
I (t + 1) < I (t)) if 
                       S (t) < 1 and will be rising (i.e., I (t + 1) > I (t)) if 
                                                                                  S (t) > 1. The LHS of
these inequalities is the effective reproduction number, Rt . Since S (0)  1, then R0 =           
                                                                                                   . R0
    2
     Talam`
          as and Vohra (2020) also show that behavioural effects can impact on vaccination by changing
the network of interactions ­ similar in spirit to Kremer (1996). However, their focus is on whether imperfect
vaccines may create increased prevalence rather than on vaccine adoption per se which is costless in their
model.



                                                      3
is the basic reproduction number which has the interpretation as the total expected number
of infections one infectious person will create over the life of their infection.
    Vaccination is a way of moving people from the susceptible to the recovered population
segments. It is assumed here that vaccination is perfect. Of key interest in this model
is the herd immunity threshold that is reached when S (t) becomes low enough, through
either acquired or vaccinated immunity, so that Rt < 1. This threshold, for 1 - S (t) is
      1
1- R   0
         . A goal of many vaccination programs is to ensure that the total of the recovered
and vaccinated shares exceeds this threshold allowing the pandemic to abate without any
further interventions.3


3       The Behavioural SIR Model
The fact that the standard SIR model lacked behavioural elements has not been lost on
epidemiologists. In particular, it has been recognised that people might observe current
prevalence (that is, I (t)) and modify their own behaviour so as to reduce infection risk.
However, the mathematical epidemiologists have typically taken what economists would call
a `reduced-form' approach to this. For instance, they might posit a variable, x  [0, 1], that
is a filter reducing the impact of  on new infections. That variable is then assumed to be
a decreasing function of I (t); e.g., x(I (t)).4


3.1     Literature Review
Work in economics to include behavioural elements in models of epidemics started in earnest
with the study of the spread of AIDS; e.g., Philipson and Posner (1993), Geoffard and Philip-
son (1996), Kremer (1996) and empirically by Greenwood et al. (2019). The pioneering
treatment that first introduced forward-looking, rational economic agents into epidemiolog-
ical models was provided by Gersovitz and Hammer (2004). They explored the different
effects that prevention versus a treatment might have on the dynamics of epidemics. In
doing this, they were able to clarify the externalities that may be present and the efficacy of
various forms of interventions (including taxes and subsidies) to improve social welfare. The
literature is now extensive and has been reviewed by Philipson (2000) and Gersovitz (2011)
and, more recently, Gans (2020b) and McAdams (2021). The models of Toxvaerd (2020)
    3
      This is not to say that further vaccination beyond this threshold may be worthwhile as infections and
health costs can continue thereafter. See Gans (2020c) for a discussion.
    4
      See for example, Eksin et al. (2019) who also explore assumptions where x(I (t), R(t)) is decreasing in
both variables, that they argue is a model of `long-term awareness' in contrast to `short-term awareness'
where x is a function of I (t) alone.



                                                     4
and Rachel (2020) examine microfounded models of endogenous social distancing comparing
how decentralised outcomes compare with socially optimal outcomes.
    In relation to vaccination, Rowthorn and Toxvaerd (2020) examines the appropriate mix
of prevention and treatment while Goodkin-Gold et al. (2020) looks at vaccine pricing where
epidemiological effects are anticipated and influenced. Makris and Toxvaerd (2020) examines
how behaviour responds to the imminent arrival of a vaccine ­ showing that it tends to induce
more caution. None of these behavioural models examine vaccine hesitancy that is the focus
here.


3.2    Model Setup
For simplicity, it is assumed that all agents are the same in terms of their preference for
activity and in terms of their costs of becoming infected. (Below, they will differ in terms of
their preferences to being vaccinated).
    Agents choose their level of activity, xi  [0, 1]. This activity gives them a per period
utility value of u(x) where, for simplicity, this has a functional form of u - (1 - x)c (for
u  c. Agents have a common discount factor of  < 1. If an agent becomes infected,
they incur an additional loss, L, in utility unless they die in which case they can incur no
utility thereafter. An infected agent has a probability,  of becoming no longer infectious in
each period they are infected. At that point, with probability , they survive and become
immune. Otherwise, they die. Either way they are part of R, the set of removed agents.
    An agent's activity choices at t are determined by the condition, {S, I, R}, they are in
at that time. If they are part of R and have not died, they are no longer infectious or at
risk. Hence, they will set their activity, xR = 1 and will earn an expected present discounted
            u
payoff of 1-  
               . In this, there is an implicit assumption that a recovery means a full recovery
to the utility they would earn had the epidemic not emerged.


3.3    Infected Agent Activity
For an infected agent (a member of I ), they are infectious and sick. Their instantaneous
utility is u - (1 - xI )c - L and their expected discounted payoff is:

                  VI (t) = u - (1 - xI )c - L +  VR + (1 -  )VI (t + 1)

                    u
where here VR =  1-   
                       . Note that, being self-interested, infected agents set x
                                                                               ^I = 1 in each
period and, thus, their expected discounted payoff becomes:



                                              5
                                                             u
                                           u - L +  (1 -  ) 1- 
                                    VI =
                                                  1 - 

3.4    Susceptible Agent Activity
For both the infected and recovered agents, their choice of economic activity is not impacted
upon by the state variables, {I (t), S (t)}. Thus, the key to the behavioural approach to
epidemiology are the choices of the susceptible. Their instantaneous utility is u - (1 - xS )c
and their expected discounted payoff is:

         VS (t) = u - (1 - xS )c +  p(xS , x
                                           ^I I (t))VI + (1 - p(xS , x
                                                                     ^I I (t)))VS (t + 1)

where p(xS , xI I (t)) is probability that an agent becomes infected at time t (the consequences
of which are felt at time t + 1).
    The structure of p(xS , xI I (t)) depends upon how activity translates into an individual's
risk of infection. The standard SIR model assumes that susceptible individuals face a proba-
bility,  , of becoming infected if they interact with an infected individual. Thus, it is natural
to posit that p(xS , xI I (t)) = xS xI I (t).
    A susceptible individual will choose xS (t) to maximise VS (t) holding the state variables
and their future path as given. Given this, note that:
                                
                                 0 c < xI I (t) (VS (t + 1) - VI )
                                
                            x
                            ^S = x c = xI I (t) (VS (t + 1) - VI )                           (BEH)
                                
                                1 c > x I (t) (V (t + 1) - V )
                                
                                        I         S            I


where x  (0, 1). Given this, the utility of a susceptible agent is:
                            
                             u-c
                                                c < xI I (t) (VS (t + 1) - VI )
                             1-
                            
                     ^S =
                     V        u-c
                                                c = xI I (t) (VS (t + 1) - VI )             (UTL-S)
                             1-
                            
                             u+xI I (t)VI
                            
                                                c > xI I (t) (VS (t + 1) - VI )
                              1- (1-xI I (t))


To anticipate, in the equilibrium examined below, x^S = x and so agents will earn utility as
if they were setting xS = 0. This represents the lower-bound on the utility of a susceptible
agent.




                                                  6
3.5     Equilibrium Analysis
Given this choice, the equilibrium outcome depends on the evolution of state variables taking
into account the choices of all agents. The simple specification for p(.) used above provides
a natural way of aggregating into the expected path for the state variables, {I (t), S (t)}.
    Let XS (t)  xS S (t). The expected number of new infecteds is equal to XS (t)I (t) while
each period I (t) infecteds are removed. Thus,

                                 I (t + 1) - I (t) = (XS (t) -  )I (t)

By construction, this also means the total number of susceptibles declines by:

                                   S (t + 1) - S (t) = -XS (t)I (t)

Note that if xS = 1 for all susceptible agents, then XS (t) = S (t) and the above two equations
become the same as the standard SIR model. It can be seen here that the time path of
{XS (t), ....} determines the net presented expected value of continuing to be susceptible
and, thus, the incentives to undertake activity at time t.
     This non-stationarity makes this whole thing a pain in the neck and has been a challenge
to forward-looking SIR models (see McAdams (2021) for a discussion). Rachel (2020) char-
acterises this equilibrium and shows that infection rates are such that Rt is just below 1 and
so fall over time. However, he uses various approximations in order to analyse policies in
the model. Gans (2020b) argues for an analytical shortcut inspired by SIS epidemiological
models (that do have stationary equilibria). The idea is to focus on conditions under which
I (t + 1) = I (t) for an interval of time (which is also what Rachel (2020)'s approximations
do). The condition is a simple one: S (t + 1) = S (t) = S for all t.5
     Note first that, from the law of motion in the SIR model and noting that x ^I = 1 we have:

                                                   I (t+1)-I (t)
                                                        I (t)
                                                                   +
                                        XS (t) =                                                     (EPI)
                                                           
With this shortcut, we can combine x                                  ^ S (I (t)), and explore equilibria
                                           ^S , setting this equal to X
in which I (t + 1) = I (t) for all t. When this condition is satisfied then x       ^S (t + 1) = x
                                                                                                 ^S (t) for
all t which carries over to, X ^ S (I (t)). Importantly, this means that:
   5
     It is immediately is apparent that this condition violates the laws of motion of the SIR model whenever
 > 0. As an accounting measure, it simply cannot be the case that some infected individuals are recovered
(or strictly speaking) removed and S (t) is not falling over time.




                                                     7
                                                                        ^ S (I  ) = 1
                                                ^ S (I (t)) -  )I (t) = X
                      I (t + 1) - I (t) = 0 = ( X                                                       (EQM)
                                                                                    R0
This implies that the equilibrium effective reproduction number,

                                            ^ =X
                                            R  ^ S (I  )R0 = 1

Thus, prevalence will neither rise nor decline in equilibrium and this pins down that equi-
librium steady state of infected agents.6
    I  can be found by solving BEH at the point where susceptible agents are indifferent
between being infected or not. This gives:

                              c                     (1 -  )(1 -  )c
                I =                   =
                           (VS - VI )    (1 -  ) (1 - )u + (1 -  )L - (1 -  )c

Given the analytical shortcut, this should be interpreted as an equilibrium prevalence that
is mainly driven by exogenous model parameters than endogenous state variables during
much of any pandemic.7 To the extent that there are reductions in S (t) overtime, these
reductions result in an increase in X^ S such that the probability of being infected remains
constant overtime.


4       Vaccine Availability and Adoption
We now consider what happens when a vaccine becomes available. We will assume that the
vaccine is perfect in that it allows a susceptible agent to be moved to the recovered category.
Thus, an agent choosing to be vaccinated at t, will receive a benefit of VR - VS (t). Note
that VS (t) will change overtime and be impacted by the number of vaccinated people. In
particular, the benefits from being vaccinated are typically higher when I (t) is increased for
t and beyond (Philipson (2000)).
    To model vaccine hesitancy, agents must face an individual cost associated with being
vaccinated. While the sources of such costs are nuanced and a mixture of real costs and
perceived costs (MacDonald et al. (2015)), here we abstract from these sources by capturing
them in a single parameter, .  > 0 is an on-going reduction in utility from being vaccinated.
    6
     It can readily be seen that this equilibrium exists if R0 > 1. When I (t) = 0, all agents set x
                                                                                                   ^S = 1
so that X^ S (0) = 1. At this point XS (0) = 1 which is less than 1. On the other hand, if I (t) = 1,
                                                R0
          1-I (t-1)
                      +
XS (1) = I (t-1)                ^ S (I (t))  0. As all of the relevant functions are continuous, there is a fixed
                      > 0 while X
                      
point where I (t) = I .
    7
      Note that this is the same outcome as Rachel (2020)'s approximations.


                                                       8
It is assumed that  is distributed amongst the population according to the distribution
function, F ().
    Each period after a vaccine is available, an agent chooses whether to vaccinate or not
and, if not, want level of activity to choose. The following proposition characterises the
equilibrium outcome:

Proposition 1 If a vaccine becomes available at t, all agents for whom   c will be vacci-
                                                                                   1
nated and no additional vaccinations will be chosen after t. If (1 - F (c))S (t) < R 0
                                                                                       , prevalence
will decrease, otherwise it will remain constant at I  .

Proof. First note that, regardless of the number of susceptible agents, S in the population,
in equilibrium, so long as S R0  1, the equilibrium prevalence will be I  and the flow utility
of a susceptible agent will be u - c + VS . By contrast, should an agent become vaccinated
                                                                          -
at t rather than t - 1, their flow utility is u -  + VR where VR = u     1-
                                                                             . Thus, it is easy to
see that all agents for whom   c will be vaccinated and the total share of the population
who become vaccinated at t will be F (c)S (t) with R(t) + F (c)S (t) being immune.
    Second, if (1 - F (c))S (t) < R 1
                                      0
                                        , then even if all susceptible agents choose x^S = 1, I 
will not be sustainable and prevalence will fall. This results in VS (t) > V    ^S and, thus, no
additional vaccinations will arise.
    Third, if (1 - F (c))S (t)  R   1
                                     0
                                        , then the original equilibrium prevalence, I  , will be
maintained. This will also not induce any agents to be vaccinated as vaccinations will
continue to be determined by whether c is greater than  or not. Thus, no additional
vaccinations will arise.

While prevalence, I (t), impacts on VS (t) meaning that, other things being equal, an increase
in I (t) will induce some agents to vaccinate even if  > c, the equilibrium effects that arise
from agents' endogenous activity choices immiserise this effect. Thus, all susceptible agents
will be indifferent between being infected or susceptible. Moreover, the level of vaccinations
in the population do not impact on prevalence so long as Rt  1. Thus, all agents for
whom c   will choose to vaccinate immediately while others will never choose to vaccinate
thereafter. Of course, if the availability of the vaccine means that R < 1 and I (t) will fall
below I  . However, this will mean that agents with  > c will have no further inducement
to be vaccinated.
    This result relies critically on the fact that when Rt  1, I  is a constant which, in turn,
is derived from the analytical shortcut. However, as Rachel (2020) shows (see also McAdams
(2021)), in behavioural models, I (t), will be likely to fall over time as agents anticipate a
point where x  ^S = 1 and the net harm from becoming infected is increasing in t. Given this,
it remains the case that all those who want to be vaccinated, will be vaccinated at time t.

                                                9
5       Policies to Counter Hesitancy
5.1     Lowering vaccine cost
The first set of policies targets the cost  associated with being vaccinated. While this may
include persuasion and educational efforts, it is also the case that a direct monetary subsidy,
 , could also increase vaccination rates.8
    While a welfare analysis involves subtle trade-offs, if we take a view, common amongst
public health officials, that vaccination rates should be the minimum amount to cause Rt to
fall below 1 (see also Budish (2020)), then we would set  so that:

                                                                   1
                                        (1 - F (c +  ))S (t) <
                                                                   R0

That is,  is set to achieve herd immunity.
    Note that, under our assumptions, in the absence of an intervention, agents who were
previously infected and have recovered from the disease would not choose to vaccinated as
they already do not socially distance, and so do not incur c, and face a strictly positive
cost  from being vaccinated. However, for those whom  > , they will choose to be
vaccinated under the intervention. Given this, the total cost of the subsidy program would
be  F (c +  )S (t) + F ( )R(t) in order to achieve a marginal effect on vaccine hesitancy of
(F (c +  ) - F (c))S (t).


5.2     Vaccine passports
Another set of policies targets the utility of susceptible agents; namely, reducing that util-
ity. The primary example of this is the vaccine passport. A passport policy restricts that
activity, x, of all agents who do not show proof of vaccination. This is done by restricting ac-
tivity of certain types or perhaps restricting other aspects of activity (such as mask-wearing
requirements).
    Here a simple view of a passport policy is taken and it is assumed that the policy caps the
activity of all unvaccinated agents at x  ¯. The idea here could be that activity along the [0, 1]
dimension is ranked from those that are most essential (close to 0) to those that are most
optional (close to 1). Unvaccinated agents are prohibited from the most optimal activities
where x > x  ¯.9 A benefit of this is that infected agents are kept away from those activities as
    8
      For instance Chevalier et al. (2021) show that locating distribution centres closer to lower income neigh-
bourhoods increases vaccination rates. Brehm et al. (2021) provide an analysis of lotteries in encouraging
vaccinations.
    9
      There are other ways of modelling passports. For instance, distinct activities could be explicitly mod-


                                                      10
are those who are still susceptible. In this way, one side-effect of this policy is to potentially
reduce disease prevalence.
    Note, first, that one impact of this policy is to limit the activities of recovered and infected
agents. In the absence of a restriction, they would set x = 1. For the recovered agent, this
is a pure welfare loss but it now means that those for whom (1 - x      ¯)c   will be vaccinated.
Even though their status is temporary, infected agents for whom (1 - x          ¯)c   will also be
vaccinated. However, as a matter of practice, this is the same as a recovered agent being
vaccinated as vaccine dose regimens likely last more than the infectious period for most
diseases. For practical purposes, however, we can treat infected people as unvaccinated and,
thus, by implication, their activity is restricted to x ¯.
    The target of the passport policy are the susceptible agents ­ both to counter hesitancy
and protect them. The protection element is subtle. Given the restrictions on activity
(and assuming they bind on the susceptible agents), the probability that a susceptible agent
becomes infected is now  x  ¯2 I (t) as both infected agents and susceptible agents are potentially
restricted in their activity. However, while this is possible in terms of exposure probabilities,
the fact that infected agents and susceptible agents are restricted to the same activities
means that the probability that a given agent a susceptible agent encounters is infected is
equal to the portion of infected people in the population unadjusted for activity level. Thus,
following the spirit of analyses such as Kremer (1996) and Talam`        as and Vohra (2020), it is
reasonable to suppose that the probability of infection remains at most  x        ¯I (t).
    Suppose, for the moment, that a susceptible agent who becomes infected and then recov-
ers, will prefer not to be vaccinated if they had chosen not to be vaccinated while susceptible.
(This will be checked in equilibrium). In this case, for unvaccinated agents, we have:

                                                   u - (1 - x
                                                            ¯)c
                                           VR =
                                                      1-

                                               ¯)c +  (1 -  ) u-1
                                  u - L - (1 - x                (1-x
                                                                  -
                                                                    ¯)c
                             VI =
                                                 1 - 
Note that, consistent with the assumption, (1 - x   ¯)c <  for these agents. The lower x  ¯ is,
the lower are the utilities from being infected and then recovered. This will impact on the
incentives of a susceptible agent in their choice of activity as it removes one of the benefits
from being infected ­ not having to manage the risk of infection.
   To examine this choice, note that the marginal condition c = I (t) VS (t + 1) - VI can
elled. However, the approach here surfaces the first-order effects and, thus, keeps the analysis simple.




                                                     11
be solved to yield the prevalence if susceptible agents are not constrained by x
                                                                               ¯:

                                           (1 -  )(1 -  )c
            I =
                    (1 - )(1 -  )(u - c) - 1 -  +  (1 -  ) x
                                                           ¯c + (1 -  )L

                                                                                                -c
Importantly, I  is increasing in x ¯. This is because, when xS is unconstrained, then VS = u   1-
while VI is decreasing in x¯. Thus, reducing x ¯ makes VS - VI larger and so susceptible agents
are more likely to be cautious in equilibrium.
    However, in terms of the choice of whether to vaccinate or not, anticipation of this
equilibrium outcome means that the choice is identical to the case where there is no vaccine
passport. It is easy to see that susceptible agents will only prefer to vaccinate if c  . Thus,
while reducing x ¯ reduces prevalence of the virus, it does not change the equilibrium amount
of vaccination by susceptible agents. As for recovered agents, some will choose not to be
vaccinated if (1 - x^)c < . Thus, our earlier supposition that susceptible agents who choose
to not be vaccinated will not subsequently become vaccinated holds.
                                                                              
    Thusfar, the analysis has assumed that x    ^S  x ¯. Recall that x
                                                                     ^S = S   (t)
                                                                                  . This condition
is more likely to be satisfied if R0 and/or S (t) are high. Vaccination, however, reduces S (t)
and as a lower x ¯ decreases I  , we need to check whether this is possible in equilibrium.
    To examine this, suppose now that x     ^S > x ¯ and so the vaccine passport constrains all
                                                                           1
agents who are not vaccinated. Note that this implies that S (t)¯    x< R   0
                                                                              and so I (t) will be
falling over time. Given this constraint, note that:

                                       u - (1 - x
                                                ¯)c +  x ¯I (t)VI
                                VS =
                                          1 -  (1 -  x¯I (t))
                                                                 -c
In particular, as c > I (t) (VS - VI ), then this VS exceeds u  1-
                                                                     that arises when activity is
unconstrained. Because activity involves an externality on all susceptible agents, constrain-
ing activity causes the utility of a susceptible agent to rise. Thus, as VR is unchanged, this
implies that the incentive to vaccinate, VR - VS , will fall as x¯ is reduced. This means that
the total number of vaccinated susceptibles will be lower than F (c)S (t).
   The above analysis can be summarised in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 A vaccine passport policy with restriction x    ¯ on unvaccinated agents will
result in either the same or fewer vaccinated susceptibles compared with the case where there
is no vaccine passport.

In summary, either the vaccine passport restrictions bind on susceptible agents or they do
not. If they do not bind, those restrictions reduce the utility of infected/recovered agents


                                               12
which makes susceptible agents more cautious in equilibrium. The equilibrium prevalence
adjusts to this making susceptible agents indifferent in terms of activity levels chosen. Thus,
their utility remains as if they chose to mitigate all activity. This leaves the gain from being
vaccinated the same as when there were no vaccine passports. If the restrictions do bind on
vaccinated agents, prevalence is reduced and this increases the utility of susceptible agents as
they receive more by meeting the constraint than choosing a zero level of activity. This means
that the gain from vaccination is lower than when there were no vaccine passports. Hence,
passports, at best, do not counter vaccine hesitancy and, at worse, increase it. Moreover,
as discussed earlier, passports lead to unnecessary vaccinations from recovered agents or to
unnecessary restrictions on their activity. Thus, they are likely to be strictly suboptimal for
a social welfare perspective.
    This analysis focuses purely on the motivation to use vaccine passports as a means of
overcoming hesitancy. When a vaccine is imperfect (as all vaccines are) and some people
cannot be vaccinated because the medical costs will always be too high, then a passport can
be useful in assessing the riskiness of interactions between people and protecting unvaccinated
people from becoming infected. In that sense, like testing, it is a means of overcoming the
pandemic information problem (Gans (2020a)). Thus, a vaccine passport is not a set of rights
per se but, instead, a means of efficiently communicating risk. For this reason, many countries
in managing Covid-19 are adopting credentials that signal low risk for a person if they have
been vaccinated or if they have received a recent negative test. In certain environments, such
as higher risk health or aged care facilities, vaccines can become mandatory to protect some
who are not vaccinated or who face higher risks with imperfect vaccines. However, this is
not a tool of overcoming hesitancy per se but overall protection of the vulnerable.


6    Conclusions
The model here exposes some first-order interactions between vaccine hesitancy, social dis-
tancing and various policy interventions. However, like the work of Francis (1997) that is
based on, it is simplified and the results may not be robust to the introduction of aug-
mentations to the epidemic model, variable vaccine costs, imperfect vaccines, imperfect in-
formation, spatial heterogeneity, heterogeneity in susceptibility, behavioural variability and
stochastic effects. These are all potentially fruitful directions for future research.




                                              13
References
Auld, C. and Toxvaerd, F. (2021). The great covid-19 vaccine rollout: Behavioral and policy
 responses.

Brehm, M. E., Brehm, P. A., and Saavedra, M. (2021). The ohio vaccine lottery and starting
  vaccination rates. Technical report, Technical report, 2021. 345.

Budish, E. B. (2020). R < 1 as an economic constraint: Can we `expand the frontier' in the
  fight against covid-19? University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics
  Working Paper, (2020-31).

Chen, F. H. and Toxvaerd, F. (2014). The economics of vaccination. Journal of theoretical
 biology, 363:105­117.

Chevalier, J. A., Schwartz, J. L., Su, Y., and Williams, K. R. (2021). Distributional impacts
 of retail vaccine availability. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eksin, C., Paarporn, K., and Weitz, J. S. (2019). Systematic biases in disease forecasting­the
  role of behavior change. Epidemics, 27:96­105.

Francis, P. J. (1997). Dynamic epidemiology and the market for vaccinations. Journal of
  Public Economics, 63(3):383­406.

Gans, J. (2020a). The Pandemic Information Gap: The Brutal Economics of COVID-19.
 MIT Press.

Gans, J. S. (2020b). The economic consequences of r= 1: Towards a workable behavioural
 epidemiological model of pandemics. Working Paper, NBER.

Gans, J. S. (2020c). Economics in the Age of COVID-19. MIT Press.

Geoffard, P.-Y. and Philipson, T. (1996). Rational epidemics and their public control. In-
 ternational economic review, pages 603­624.

Gersovitz, M. (2003). 25 births, recoveries, vaccinations, and externalities. Economics for
 an imperfect world: Essays in honor of Joseph E. Stiglitz, page 469.

Gersovitz, M. (2011). The economics of infection control. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ.,
 3(1):277­296.

Gersovitz, M. and Hammer, J. S. (2004). The economical control of infectious diseases. The
 Economic Journal, 114(492):1­27.

                                             14
Goodkin-Gold, M., Kremer, M., Snyder, C. M., and Williams, H. L. (2020). Optimal vac-
 cine subsidies for endemic and epidemic diseases. Technical report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Greenwood, J., Kircher, P., Santos, C., and Tertilt, M. (2019). An equilibrium model of the
  african hiv/aids epidemic. Econometrica, 87(4):1081­1113.

Kremer, M. (1996). Integrating behavioral choice into epidemiological models of aids. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):549­573.

MacDonald, N. E. et al. (2015). Vaccine hesitancy: Definition, scope and determinants.
 Vaccine, 33(34):4161­4164.

Makris, M. and Toxvaerd, F. (2020). Great expectations: Social distancing in anticipation
 of pharmaceutical innovations. mimeo.

McAdams, D. (2021). The blossoming of economic epidemiology. Annual Review of Eco-
 nomics, 13.

Oster, E. (2018). Does disease cause vaccination? disease outbreaks and vaccination re-
  sponse. Journal of health economics, 57:90­101.

Philipson, T. J. (2000). Economic epidemiology and infectious diseases. Handbook of Health
  Economics, 1:1761­1799.

Philipson, T. J. and Posner, R. A. (1993). Private Choices and Public Health. Cambridge,
  Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Rachel, L. (2020). An analytical model of covid-19 lockdowns. mimeo, London School of
  Economics.

Rowthorn, B. R. and Toxvaerd, F. (2020). The optimal control of infectious diseases via
  prevention and treatment. Technical report.

Talam`as, E. and Vohra, R. (2020). Free and perfectly safe but only partially effective vaccines
  can harm everyone. Games and economic behavior, 122:277­289.

Toxvaerd, F. (2020). Equilibrium social distancing. mimeo, University of Cambridge.

Toxvaerd, F. and Rowthorn, R. (2020). On the management of population immunity. mimeo.




                                              15
