                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       EXPERIENCE EFFECTS IN FINANCE:
              FOUNDATIONS, APPLICATIONS, AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

                                      Ulrike Malmendier

                                      Working Paper 29074
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29074


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




This article is based on the 2020 European Finance Association keynote address titled "Exposure,
Experience, and Expertise: Why Personal Histories Matter in Finance and Economics." I thank
the editor Alex Edmans, Chris Parsons, and the EFA audience for their comments and
suggestions, and Clint Hamilton, Karin Li, and Junru Lyu for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ulrike Malmendier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Experience Effects in Finance: Foundations, Applications, and Future Directions
Ulrike Malmendier
NBER Working Paper No. 29074
July 2021
JEL No. D03,D8,D83,D87,D9,E17,E52,E7,G02,G4

                                          ABSTRACT

This article establishes four key findings of the growing literature on experience effects in
finance:(1) the long-lasting imprint of past experiences on beliefs and risk taking, (2) recency
effects, (3) the domain-specificity of experience effects, and (4) imperviousness to information
that is not experience-based. I first discuss the neuroscientific foundations of experience-based
learning and sketch a simple model of its role in the stock market based on Malmendier et al.
(2020a,b). I then distill the empirical findings on experience effects in stock-market investment,
trade dynamics, and international capital flows, highlighting these four key features. Finally, I
contrast models of belief formation that rely on "learned information" with models accounting for
the neuroscience evidence on synaptic tagging and memory formation, and provide directions for
future research.


Ulrike Malmendier
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

  Economic and political crises often shape entire generations. For example, World
War I brought about the "lost generation," whose beliefs and values were shaken by
the disorienting war experience. The Great Depression bore a generation of risk-averse
Depression Babies, who shied away from the stock market and hoarded food supplies.
Positive experiences can also be formative, such as the post-World War II prosperity and
optimism giving rise to the generation of "Baby Boomers."
  In recent years, financial economists have started to better understand the long-lasting
imprint resulting from the exposure to different economic and political outcomes, and
especially macro-financial shocks. Personal lifetime experiences appear to deeply shape
belief formation and risk taking in finance, whether we consider stock-market participa-
tion, mortgage choices, consumption expenditures, or interest-rate expectations. While
an earlier literature in corporate finance had identified the role of formative experiences
for managerial decision-making (cf. Malmendier (2018)), there is now a growing under-
standing of the much broader and more general applicability of these concepts.
  In this article, I shed light on the role of past lifetime experiences (experience effects )
from three angles. First, I discuss the neuroscience foundations of experience effects and
point out how they do or do not square with existing models of belief formation. While
some of these links to neuroscience research are still tentative, they help conceptualize the
notion of experience effects. Second, I summarize a simple theoretical OLG framework,
which captures the notion of experience-based learning and indicates possibilities of fur-
ther theoretical development. And third, I present some of the main empirical findings on
beliefs and investment in the stock market, with an eye towards synthesizing the stylized
features and identifying areas for further research.2

   2
     There is a wide range of applications of experience effects outside the realm of the stock market and,
in fact, outside finance, which I will briefly point to in Section 6; cf. also Malmendier (2021).


                                                    1
  To guide the discussion, let me preview here four "key features" that have emerged from
the growing empirical literature and which, as I will argue, should guide the development
of modern models of belief formation in macro-finance.

  1. Long-lasting effects. Past experiences of macro-finance realizations shape indi-
        vidual beliefs and choices for years and decades to come. For example, individuals
        who have lived through stock-market crises are less likely to participate in the stock
        market for the rest of their lives, both on the extensive and the intensive margin
        (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011). Individuals who have lived through the financial
        and housing crisis of 2008 have remained significantly less likely to purchase a home,
        and are also significantly curbing their expenditures (Malmendier and Shen, 2018).

  2. Recency bias. More recent experiences have a stronger impact on individual
        expectations and risk-taking than experiences made earlier in life (Tversky and
        Kahneman, 1974). When predicting future returns in the stock, housing, or other
        asset markets, investors overly rely on the price realizations in those markets over
        recent months or the past year, though it is also the case that big enough shocks
        have a detectable impact on individual investors and consumers decades later.

  3. Domain specificity. The lingering influence of past experiences on risk taking
        is specific to the markets or arenas of life in which individuals have had personal
        exposure to past realizations. For example, while exposure to negative returns in the
        stock market reduce stock-market participation, and negative exposure in the bond
        market reduce bond-market participation, there is no evidence of cross-fertilization
        (Malmendier and Nagel, 2011). In other words, rather than altering risk attitudes
        in general, these adjustment concern the concrete "domain," in which a good or
        bad outcome has been experienced.3

  3
      In the context of experience-based learning, "domain specificity" indicates that beliefs about future


                                                     2
   4. Robustness to expert knowledge. While much of the existing research in be-
       havioral finance and economics emphasizes biases detected in consumers and indi-
       vidual investors, but not among professional decision-makers, experience effects are
       observed among highly educated and specialized individuals as well, even in their
       area of expertise. For example, central bankers at the FOMC tilt their inflation pre-
       dictions into the direction of their personal experiences (Malmendier et al., 2021),
       and professional forecasters place too much weight on their own belief and too little
       on publicly available information (Bianchi et al., 2020).


  In Section 2, I link these four features to the conceptual foundation of experience ef-
fects in the neuroscience and psychology literature. The observation that individuals
assign excess weights to outcomes they have personally experienced mirrors the under-
lying neurological process of synapse formation and reflects our modern understanding
of neuroplasticity, i. e., of the brain's lifelong ability to change and adapt as a result of
experience. The brain forms stronger connections between neurons that are used more
frequently, while those that have not been used in a while eventually die, providing the
foundations of the first two empirical features: (1) the statistically detectable influences
of past experiences and (2) recency bias. The neuroscience evidence also microfounds
(3) domain specificity since the weights are specific to the outcomes (type of stimuli) the
individual has experienced. Finally, the process of "re-wiring" naturally applies to the
neural pathways of experts and non-experts alike, as suggested under (4) above.
  The experience-based updating process can be modeled as a form of generalized Bayesian
learning (Bissiri et al., 2016) with a loss function such that individuals assign more weight
to outcomes that they have personally experienced than to other known realizations. In

realizations of similar assets or correlated risks are not necessarily following this correlation structure.
The notion of "domains" is similar to that of "(content) domains" in Weber et al. (1993, 2002), though
their definition of is broader. I will discuss the ongoing debate about domains and domain-specificity in
theoretical neuroscience in Section 2.


                                                     3
Section 3, I briefly sketch the simple theoretical OLG framework from Malmendier et al.
(2020a,b) to guide the discussion of the empirical evidence. After presenting some of the
empirical evidence, with a focus on stock-market experiences and beliefs about stock re-
turns, in Section 4, I point to the similarities and differences of other modern approaches
to belief formation in Section 5. The key difference of experience-based learning is the
recasting of learning from information-based to experience-based updating. Information
can be learned, but learned knowledge will not undo the "re-wiring" that occurs in our
brains as we are accumulating experiences. Section 6 provides additional directions for
future research.


2. Neuroscience Foundation

  Traditional models of economic decision-making do not allow for personally experienced
information to affect individual beliefs differently than otherwise acquired information
about the same realizations, at least once we account for all economic implications of
those realizations. For example, the effect of "living through a depression" on individ-
uals' economic outlook, financial risk-taking and financial investment is predicted to be
no different than reading about it as long as we control for income, wealth, and other
economic effects of the depression. Similarly, past experiences of unemployment should
have the same influence on future job choices, savings rates, or consumption as full infor-
mation about the economic implications of such realizations (e.g., about job prospects or
potential industry shocks), given controls. And, living through the COVID-19 pandemic
would have the same impact on for educational, social, or economic choices as perfect
information about the likelihood and implications of a pandemic would.
  In practice, it is of course often hard to perfectly control for all direct and indirect im-
plications of economic shocks that might have changed the economic reality of those who
have experienced it. But the thought experiment challenges the view that the long-term


                                              4
effects of crisis experiences can only be attributed to changed circumstances. Intuitively,
even if we could perfectly control for all such channels, wouldn't we expect marked dif-
ferences in behavior after such an experience?

  Modern neuroscience suggests exactly that. The human brain alters its structure and
adapts to new experiences throughout life. At every new experience, it forms a connection
(synapse) between two neurons through which the neurons communicate how to react
in response to the experience. The pre-synaptic cell sends neurochemical messengers
(neurotransmitters) to the post-synaptic neuron via the synapse, and the post-synaptic
neuron reacts, for example, by sending its own neurotransmitter or by reducing or even
shutting down its own signaling (Bear et al., 2020).
  Importantly for our dynamic learning context, the brain keeps reorganizing synaptic
pathways throughout life as we accumulate new experiences. While researchers used
to believe that the brain became fixed after a certain age, modern neuroscience has
established that the brain never stops changing in response to learning. Neurons that
are used frequently develop stronger connections, while those that are used infrequently
will eventually die. This process of synaptic pruning also explains why, after an explosive
growth in synapses since birth (from an estimated 2,500 synapses per neuron in the
cerebral cortex at birth to maybe 15,000 synapses per neuron at the age of three), the
number of synapses is about halved when we reach adulthood (cf. chapter 2 in Doidge
(2007)). In other words, the brain alters its actual physical structure as the result of
experiences (structural brain plasticity ).4 Experience-based learning directly captures
this type of rewiring: past lifetime experiences are predicted to have a lasting impact on
people's perceptions and decision-making.
  The empirical evidence on experience effects also suggests that it matters how strongly

   4
    In addition to structural plasticity, the brain also possesses the functional plasticity to move functions
from a damaged area of the brain to other undamaged areas.



                                                      5
Figure 1: Expression of LTP. Notes: Postsynaptic changes are visible in the increased number of receptors
in post-synaptic (lower) neuron. Rendition replicates Whitlock et al. (2006).


and how often we make an experience, as we will discuss in detail in Section 4. The
neuroscientific evidence mirrors this insight, too. The strength and shape of synapse
formation depends on how and how often we make an experience. Bliss and Lømo (1973)
first discovered that the structure of a synapse changes when it is repeatedly stimulated.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the post-synaptic neuron ends up with more available receptors,
which heightens its sensibility. A prolonged increase in synaptic strength is known as
long-term potentiation (LTP), and has become the primary cellular model of memory in
the mammalian brain (Bear et al., 2020). Frey and Morris (1997) later proposed that
"synaptic tags" at the potentiated synapses allow to establish particularly longlasting
late LTP. Their synaptic tagging hypothesis states that synapses get `tagged' by some
previous synaptic activity. That is, prior activity of a neuron is relevant for the longer-
lasting persistence of LTP ­ which is the phenomenon we are interested in to better
understand long-term scarring effects.

  We can now see how the neuroscientific evidence on structural brain plasticity and the
formation of synapses provides a foundation for our four key features of experience-based
learning: Both (1) persistent influence of past experiences and (2) recency bias reflect the



                                                   6
process forming, strengthening, and removing neural connections. As these processes are
specific to an experience, and do not alter the generalized concept of "risky decisions"
or "risky assets," they are naturally (3) domain specific. And, as the "re-wiring" of
neural pathways and "tagging" of synapses occur in the mammal brains of experts and
non-experts alike, we have a foundation of the (4) robustness to learned knowledge.
  At this point, it is worth elaborating on the notion "domain" and "domain-specific."
As used here, domain-specific learning means that experiences in one type of market or
with one type of asset risk do not necessarily affect beliefs about another market or asset
risk, even if the underlying payoff structures are correlated and the individual knows
this. The implied lack of cross-fertilization is similar to that across "(content) domains"
in Weber et al. (1993, 2002), though their definition is broader, as they distinguish finan-
cial decisions (separately for investing versus gambling), health and safety, recreational,
ethical, and social decisions. The theoretical neuroscience literature, instead, utilizes the
term "(cognitive) domain" to describe separate brain modules that are specialized for
particular types of stimuli. Initially, the observation of the specific neuropsychological
deficits in brain-damaged patients lead to the conclusion that different cognitive domains
are processed within a specialized region of the brain (Karmiloff-Smith, 2015), and lead
to the distinction of common-sense psychological categories such as, say, number, face,
and grammatical (semantics and syntax) processing, spatial cognition, and more abstract
modules such as "knowledge of the constraints governing the physical world." Modern
brain data, however, suggests that domains need to be defined more abstractly than the
common-sense psychological categories listed above (Spunt and Adolphs, 2017).
  The same applies to the notion in the financial decision-making context. It is an open
question which stimuli are to be grouped together in "domains," and an even bigger
question how to translate these groupings into typical financial variables. The evolving
insights from neuroscience will help economists shape their theoretical modeling towards


                                             7
neuropsychological realism as well as improved predictions, both in the time series and
in the cross-section. The theory and evidence presented in this paper is a first attempt
to reflect the features we have gathered so far from the neuroscientific evidence.
  I conclude this section with another word of caution. The type of neuroscientific
evidence presented in here describes processes on a very disaggregate (molecular) level.
Tying such evidence to human beliefs and choice behavior is necessarily daring. After
all, current technology does not enable us to pinpoint, at a molecular level, the exact
impact of a given experience on the brain or link specific changes in the brain to specific
actions. So why not stay at the level of behavioral psychological evidence, e. g., refer to
the evidence on "availability bias" (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974) and its successors?
The latter is indeed fully consistent with the underpinnings proposed here: people tend
to overweight events that come to mind easily, i. e., are "available" to them, and personal
experiences are a catalyst for this availability. Hence, the discussion of experience effects
from a cognitive neuroscience and a psychology perspective lead to similar insights.
  The reason to "dig deeper" is again the the open question of which circumstances and
features of an experience that helps anchoring it more strongly in memory and makes it
more easily retrievable. The hope is that the developing neuroscience research will help
us understand better what comes to mind easily, why, and under what circumstances.


3. Theoretical Model

  In this section, I sketch the basic ingredients of the simple OLG model of experience-
based learning from Malmendier et al. (2020a,b) to illustrate how the (over-)emphasis on
personally experienced realization generates the four features highlighted above, (1) long-
lasting scars, (2) recency bias, (3) domain specificity, and (4) robustness to information
(applicability to experts). The brief sketch also indicates how such a framework gives rise
to additional predictions that can be tested empirically.


                                             8
  Beliefs versus preferences. Before we can get started, we need to consider the oft-asked
"beliefs-versus-preferences" question. It is ex-ante unclear whether we would want to
capture the re-wiring of our brains as the formation (and alteration) of individual prefer-
ences or as individuals assigning altered probability weights to possible future outcomes.
Or, we might consider another route altogether, akin to cognitive limitations discussed
in the behavioral-economics literature (Rabin, 1998). What is the right approach?
  There are several possible responses to this question. A first answer is that we can go
either way and that the distinction between a preference and a beliefs channel matters
less than our standard economic modelling approaches may lead us to think. As Savage
(1954) has shown, we can map between subjective beliefs and preferences, and even derive
beliefs from preferences. In fact, attempts to distinguish between beliefs and preferences
in determining equilibrium prices can be futile.5
  Second, though, almost every piece of empirical research on experience effects includes
direct evidence on past experiences affecting beliefs--whether it is the beliefs of investors
about future stock-market performance, the beliefs of consumers and FOMC members
about future inflation rates, or the beliefs of mortgage borrowers about future interest
rates.6 This evidence does not rule out that personal experiences also alter individ-
ual preferences and cognitive processes, but it invites belief-based modelling as a (well-
documented) starting point, from which we can move to incorporating other channels as
evidence emerges.
  Finally, regarding the idea of a third, cognitive channel, note that a basic belief-based
approach of experience effects could be re-interpreted as a model of cognitive limitation.
In a model of generalized Bayesian learning, where agents overweigh or restrict their data

   5
      As Kraus and Sick (1980) put it: "Since individual agent optimality conditions involve the product
of probability and marginal utility, it may be that any set of equilibrium prices that are consistent with
some combination of beliefs and preferences could also have resulted from different beliefs combined with
different preferences."
    6
      Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2016); Malmendier et al. (2021); Botsch and Malmendier (2020).


                                                    9
to realizations that they have personally experienced, this limited consideration of data
can be re-interpreted as a cognitive restriction. The simple theoretical model sketched
below illustrates this point.

  Model Set-Up. We start from briefly sketching the infinite-horizon OLG economy from
Malmendier et al. (2020a,b).7 There is a continuum of agents with CARA preferences. At
each point in time t  Z, a new generation is born and lives for q  {1, 2, 3, ...} periods.
Each generation has a mass of q -1 identical agents, and there are q + 1 generations alive
at any time t. Figure 2, adapted from Malmendier et al. (2020a), illustrates the OLG
setting for the case of q = 2, meaning that each agent born t lives for two periods, until
t + 2, and trades at three points in time, t, t + 1, and t + 2. At each point in time (on
the horizontal timeline), there are three cohorts alive, with their names indicated on the
vertical axis. As time progresses, new cohorts enter, and cohorts that have already lived
for two periods exit. For example, at time t + 1, the (t + 1)-cohort is born and lives for
the next two periods, while the (t - 1)-cohort consumes everything they own at time t + 1
and then exits.
  Agents transfer resources across time by investing in financial markets. There are two
types of assets: the risk-free asset (in perfectly elastic supply) generates a gross return
of R > 1 at all times, and the risky asset (in unit net supply) generates a dividend
dt  N (,  2 ) at time t. Trading takes place at the beginning of each period. At the end
of the last period of their lives, agents consume the wealth they have accumulated.
  The key question is how agents learn about future returns when they do not know
the true mean of dividends  and use past observations to estimate it. (For tractability,
agents are assumed to know the variance of dividends.) For the purpose of this article,
I will not consider the general model from Malmendier et al. (2020a) but only the more

   7
    Other approaches to modeling experience-based learning include Ehling et al. (2018) and Collin-
Dufresne et al. (2017), who also discuss portfolio choice and asset pricing implications of experience-based
learning. Reassuringly, all papers reach similar conclusions coming from different modeling angles.


                                                    10
                            t                   t+1                  t+2               t+3             t+4

                                                                                                                   time
   generation                                                     (t+2)-cohort       (t+2)-cohort   (t+2)-cohort
                                                               is born and trades       trades       consumes
 (t+2) cohort

                                            (t+1)-cohort         (t+1)-cohort       (t+1)-cohort
                                         is born and trades         trades            consumes
 (t+1) cohort

                         t-cohort            t-cohort              t-cohort
                    is born and trades        trades              consumes
   t cohort

                       (t-1)-cohort        (t-1)-cohort
                          trades            consumes
 (t-1) cohort

                       (t-2)-cohort
                        consumes
 (t-2) cohort




                Figure 2: Timeline for an economy with two-period lived generations, q = 2


tractable version with myopic agents, who maximize per-period utility. I also focus on
the case of only one young and one older generation actively trading at any point in time
(q = 2).
  A two-period lived generation born at t = n maximizes Etn [- exp(-Wtn
                                                                      +1 )] at each

time t  {n, n+1}, where Wtn                                            n
                          +1 is n's wealth at time t+1. Denoting with xt the investment

in the risky asset, with an
                          t the amount invested in the riskless asset, and with pt the price

of one unit of the risky asset, generation n's budget constraint is Wtn = xn       n
                                                                           t pt + at at

t  {n, n + 1}. Wealth next period becomes Wtn     n                   n      n
                                            +1 = xt (pt+1 + dt+1 ) + at R = xt (pt+1 +

dt+1 - pt R) + Wtn R, or, if we express the excess payoff from investing in one unit of the
risky asset over the riskless asset as st+1  pt+1 + dt+1 - pt R (analogous to the equity



                                                          11
premium), Wtn     n          n
            +1 = xt st+1 + Wt R. Hence, the maximization problem can be rewritten as




                              xn           n
                               t  arg max Et [- exp(-xst+1 )] ,                              (1)
                                        x R



where Etn [·] is the (subjective) expectation with respect to a Gaussian distribution with
variance  2 and a subjective mean of dividends, denoted by t
                                                           n
                                                             .

  Experience-based Learning (EBL). Under EBL agents (1) overweigh realizations ob-
served during their lifetimes and (2) tilt the excess weights toward the most recent obser-
vations when forecasting dividends. It is important to emphasize that EBL agents choose
to discount earlier observations even though they observe the entire history of dividends.
Learned knowledge does not alter the way the brain processes experienced realizations.
For simplicity, agents are also modeled as fully understanding the model and knowing all
the primitives except the mean of the dividend process, differently from, say, agents in
reinforcement learning-type models.
  Let's consider the limiting case where agents only use observations realized during their
lifetimes and apply zero weight to any prior realizations. In this case, the subjective mean
of dividends of generation n at time t is

                                          age
                                   n
                                   t            w(k, , age)dt-k ,                            (2)
                                          k=0


where age = t - n. Prior literature parameterizes the weight w(k, , age) that an agent
aged age assigns to dividends k periods earlier as

                                                   (age + 1 - k )
                             w(k, , age) =        age                
                                                                                             (3)
                                                  k =0 (age + 1 - k )



for all k  age, and w(k, , age)  0 for all k > age.8 The denominator in (3) is a

  8
      Note that the +1 term in both the numerator and denominator serves to avoid zero weight for


                                                  12
              normalizing constant that depends only on age and on the parameter that regulates the
              recency bias, . The empirical evidence suggests a choice of  > 0 so that more recent
              observations receive relatively more weight.

                                          Weighting Function:                                                            Weighting Function:
                                Illustration for a 40-year old individual                                      Illustration for a 60-year old individual
                  0.10                                                                              0.10
                                                                            =0                                                                             =0
                                                                            =1                                                                             =1
                                                                            =2                                                                             =2
                  0.08                                                      =3                      0.08                                                   =3


                  0.06                                                                              0.06
Weight Function




                                                                                  Weight Function
                  0.04                                                                              0.04


                  0.02                                                                              0.02


                  0.00                                                                              0.00
                          0     10      20        30         40       50     60                            0   10      20        30         40       50     60
                                      Number of Years Before Today                                                   Number of Years Before Today
                         Figure 3: Weighting Function: Illustration for 40-year old and 60-year old individuals


                     Figure 3 illustrates the shapes of the weighting function for positive  values 1, 2, and
              3, in line with the range of empirical estimates from Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2016),
              and for comparison the case of equal-weighting ( = 0). The weights on the left are for a
              40-year old investor, and the weights on the right for a 60-year old investor. The compar-
              ison shows that differently-aged investors apply experience weights to different ranges of
              past years, namely, their personal prior lifetimes. The juxtaposition also highlights that
              younger generations generally put more weight on recent experiences: Towards the left
              of the two plots (recent past), the weights are shifted up more for the 40-year old than
              the 60-year old investor. In other words, individuals with a shorter lifespan so far are

              individuals aged 0, which are included in this simple theoretical set-up. Empirical studies typically
              include only older individuals, e. g., aged 25­75 in Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2016), and drop the +1
              term from (3). The differences in empirical estimates are virtually undetectable.



                                                                                  13
automatically more "impressed," or "imprinted," by recent macro-finance realizations.
  Let's consider a concrete numerical example to see how the mechanics work, using
 = 1 and the three-generation (q =2) setting from Figure 2. At any time t, there
are three generations alive: the oldest cohort (n=t-2), about to exit the market; the
middle-aged cohort (n=t-1), and the youngest cohort (n=t) that just enters the market.
Assume that the dividend has been steady with dt-2 = dt-1 = 6, but there is a spike
in dividend for the current period, dt = 12. From equations (2) and (3), the subjective
mean of dividends for the youngest generation (n=t) is completely dependent on the
                          t              (0+1-0)1
most recent dividend with t =            (0+1-0)1
                                                    · 12 = 12. Meanwhile, dt-1 plays a critical
role in the subjective mean of dividends for the middle-age generation (n=t-1), with
t-1        1                             (1+1-0)1                      (1+1-1)1
t   =      k=0   w(k, 1, 1)dt-k =    (1+1-0)1 +(1+1-1)1
                                                          · 12 +   (1+1-0)1 +(1+1-1)1
                                                                                        · 6 = 10. Due to
recency effects, this cohort places heavier weights on the more recent dividend dt , but they
                                                                                   t-1   t
still place some, albeit lower weight on the earlier dividend dt-1 as well, making t   < t .
The oldest cohort (n=t-2), instead, exits the market by selling everything they own
without considering the dividend. In order to demonstrate the mechanics of the weighting
                                       t-2
functions, we can still calculate what t   would base their trading on if this cohort were
                           t-2              2                                   (2+1-0)1
to actively trade, namely, t   =            k=0   w(k, 1, 2)dt-k =    (2+1-0)1 +(2+1-1)1 +(2+1-2)1
                                                                                                     · 12 +
          (2+1-1)1                             (2+1-2)1
(2+1-0)1 +(2+1-1)1 +(2+1-2)1
                               ·6+   (2+1-0)1 +(2+1-1)1 +(2+1-2)1
                                                                     · 6 = 9. We see that, although
both cohort n=t-1 and cohort n=t-2 have only experienced a dividend of 6 prior to t,
                                                                          t     t-1
the older cohort places heavier emphasis on prior dividends, which causes t-2 < t .

                                                              n
  An important implication of this theoretical set-up is that t does not necessarily
                                               n                                    age
converge to the truth as t  . By construction, t  N (,  2                                             2
                                                                                    k=0 (w (k, , age)) ),
                                                            age               2
and hence, convergence depends on whether                   k=0 (w (k, , age))      0. This in turn
depends on how fast the weights on "old" observations decay to zero (i. e., how large 
is). When agents have finite lives, convergence will not occur.
  To put it differently, experience-based learning generates persistent belief heterogeneity


                                                    14
in investors, which other literatures often have to assume in an ad-hoc manner, e. g., to
generate trading volume. Experience effects provide an empirical reason why two people
may come to hold different beliefs, despite no differences in information.

Equilibrium outcomes. Malmendier et al. (2020a) consider the case of linear equilibria
where, given a price schedule {pt } that is affine in dividends,

  1. the demand profiles {(an    n
                            t , xt ) : t  {n, n + 1}} for the riskless and the risky asset

      solve the generation-n problem, and

                                       1        t-1
  2. the market clears in all periods: 2 (xt
                                           t + xt ) = 1 for all t  Z.


                                                                               n [s
                                                                              Et    t+1 ]
In this setting, the risky-asset demand of generation n  {t, t - 1} is xn
                                                                        t =   Vtn [st+1 ]
                                                                                          .   Most
interestingly, one can show that the price loadings depend on past dividends, but only
those observed by the oldest generation trading in the market ­ in our case (q =2):


                                  pt =  + 0 dt + 1 dt-1 .                                      (4)


Here, the younger generation of market participants that has only experienced the div-
idend dt and expects dividends to be identical in the next period. The older ("middle-
aged") generation of market participants has more experience and incorporates the pre-
vious dividend dt-1 in their weighting scheme. As a result, dt and dt-1 determine pt , with
the price being more sensitive to the more recent dividend (0 > 1 ) for  > 0. The
specific value of the coefficients depends on the value of .
  The dependence of prices on past dividends is a key feature of the model. While models
of extrapolation and learning also generate history dependence, experience effects allow
us to link it intrinsically to the demographic structure of market participants.
  One can develop the model set-up further and allow the mass of a generation to deviate
from 1/q to better tease out the role of demographic composition. For example, if the


                                             15
fraction of young people in the market increases, current dividends will matter more
relative to past dividends for the determination of prices. Vice versa, as a large generation
such as the "baby-boom generation" becomes old, prices depend less on contemporaneous
dividends and more on past dividends. The model also predicts that an increase in the
overall population of market participants generates a level increase in prices.

  The simple set-up presented so far captures the imprint of past experiences on beliefs
and risk-taking in the stock market, and it naturally incorporates history-dependent fluc-
tuation in the level of market valuation. The model also generates further cross-sectional
predictions. It implies (i) persistent generational differences in beliefs, based on personal
experiences, and (ii) generational differences changing over time as personal experiences
of different cohorts diverge or converge. Moreover, it predicts (iii) age differences in
response to a recent shock: Intuitively, a given crisis experience exerts stronger influ-
ence on younger cohorts, for whom the crisis experience constitutes a larger portion of
their lifetime histories so far. As a result, EBL predicts that younger generations react
more optimistically than older generations to positive changes in recent dividends and
more pessimistically to negative changes. The bigger the shock (change in dividends) is,
the larger is the predicted belief heterogeneity |dt - dt-1 |. These differences also imply
predictions for history-dependent fluctuations in market participation.
  Finally, the model allows to show that cross-sectional differences in lifetime experi-
ences and resulting cross-sectional differences in beliefs affect trade volume. Consider the
following measure of total trade volume for our two-period lived agents:

                                                               1
                                           t                   2
                                       1                   2
                             T Vt              xn    n
                                                t - xt-1                                 (5)
                                       2 n=t-2


with xt
      t-1 = 0. That is, trade volume is the square root of the weighted sum (squared) of




                                               16
the change in positions of all agents in the economy. If we rewrite (5) as

                                                                                1
                                                                                2
                                          t               2
                   2
                        t-1   t-1     1        n
                                               ~   n
                                                   ~           1        1 t-2 2 
        T Vt =          t   - t-1 -            t - t-1        + ( xt  2
                                                                   t ) + (xt-1 )        (6)
                  2                   2n~ =t-2
                                                               2        2


               1           t     t-2                                             n
with  =     2 (1+0 )
                       and t-1 = t   = 0, we can see that changes in the beliefs t of
the generations trading at time t, relative to their beliefs at time t - 1 induce trade,
and changes in beliefs are in turn driven by shocks to dividends. Specifically, when the
change in a cohort's beliefs is different from the average change in beliefs, trade volume
increases. That is, trade volume increases in the dispersion of changes in beliefs.
  Before turning to the empirical evidence, let's reconsider one more time the different
possible mechanisms for experience effects--beliefs, preferences, and cognitive limitations.
Ostensibly, the model chooses the route of belief formation, restricting the updating
behavior to respond to personally experienced realizations. As we emphasized, such
behavior does not reflect limited information or failure to understand the model. Instead,
agents focus on personally experienced outcomes even though they are fully informed
about other historical information. Reflecting the motivating neuroscientific evidence on
synaptic strength, the model aims to reflect that past experiences will be accessed more
frequently and more directly. Whether we understand this approach to be a type of non-
standard (Gaussian) belief formation or a cognitive limitation on the standard (Gaussian)
belief formation process is ultimately a question of labeling. We might even consider the
emphasis on one type of information (personally experienced) over other types (learned
information) a "preference," though this latter approach seems less natural. The agent
is unlikely to "prefer" or "want" to access personally experienced information more,
especially if it is less predictive of future outcomes.




                                              17
4. Empirical Evidence from Capital Markets

  The starting point, and foundation of the literature on experience-based learning, is
the evidence on the long-lasting effects of past stock-market crashes (and peaks) on stock-
market participation and on the resulting inter-generational differences, as modeled in
the prior section. In this section, I synthesize some of the empirical evidence on expe-
rience effects in capital markets, with an eye towards highlighting the four key features
emphasized throughout the article. In addition, the model from Section 3 revealed several
dynamic implications for market composition and trading behavior, some of which have
been tested. I will also discuss cross-sectional sources of variation arising from region- or
country-specific exposure to different macro-finance histories, which can be added to the
model. The experience-based learning perspective helps to explain several well-known
international-finance puzzles, including home bias in equity investment, fickleness, and
retrenchment.

4.1. Precursors in Earlier Finance Research

  Before we dive into the empirical evidence on experience effects in capital markets, I
would like to briefly point to precursors in earlier literature. Even before Malmendier
and Nagel (2011) coined the term "experience effects," research in financial economics
had documented empirical regularities consistent with this notion. On the individual
investor side, Vissing-Jorgensen (2003) shows that young retail investors had the highest
return expectations during the stock-market boom in the late 1990s, consistent with the
implication of experience-based learning that younger cohorts are most sensitive to recent
realizations. In a similar vein, Greenwood and Nagel (2009) document that young mutual
fund managers chose higher exposure to technology stocks in the late 1990s than older
managers, extending the insight of a stronger reaction of younger cohorts to recent stock-
market returns to the allocation to stocks. Another key example is Kaustia and Kn¨
                                                                                 upfer


                                             18
(2008) who show that the returns investors earn from their personal investments in initial
public stock offerings (IPOs) are positively related to their future IPO subscriptions. Choi
et al. (2009) report that employees who have experienced relatively high returns in their
401(k) accounts subsequently increase their 401(k) savings rates. The last two papers
highlight the importance of personal experiences, in particular.
  There is also a parallel literature in Corporate Finance. Malmendier and Tate (2005)
and Malmendier et al. (2011), show that corporate managers who grew up during the
Great Depression ("Depression babies") shy away from external financing, in particular
stock issuances. Graham and Narasimhan (2004) and Schoar and Zuo (2017) argue that
corporate managers who were at the helm of their companies during the Great Depression
(or other times of economic downturn) continue to shy away from high debt levels and
are more conservative in their capital expenditures. All of this research strongly conveyed
the lasting impact of past experiences.

4.2. Experience Effects in the Stock Market ­ Evidence on the Four Key Features

  One famous example of longlasting scars from past economic shocks is the generation
of "Depression Babies" in the US, whose experience of significant financial and emo-
tional trauma during the Great Depression supposedly made them exceedingly risk averse.
Given the well-known notion of "Depression Babies," it is somewhat surprising that no
researcher in the 20th century documented the generation's aversion to stock-market
participation--surprising even more so since already the raw data reveals a striking pat-
tern: the stock-market participation of the generation that experienced the 1930s Great
Depression as teenagers or young adults is, at 13%, less than half of later cohorts.
  Malmendier and Nagel (2011) are the first to systematically test for the relation between
past stock-market experiences and stock-market participation rates, using data from the
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF, available since 1983), combined with data from
its precursor, the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR,

                                            19
available since 1947). What is crucial for an empirical analysis of experience effects in field
data is to ensure that, as much as possible, the estimates do not pick up life-cycle effects,
such as wealth-dependent, age-dependent, or time-varying risk aversion, nor time trends
or any aggregate effects. To achieve this goal the authors focus on the cross-section, and
differences in the cross-section over time. They estimate a simple probit model to predict
individual (or cohort) i's stock-market participation y at time t as follows:


                                 Pr(yi,t = 1|xi,t , Ai,t ()) = ( + Ai,t () +  xi,t ),                         (7)


where xi,t includes a battery of income, wealth, and demographic controls as well as time
effects.
  The key explanatory variable is Ai,t (), which is the weighted sum of past lifetime
                                        agei,t -1
experiences, Ai,t () =                  k=1         wi,t (k, , agei,t )Rt-k . Returns Rt-k are annual real S&P
500 returns, running from the end of the previous year (t - 1) back to the end of the
birth year (t - (agei,t - 1)) of investor i. Multiplying weight wit (k, ) with  yields the
partial effect of a return experienced k years ago on the dependent variable (stock-market
participation) for a household of i's age.
  A key ingredient, that has been used in multiple follow-up papers, is the weighting
function used in the estimation, wi,t (k, , agei,t ), which was introduced in equation (3).9
It allows weights to decline, increase, or remain constant over time,10 while introducing

   9
     In the theoretical model and its illustration with two-period lived agents, return experiences include
realizations in the current year (k = 0) and go back to the beginning of the birth year (k = age), as shown
in equations (2) and (3). In the empirical analysis, it is preferable to exclude concurrent realizations
from the proxy for past experiences in order to distinguish alternative interpretations. Moreover, given
the annual availability of much of the data, the end of the birthyear is the natural starting point.
Correspondingly, Malmendier and Nagel (2011) and later empirical papers specify wi,t (k, , agei,t ) =
     (agei,t -k)
  agei,t -1                  . In practice, both formulations imply virtually identical relative weighting.
  k =1
            (agei,t -k   )
  10
    Malmendier and Nagel (2011) also experimented with quadratic weighting functions and other func-
tional forms. They found that allowing for "humps," U-shaped weights, step function, and other non-
monotonicities did not improve fit. One caveat, though, is that this and other studies use repeated
cross-sectional data; longer-term panel data might allow for a sharper distinction between alternative


                                                               20
only one additional parameter (). Malmendier and Nagel (2011) use maximum likelihood
to simultaneously estimate  and the coefficient of interest  . This approach lets the data
determine which weighting scheme best explains households' stock-market participation.
  The results in Malmendier and Nagel (2011) suggest a strong and persistent effect
of prior lifetime experiences of stock-market realizations on stock-market participation.
Comparing an investor with fairly poor stock-market experiences in her life so far (at
the 10th percentile of the sample) with an investor with very positive stock-market ex-
periences (at the 90th percentile), the estimates imply an increase in the probability
of stock-market participation of 10.2 pp. The effect is very large both in absolute and
relative to the sample average of stock-market participation of 34.2%.
  The estimate of the weighting parameter  is also of interest. With  = 1.3, the
weighting function lies between the purple (dashed) line and the blue (dash-dotted) line,
in Figure 3. It implies that households' stock-market participation decisions are most
strongly influenced by recent returns, but that returns many years in the past still exert
a significant influence.
  Interestingly, a different set of estimations, which use survey respondents' self-assessed
willingness to take risk in the stock market, rather than actual stock holdings, as the out-
come variable, generates a very similar  estimate ( = 1.4). Hence, for both risk-taking
measures, a significant part of the variation can be traced to variation in experienced real
stock-market returns, with roughly similar weights on the history of past returns.
  These results establish stylized fact (1) in stock-market data, namely, the presence of
longlasting experience effects. The robust estimate of a  > 1 also confirms stylized fact
(2), namely, the embedded recency bias.
  The two findings translate into significant cross-cohort difference in stock-market par-
ticipation, and in differences in these differences over time, as illustrated in Figure 4. The

weighting function.


                                             21
                                                      0.100
 Difference in Participation Rate (Old Minus Young)



                                                      0.075

                                                      0.050

                                                      0.025

                                                      0.000

                                                      0.025

                                                      0.050

                                                      0.075

                                                      0.100
                                                              1960       1970               1980               1990               2000               2010         2020
                                                                                                              Year

                                                                     Actual: Raw participation rate
                                                                     Actual: Fitted participation rate with actual experienced returns
                                                                     Counterfactual: Fitted participation rate with experienced returns set to long-run average

Figure 4: Difference in stock market participation rates: Old (age > 60) minus young (age 
40): Difference in average fitted stock market participation probabilities between young (age  40) and
old (age > 60) (old minus young) from the probit model (dashed line), compared with the counterfactual
difference in average fitted probabilities when the experienced stock market return is set to the average
annual return since 1871 until the year prior to the survey year (solid line), and the actual participation
rate in the raw data (dotted line).


figure, adapted to more recent data from Figure III.a in Malmendier and Nagel (2011),
plots differences in the stock-market participation rates of cohorts above 60 years versus
those 40 years or younger over time. The black (dotted) line is the raw difference in rates;
the blue (dashed) line plots predicted differences based on fitted stock-market participa-
tion probabilities from the probit model; and the red (solid) line shows the counterfactual
differences in fitted probabilities when the experienced stock return is set to the average
annual return since 1871 until the year prior to the survey year. The plot reveals that
the raw and predicted differences are quite closely aligned, confirming the high predic-
tive power of experience effects. The counterfactual plot, however, features some large
deviations, especially during the 1970s and 1980s, when the old-minus-young differences
would have been much lower and in fact negative rather than positive. Conversely, it


                                                                                                         22
would have been more positive in the 1960s and mid-1990s to early 2000s. These are the
periods when experienced effects are estimated to have their biggest impact.

  Experience effects can also be detected in bond-market data. An interdecile-range
(IDR) shift in lifetime experiences of bond returns (long-term government bonds) predicts
a change in bond-market participation of 11.4 pp, relative to a sample average of 37.6%.
The estimated weighting parameter is also remarkably similar to the estimates from the
elicited risk-tolerance and stock-market participation model,  = 1.3.
  I mention the bond-market results here since they help establish stylized fact (3) on
domain specificity. When Malmendier and Nagel (2011) include experienced stock returns
in a regression predicting bond-market participation or, vice versa, include experienced
bond returns in a regression predicting stock-market participation, neither experience has
predictive power. There is no cross-fertilization between the stock and the bond market.
  Finally, Malmendier and Nagel (2011) provide some evidence regarding stylized fact (4),
the persistence of experience effects among more informed investors. They test how the
strength of the estimated effect varies with financial sophistication using (i) a dummy for
having above-median liquid assets and (ii) a dummy for completion of a college degree.
They find that the interactions of these proxies with the experienced return variable
(cf. their Appendix-Table A.3) are never statistically nor economically significant. That
is, there is little difference between households with high and low financial sophistication
in the strength of experience effects. While their SCF and ICPSR data does not allow for
more direct proxies, related studies show experience effects directly among professional
investors, including, for example, mutual-fund managers (Greenwood and Nagel, 2009).
  Before we turn to tests of the additional implications derived in the theoretical frame-
work, let's briefly touch on the beliefs-versus-preferences discussion. The analysis in
Malmendier and Nagel (2011) provides additional results that directly relate to beliefs
about future stock returns. Using 1998-2007 UBS/Gallup survey data from the Roper


                                            23
Center (now at the University of Cornell) on return expectations, they estimate that
a 1 pp increase in experienced stock returns is associated with a 0.5-0.6 pp increase in
expected 12-month stock-market returns and a 0.6-0.7 pp increase in expected 12-month
returns on respondents' own portfolio. These findings do not rule out that life-time return
experiences affect risk preferences as well, but at a minimum, the beliefs channel captures
an important part of the experience effects.

4.3. Experience-Based Market Dynamics

  The model of experience-based learning has further implications for aggregate valua-
tions and the dynamics of stock-market participation and trading. I present four sets of
findings, and point to open questions and future research directions.

  Market valuations. A first implication regards aggregate valuation levels. As expe-
rienced returns fluctuate over time, they alter aggregate risk-taking in the stock market.
Figure 5, which updates Figure IV from Malmendier and Nagel (2011), illustrates this
point. The plot relates populationwide averages in lifetime experienced returns, shown as
red bars, to the price/earning (P/E) ratio, shown as the blue solid line. The experience-
effect model predicts that periods of high experienced returns (and hence high willingness
to invest in the stock market) should coincide with periods of high price/earnings ratios,
i. e., high market valuations. Indeed, the figure indicates a strong positive correlation
between aggregated experienced stock-market return of U.S. investors and the P/E ra-
tio. Periods of high equity-market valuations (the 1960s, 1990s, and 2010s) coincide with
periods when the average investor has experienced high stock-market returns over their
life so far. Periods of low valuation and high subsequent returns (1940s, early 1980s, and
to some extent late 2000s with the financial crisis) coincide with the average investor
having experienced low stock-market returns over their life so far. This correlation is not
mechanical as it would not arise for other plausible values of the weighting parameter 
that the cross-sectional differences in the SCF microdata could have generated.

                                            24
             0.16
                                                                                              50
             0.14

             0.12                                                                             40

             0.10
                                                                                              30
   Returns




             0.08




                                                                                                  P/E
                                                                                              20
             0.06

             0.04                                                                             10

             0.02
                                                                                              0
             0.00
                    1950   1960      1970      1980    1990          2000        2010     2020
                                                  Year
                               Average Experienced Return            P/E Ratio

Figure 5: Aggregate Perspective: Market Valuation Average Experienced Returns are calculated
as a weighted average of lifetime real S&P 500 returns across all age groups at a given point in time
(from age 25 to age 74), where the weights are the percentage share of aggregate liquid assets held by the
respective age group (on average across SCF waves) and the weighting over individuals' lifetimes uses
the average estimated  parameter across the different estimations in Malmendier and Nagel (2011),
 = 1.5. The annual P/E Ratio is an updated series from Shiller (2005), which is calculated with a
10-year moving average of trailing earnings of firms in the S&P 500 index in the denominator. Since
the stock return data dates back to 1871 and we consider age up to 75, we can only compute average
experience from 1946 onward.


  The empirical estimates imply that experience-based learning about stock returns is a
plausible explanation for time-variation in the aggregate demand for risky assets and the
resulting variation in stock-market valuation levels and P/E ratios. A deeper analysis
of this back-of-the-envelope illustration, also separately for different asset classes, is a
promising avenue for future research.

  Market participation. A second aggregate implication regards the time variation
in market participation: differences in cohorts' lifetime experiences of past stock returns
predict differences in cohorts' willingness to participate in the stock market. Cohorts that
have experienced particularly high stock returns over their lives so far should be more

                                                   25
heavily represented in the stock market than those cohorts whose lifetimes so far featured
lower average returns. In other words, a theory of experience effects carries predictions for
asset-market composition and its fluctuation over time. While much of the prior research
has focused on life-cycle variations, experience effects allow for a different perspective:
not only age, but also prior life experiences influence market participation.
       Difference in log stock market participation (old minus young)




                                                                        0.10                                           2007      2013
                                                                                                                                2010               1983
                                                                                                                                1977
                                                                        0.05                     1960            2004              2016     1986
                                                                                                 1967           1971
                                                                        0.00          1963
                                                                                          1964      1970                                                  2019
                                                                        0.05                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                         1989

                                                                        0.10   1962                     1998
                                                                        0.15                     1968
                                                                        0.20                                    1995
                                                                                                         2001
                                                                        0.25
                                                                                             1969
                                                                                 0.06            0.04           0.02           0.00           0.02
                                                                                  Difference in experienced stock market returns (old minus young)

Figure 6: Aggregate Perspective: Market Composition. Differences in stock-market participation
rates of old and young individuals plotted against differences in experienced stock returns.


  Figure 6 shows that the dynamic participation predictions hold in the data.11 For
visualization purposes, the figure combines again all cohorts over 60 into the set of "old
cohorts," and all cohorts age 40 or below into the set of "young cohorts." It then plots
the difference in their average lifetime return experiences, defined as average S&P 500
returns in the past 50 years versus the past 20 years, against the difference in their (log)
stock-market participation rates. The figure reveals a clear positive correlation, which

  11
    The figure updates both Figure I from Malmendier and Nagel (2011) and Figure 5 from Malmendier
et al. (2020a).



                                                                                                                 26
has in fact become stronger compared to the original version in Malmendier and Nagel
(2011), which ended in 2007. This is also echoed in several variants of the graph that
use lifetime experiences in real dividends, earnings, or (log) GDP instead of stock returns
(cf. Malmendier et al. (2020a)).
  The pattern confirms the predictive power of experience effects for a better under-
standing of market participation. It also point to future research possibilities: Can we
dig deeper and better capture the differential experiences of those individuals who never
participate in the stock-market (or drop out)? Do they update their beliefs differently?
In fact, might negative beliefs that caused non-participants not to enter or to drop out of
the stock market be sticky as they do not "experience" current, more positive realizations
as closely as participants do?
  Another direction for future research is a more asset-specific analysis. Rather than
considering stock-market investment in general, can we be more specific about different
cohorts' experiences with different types of assets? An example is the analysis of prior
investment experiences in specific industries in Huang (2019). She finds that positive
return experiences in a given industry increase the likelihood of further investment in the
same industry. Zooming in further, we might ask whether this patterns also holds on the
stock level, or zooming out, we might turn to assets other than shares.
  Finally, it would be interesting to further explore the interaction of cross-cohort differ-
ences and recent experiences versus those further in the past. Do younger cohorts react
more strongly to a (recent) dividend shock than older cohorts as it makes up a larger
part of their lifetimes? More specifically, does a positive shock induce younger cohorts
to invest relatively more in risky assets, while a negative shock tilts the composition to-
wards older cohorts? How about earlier shocks, which both younger and older cohorts
have experienced? As Figure 3 illustrates, some of the earlier shocks (say, 35 to 40 years
ago) should be weighted more heavily by an older, 60-year old individual than a younger,


                                             27
40-year old individual. Can we find data that allows us to tease out these differential
effects?

  Trade volume. The emphasis on cross-sectional differences in experience-based beliefs
allows us to turn to yet another aspect of market dynamics, namely, trading decisions.
Does experience-based learning help us better understand fluctuations in trade volume
among market participants? The theory model in Section 3 revealed that it is not the
differences in lifetime experiences (and resulting level of disagreement between cohorts)
that predict trading, but changes in those differences. The prediction is that trade volume
is higher as disagreement increases.
                                                                                                                               0.008
                                                0.3
                                                                                                                               0.007
       Deviation of Turnover Ratio from Trend




                                                0.2                                                                            0.006




                                                                                                                                   SD of Experience Movement
                                                                                                                               0.005
                                                0.1
                                                                                                                               0.004
                                                0.0                                                                            0.003

                                                0.1                                                                            0.002

                                                                                                                               0.001
                                                0.2
                                                                                                                               0.000
                                                      1985     1990    1995     2000          2005    2010       2015   2020
                                                                                       Year
                                                                        Deviation of Turnover Ratio from Trend
                                                                        SD of Experience Movement

                                                             Figure 7: Aggregate Perspective: Market Dynamics


  Malmendier et al. (2020a) test precisely this implication, using the de-trended turnover
ratio as their proxy for trade volume.12 Figure 7 plots the corresponding deviations of

  12
    Malmendier et al. (2020a) calculate the average monthly turnover ratio (shares traded divided by
shares outstanding), weighted by market-capitalization across all firms in January and in December of


                                                                                        28
the turnover ratio from the trend (red solid line) against changes in experience-based
disagreement between cohorts, calculated as the standard deviation of experienced re-
turns (dashed blue line).13 The plot, which updates Figure 9 from Malmendier et al.
(2020a), reveals that increases in experience-based disagreement strongly predict higher
abnormal trade volume. Together with the findings on market valuation and market
participation, the figure confirms the explanatory power of experience-based learning for
market dynamics. The results on trading behavior also give rise to additional avenues for
future research. More fine-grained data would allow for asset-specific analyses, comparing
trading in those assets with the asset-specific prior experiences.

  International Capital Flows. As an example of an analysis that moves away from
the US stock market, I briefly report results from a related study that takes the notion
of experience effects to the international context and distinguishes between two types of
asset classes ­ domestic and foreign.
  Experience effects have direct implications for international macro models: Investors in
different countries have different "experiences," i. e., differ in their exposures to domestic
versus foreign outcomes. Different countries also feature different demographics, resulting
in different cross-cohort differences and market composition. For example, the experience-
effects model predicts that the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on risk attitudes and
beliefs are different across countries depending on how strongly the pandemic affected
the economy and the local stock-market, say, in Spain, where the IBEX 35 was still
significantly below pre-pandemic levels a year later, versus neighboring France, where
the CAC 40 reached and exceeded pre-pandemic levels around the same time. Moreover,
a higher fraction of market participants exposed to the crisis were relatively young in

the preceding year. They then log, linearly detrend, and CF-filter the yearly variable to obtain the
deviation of turnover ratio from the trend.
  13
     The variable takes the change in experienced returns as of the current year relative to the prior year,
and calculates the current-year age-cohort population-weighted standard deviation of this difference
variable.


                                                    29
France compared to the (more strongly) aging population in Spain.
  Malmendier et al. (2020b) demonstrate that experience effects help explain classic
international macro puzzles regarding capital flows and portfolio investment. Specifically,
they focus on the tendency of investors to

   1. hold an over-proportional fraction of their equity wealth in domestic stocks (home
       bias, cf. Cooper and Kaplanis (1986) and French and Poterba (1991));

   2. invest in domestic equity markets in periods of domestic or global crises (retrenchment,
       cf. Forbes and Warnock (2012); Broner et al. (2013));

   3. withdraw capital from foreign equity markets in periods of foreign & global crises
       (fickleness, cf. Forbes and Warnock (2012); Caballero and Simsek (2018)).


  The basic intuition relies on investors having had more exposure to domestic risky-
asset returns than foreign investors. In that sense, foreign investors behave similarly
to younger investors in the baseline experience-effect model. Malmendier et al. (2020b)
show that experience-based learning jointly rationalizes the above puzzles:14 First, the
setting generates home bias in portfolio holdings as agents perceive domestic output as
less risky. Hence, they tend to overweigh domestic assets. Second, agents over-react
to foreign output realizations because they are generally less confident about what they
know about the foreign country. As result, negative shocks, e. g., low output realizations
abroad, together with general equilibrium effects imply that capital inflows of domestic
agents (retrenchment) and outflows of foreign agents (fickleness) both increase. The
reverse holds for booms. That is, crises are followed by an increase in domestic inflows
and foreign outflows of capital, and booms are followed by the corresponding decrease,

  14
    To simplify the theoretical analysis, Malmendier et al. (2020b) endow agents with more precise prior
beliefs about domestic than foreign output, which capture that they are more confident about their
knowledge of their own country than a foreign country.



                                                  30
even though all agents perceive the shocks the same way, as negative or positive.
  In addition, experience-based learning generates new testable predictions based on the
demographic composition of different countries. Experience-based learning implies that
countries with a larger number of young market participants overreact (more) to both
domestic and foreign shocks. Hence, retrenchment and fickleness are both alleviated in
young-demographics countries, and exacerbated in old-demographics countries.
  All predictions are tested and confirmed in data from the IMF, World Bank, and
the World Federation of Exchanges. Thus, the concept of experience effect provides a
unifying framework for a range of international macro-puzzles. At the same time, both the
theoretical and the empirical analysis are rather "high-level," often due to data constraints
on the precise nature of the assets, details of investment and holding patterns, and the
demographics of different countries. The international context is probably the setting
that provides for the richest and most promising set of further analyses for researchers
with access to more fine-grained country-specific data.


5. Related Approaches

  Before concluding with some further suggestions for future research, I would be remiss
not to point to other modern formalizations of belief formation, many of which are able
to capture several--though typically not all--of the four stylized features.
  A large strand of the literature focuses on over-inference from more recent observations,
including models of natural expectation formation (Fuster et al., 2011, 2010) and over-
extrapolation (Barberis et al., 2015, 2016). These approaches capture key feature (2),
the significant recency bias in investors' belief formation. There is also evidence of such
over-extrapolation occuring in professional experts such as top managers running pension
funds (Andonov and Rauh, 2020), akin to feature (4), the robustness to learned expert
knowledge.


                                             31
  Other approaches incorporate both (1) long-lasting scarring effects and (2) recency
bias. An example is the model in Kozlowski et al. (2020), which assumes that the ex-
perience of economic shocks changes how people think about tail risk. Agents in their
model do not know the distribution of shocks, which induces updating and a long-lasting
economic response after the realization of such a tail event. The latter approach does
not naturally capture (3) the domain specificity of experience-based belief formation and
(4) the robustness to learned (expert) knowledge, though. One could, of course, assume
that individual updating about tail events is domain specific, i. e., individuals ignore or
are uninformed about the correlation between the returns of related assets, though this
seems implausible at least for professional forecasters, bankers, and other professionals.
  The most fundamental difference between the concept of experience effects and most
other modern models of belief formation, such as the ones cited above, is that the latter
models still rely on "information" as the core determinant. There is no room for "experi-
ences" to be stronger than learned information. Instead, information-based theories tend
to attribute the effect of "experiences" to information constraints, possibly paired with
heterogeneous priors and model uncertainty assumptions. The issue is that "learned"
information will not necessarily undo experience effects. The lasting effect of experiences
reflects a "re-wiring" that occurs as we accumulate experiences throughout our lives.
  Modern theoretical approaches that directly account for such re-wiring, outside the
literature on experience effects, tend to fall in the realm of memory research. A first
example is Wachter and Kahana (2019), who introduce the concept of retrieved-context
memory to financial decision-making. They define "context" as a record of associations
that arise from experiences and the environment. "Retrieved context" is the mechanism
through which this belief system responds to the current environment and which directly
links to experience-based learning. As the authors emphasize: "Unless agents have full
access to all decision-relevant information at the moment of choice, they must use their


                                            32
memory of past experiences to guide their decisions."
  The authors also introduce the concepts of similarity, contiguity, and recency as the
"three major laws governing the human memory system." Similarity is a concept that has
been incorporated into some economic theories, notably Gilboa and Schmeidler (1995)'s
case-based decision theory, though their axioms leave the form of similarity unrestricted.
Psychologists, instead, define similarity to capture the brain's tendency to recall past
information which is similar to currently active features or experiences. Relatedly, conti-
guity refers to the idea that people are more likely to recall features from past memory
which have previously co-occurred with features or experiences that are currently active.
And recency naturally captures the concept from stylized feature (2). The first two,
similarity and contiguity provide for a neuroscience underpinning of stylized feature (3),
domain specificity. As the authors write, they imply that "remembering an item involves
a jump-back-in-time to the state of mind that obtained when the item was previously
experienced," generating ­ when triggered ­ feature (1), the long-lasting imprint.
  A related model by Bordalo et al. (2020) is also in line with the notion of experience ef-
fects and its neuroscience foundations. The authors emphasize that the basic mechanisms
of memory make information embedded in past experiences disproportionately accessible
to decision makers. As such, their approach naturally captures the stylized features (1),
(2), and (4). Moreover, much of their model revolves around the role of "context," which
is related to (3) domain specificity, as we just discussed. They emphasize that contextual
stimuli trigger recall of past experiences based on contextual similarity.
  Overall, a modern understanding of memory-based anchoring and adjustment mecha-
nisms provides a direct underpinning for the evidence on experience effects and experience-
based learning. At the same time, this work still lacks clarity about what exactly charac-
terizes a "context" and what exactly qualifies as "similar," mirroring the lack of clarity
around "domains" and "domain specificity" in the literature on experience effects. Here,


                                            33
progress likely needs to come from the side of neuroscience to allow for more predictive
economic theories and empirical tests.


6. Implications for Future Research

  The neuroscientific and theoretical underpinnings of experience effects as well as the
empirical findings have allowed us to discern some of the key aspects of how our past
experiences influence our beliefs, attitudes, and decision-making. I have emphasized four
baseline findings: (1) the notion of a long-lasting imprint, which is slowly altered over time
as individuals accumulate new experiences, (2) the observation of a bias towards more
recent experiences, (3) the domain specificity, or lack of cross-fertilization, in experience-
based belief formation, and (4) the robustness of these findings to "learned knowledge,"
including that of professionals and experts. Both the theoretical and the empirical find-
ings have then pointed us towards further implications of experience effects and these
four features. The notion of a long-lasting imprint gives rise to (i) persistent cross-cohort
differences, and recency bias triggers (ii) a stronger (over-)reaction of younger cohorts to
recent shocks than older cohorts. Moreover, domain specificity invites (iii) more asset-
or market-specific research; and the robustness to "learned knowledge" invites (iv) more
analyses of professional, highly trained subjects such as doctors, fund managers, or central
bankers.
  Going forward, it would be desirable for theoretical work to aim not only for more
psychological and empirical realism, as much of the behavioral finance literature has done
already, but to also build more closely on the neuroscientific evidence of brain functions
and brain re-wiring. Concepts such as "similarity" and "contiguity" and "context" appear
to not have been fully sorted out in terms of their meaning for financial and economic
decision making. It remains to be fleshed out what exactly delineates a domain and how
"similarity" and "contiguity" help to identify it. We might also ask whether "domains"


                                             34
can be actively (re-)shaped, rather than being set in stone. For example, I discussed
that Malmendier and Nagel (2011) show how investors who get burned in the stock
market, do not seem to change their beliefs or behaviors regarding the bond market. This
domain specificity, though, relies implicitly on a categorization that originally creates
those domains. That is, the observed behavior occurs at a time time when stock and
bond markets are fairly well segregated, with different news stories, analysts, and other
resources dedicated to one or the other. But if, at different times or in different countries,
stocks and bonds were not categorized as cleanly as (quasi) separate, or there was a
larger convertible market, one might observe less specificity in behavior with respect to
experiences in those domains.15 It would very interesting to know the price and trading
implications of widening and narrowing domains, and identify the effects empirically.
  Another angle in need of theoretical development is work moving beyond information-
based theories­in the sense "information" is currently understood. An important step
forward, in terms of theoretical development, has been the move from theories of over-
extrapolation and over-inference, that still have "theoretically understood information"
at their core, to theories that emphasize "encoding" and "retrieval." An early predeces-
sor is the case-based decision theory of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1995), whose mapping
from "problems" and "actions" to results clearly sees the importance of individually ex-
perienced situations. While Gilboa and Schmeidler dispense entirely with the notion of
beliefs, later models such as Bordalo et al. (2019) and Wachter and Kahana (2020) in-
corporate a role of "context" while remaining grounded in a (quasi-)Bayesian modeling
framework. For a more extensive discussion, see Malmendier and Wachter (2021).
  More closely related to the model proposed here, one may ask whether the weights on
prior lifetime experiences should should truly be decreasing over all age ranges. While
capturing recency effects, such parameterization misses out on other aspects of brain

 15
      I thank Chris Parsons for making this point.


                                                     35
function, e. g., higher brain plasticity earlier in life. For example, some childhood expe-
riences might be particularly influential as the evidence in Duchin et al. (2021) (on the
long-term effects of CEOs growing up in a male-dominated family on how they allocate
capital to male versus female divisional managers) suggests.
  On the empirical side, the applicability of `experience effects' within finance has already
proven to be far-reaching. We have discussed papers on stock-market participation, trad-
ing behavior, and international capital flows. There are also numerous applications to
consumption and to inflation expectations in macro-finance, especially monetary eco-
nomics, e. g., Malmendier and Shen (2018); Malmendier and Nagel (2016); Malmendier
et al. (2021). (For an overview cf. Malmendier (2021).) However, we still have little
evidence on how past experiences shape other dimensions of household financial decision-
making. For example, whether individuals accumulate too much debt or too little (debt
aversion) given their financial situation, might be affected by experiences thye made ear-
lier in life, or they saw their parents make. Similarly, prior exposures could help explain
the large heterogeneity in savings rates. Do early experiences with the benefits of saving
make kids life-long savers, as sometimes said about the Germans and their tradition of
local S&L banks opening saving accounts for first-graders? Other applications include
insurance choices--from home to life and fire, flood, or earthquake insurances. While
differences in the choice of coverage have been related to demographic and financial de-
terminants, including proxies for risk aversion, experience-based learning points to the
deeper question where individual-level differences in the willingness to pay for insurance
may come from. What role does prior exposure to negative realizations of the underlying
risk play?16
  The household finance applications also illustrate that there is potential for more re-

  16
    Some of the existing insurance literature has related past natural disasters to a higher uptake of
the corresponding type of insurance; see for example Botzen and van den Bergh (2012) and Froot and
O'Connell (2007, 2008).


                                                 36
search on personal experiences. While some of the papers discussed earlier, such as
Kaustia and Kn¨
              upfer (2008) and Choi et al. (2009), leverage truly personal experiences,
much of the experience-effect literature uses exposure to macro-finance realizations. The
latter approach comes with the advantage of avoiding certain endogeneity concerns; but
it misses some of the experiences that are encoded most strongly. Personal experiences
also offer a pathway to incorporating parents' experiences, family background, and other
channels of intergenerational transfer into the research on experience effects.
  For all of these potential applications, researchers will benefit from the increasing avail-
ability of within-person "big data." These data sources allow us to distinguish standard
information-based explanations from attributing effects to personal experiences, and to
make progress on answering some of the open questions.




                                             37
References
Andonov, A. and J. D. Rauh (2020). The return expectations of institutional investors.

Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer (2015). X-CAPM: An extrapolative
  capital asset pricing model. Journal of financial economics 115 (1), 1­24.

Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer (2016). Extrapolation and bubbles.
  Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bear, M., B. Connors, and M. Paradiso (2020). Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain,
  Enhanced Edition. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.

Bianchi, F., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ma (2020). Belief distortions and macroeconomic
  fluctuations. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bissiri, P. G., C. C. Holmes, and S. G. Walker (2016). A general framework for updat-
  ing belief distributions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, Statistical
  methodology 78 (5), 1103.

Bliss, T. V. and T. Lømo (1973). Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in
  the dentate area of the anaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path.
  The Journal of Physiology 232 (2), 331­356.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, R. L. Porta, and A. Shleifer (2019). Diagnostic expectations
  and stock returns. The Journal of Finance 74 (6), 2839­2874.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2020). Memory, Attention, and Choice. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 135 (3), 1399­1442.

Botsch, M. J. and U. Malmendier (2020). The Long Shadows of the Great Inflation:
  Evidence from Residential Mortgages.

Botzen, W. W. and J. C. van den Bergh (2012). Risk attitudes to low-probability climate
  change risks: WTP for flood insurance. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organiza-
  tion 82 (1), 151­166.

Broner, F., T. Didier, A. Erce, and S. L. Schmukler (2013). Gross capital flows: Dynamics
  and crises. Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (1), 113­133.

Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2018). A model of fickle capital flows and retrenchment.
  Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009). Reinforcement learning
 and savings behavior. The Journal of finance 64 (6), 2515­2534.

Collin-Dufresne, P., M. Johannes, and L. A. Lochstoer (2017). Asset pricing when `this
  time is different'. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (2), 505­535.

                                            38
Cooper, I. A. and E. Kaplanis (1986). Costs to crossborder investment and international
  equity market equilibrium. Recent developments in corporate finance , 209­240.

Doidge, N. (2007). The brain that changes itself: stories of personal triumph from the
 frontiers of brain science. Penguin.

Duchin, R., M. Simutin, and D. Sosyura (2021). The origins and real effects of the gender
 gap: Evidence from CEOs' formative years. The Review of Financial Studies 34 (2),
 700­762.

Ehling, P., A. Graniero, and C. Heyerdahl-Larsen (2018). Asset prices and portfolio choice
  with learning from experience. The Review of Economic Studies 85 (3), 1752­1780.

Forbes, K. J. and F. E. Warnock (2012). Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and
  retrenchment. Journal of International Economics 88 (2), 235­251.

French, K. R. and J. M. Poterba (1991). Investor Diversification and International Equity
  Markets. The American Economic Review 81 (2), 222­226.

Frey, U. and R. G. Morris (1997). Synaptic tagging and long-term potentiation. Na-
  ture 385 (6616), 533­536.

Froot, K. A. and G. O'Connell (2007). 5. The Pricing of US Catastrophe Reinsurance.
  University of Chicago Press.

Froot, K. A. and P. G. O'Connell (2008). On the pricing of intermediated risks: Theory
  and application to catastrophe reinsurance. Journal of Banking & Finance 32 (1),
  69­85.

Fuster, A., B. Hebert, and D. Laibson (2011). Natural Expectations, Macroeconomic
  Dynamics and Asset Pricing. In D. Acemoglu and M. Woodford (Eds.), NBER Macroe-
  conomics Annual 2011. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Fuster, A., D. Laibson, and B. Mendel (2010). Natural Expectations and Macroeconomic
  Fluctuations. Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, 67­84.

Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1995). Case-based decision theory. The quarterly Journal
  of economics 110 (3), 605­639.

Graham, J. R. and K. Narasimhan (2004). Corporate Survival and Managerial Experi-
  ences During the Great Depression. Experimental & Empirical Studies eJournal .

Greenwood, R. and S. Nagel (2009). Inexperienced investors and bubbles. Journal of
  Financial Economics 93 (2), 239­258.

Huang, X. (2019). Mark Twain's Cat: Industry Investment Experience, Categorical
 Thinking and Stock Selection. The Journal of Finance Economics 131, 404­432.


                                           39
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (2015). An alternative to domain-general or domain-specific frame-
 works for theorizing about human evolution and ontogenesis. AIMS Neuroscience 2 (2),
 91­104.

Kaustia, M. and S. Kn¨
                     upfer (2008). Do investors overweight personal experience? Evi-
 dence from IPO subscriptions. The Journal of Finance 63 (6), 2679­2702.

Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2020). The tail that wags the econ-
 omy: Beliefs and persistent stagnation. Journal of Political Economy 128 (8), 2839­
 2879.

Kraus, A. and G. A. Sick (1980). Distinguishing Beliefs and Preferences in Equilibrium
  Prices. The Journal of Finance 35 (2), 335­344.

Malmendier, U. (2018). Behavioral Corporate Finance. In D. Bernheim, S. DellaVigna,
 and D. Laibson (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics, Volume 1. Amsterdam:
 Elsevier North-Holland.

Malmendier, U. (2021). Exposure, Experience, and Expertise: Why Personal Histories
 Matter in Economics. Working Paper .

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences
 affect risk taking? The quarterly journal of economics 126 (1), 373­416.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2016). Learning from inflation experiences. The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 131 (1), 53­87.

Malmendier, U., S. Nagel, and Z. Yan (2021). The making of hawks and doves. Journal
 of Monetary Economics 117, 19­42.

Malmendier, U., D. Pouzo, and V. Vanasco (2020a). Investor experiences and financial
 market dynamics. Journal of Financial Economics 136 (3), 597­622.

Malmendier, U., D. Pouzo, and V. Vanasco (2020b). Investor experiences and interna-
 tional capital flows. Journal of International Economics 124, 103302.

Malmendier, U. and L. S. Shen (2018). Scarred consumption. Working Paper, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Malmendier, U. and G. Tate (2005). CEO overconfidence and corporate investment. The
 journal of finance 60 (6), 2661­2700.

Malmendier, U., G. Tate, and J. Yan (2011). Overconfidence and early-life experi-
 ences: the effect of managerial traits on corporate financial policies. The Journal
 of finance 66 (5), 1687­1733.

Malmendier, U. and J. Wachter (2021). Memory of Past Experiences and Economic
 Decisions. Working Paper .

                                         40
Rabin, M. (1998). Psychology and economics. Journal of economic literature 36 (1),
  11­46.

Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. Wiley, New York.

Schoar, A. and L. Zuo (2017). Shaped by booms and busts: How the economy impacts
  CEO careers and management styles. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (5), 1425­
  1456.

Spunt, R. P. and R. Adolphs (2017). A new look at domain specificity: insights from
  social neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 18, 559­567.

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
  biases. Science 4157, 1124­1131.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2003). Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does" irrationality"
  disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions. NBER macroeco-
  nomics annual 18, 139­194.

Wachter, J. A. and M. J. Kahana (2019). A retrieved-context theory of financial decisions.
 Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Wachter, J. A. and M. J. Kahana (2020). Associative learning and representativeness.
 Available at SSRN 3602327 .

Weber, E. U., A.-R. Blais, and N. E. Betz (2002). A domain-specific risk-attitude scale:
 Measuring risk perceptions and risk behaviors. Journal of behavioral decision mak-
 ing 15 (4), 263­290.

Weber, E. U., U. B¨
                  ockenholt, D. J. Hilton, and B. Wallace (1993). Determinants of
 diagnostic hypothesis generation: effects of information, base rates, and experience.
 Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 19 (5), 1151.

Whitlock, J. R., A. J. Heynen, M. G. Shuler, and M. F. Bear (2006). Learning induces
 long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. science 313 (5790), 1093­1097.




                                           41
