                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MACHINE LEARNING AND MOBILE PHONE DATA CAN IMPROVE THE TARGETING
                   OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE

                                          Emily Aiken
                                        Suzanne Bellue
                                          Dean Karlan
                                      Christopher R. Udry
                                      Joshua Blumenstock

                                      Working Paper 29070
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29070


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021

Isabel Onate Falomir, Shikhar Mehra, Suraj Nair, Adrian Dar Serapio, Nathaniel Ver Steeg, and
Rachel Warren provided invaluable research assistance on this project. This project would not
have been possible without the dedication of our project partners in Togo, especially Minister
Cina Lawson, Shegun Bakari, Stanislas Telou, Leslie Mills, Kafui Ekouhoho, Morlé Koudeka,
and Attia Byll. The team at GiveDirectly was instrumental in implementing the Novissi
expansion studied in this paper (especially Han Sheng Chia, Michael Cooke, Kristen Lee, Alex
Nawar, and Daniel Quinn). We thank Esther Duflo, Luis Encinas, Tina George, Rema Hanna,
Ethan Ligon, and Ben Olken for helpful feedback. We are grateful for financial support from
Google.org, data.org, the Center for Effective Global Action, the Jameel Poverty Action Lab, the
Global Poverty Research Lab at Northwestern University, and the World Bank, which financed
the phone surveys and data collection under the WURI program. Blumenstock is supported by
NSF award IIS ­ 1942702. Authors retained full intellectual freedom in conducting this research,
and as such all opinions and errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Emily Aiken, Suzanne Bellue, Dean Karlan, Christopher R. Udry, and Joshua
Blumenstock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Machine Learning and Mobile Phone Data Can Improve the Targeting of Humanitarian Assistance
Emily Aiken, Suzanne Bellue, Dean Karlan, Christopher R. Udry, and Joshua Blumenstock
NBER Working Paper No. 29070
July 2021
JEL No. C55,I32,I38,O12,O38

                                           ABSTRACT

The COVID-19 pandemic has devastated many low- and middle-income countries (LMICs),
causing widespread food insecurity and a sharp decline in living standards1. In response to this
crisis, governments and humanitarian organizations worldwide have mobilized targeted social
assistance programs2. Targeting is a central challenge in the administration of these programs:
given available data, how does one rapidly identify the individuals and families with the greatest
need3? This challenge is particularly acute in the large number of LMICs that lack recent and
comprehensive data on household income and wealth4­6. Here we show that non-traditional "big"
data from satellites and mobile phone networks can improve the targeting of anti-poverty
programs. Our approach uses traditional survey-based measures of consumption and wealth to train
machine learning algorithms that recognize patterns of poverty in non-traditional data; the trained
algorithms are then used to prioritize aid to the poorest regions and mobile subscribers. We
evaluate this approach by studying Novissi, Togo's flagship emergency cash transfer program,
which used these algorithms to determine eligibility for a rural assistance program that disbursed
millions of dollars in COVID-19 relief aid. Our analysis compares outcomes ­ including exclusion
errors, total social welfare, and measures of fairness ­ under different targeting regimes. Relative
to the geographic targeting options considered by the Government of Togo at the time, the machine
learning approach reduces errors of exclusion by 4-21%. Relative to methods that require a
comprehensive social registry (a hypothetical exercise; no such registry exists in Togo), the
machine learning approach increases exclusion errors by 9-35%. These results highlight the
potential for new data sources to contribute to humanitarian response efforts, particularly in crisis
settings when traditional data are missing or out of date.

Emily Aiken                                      Christopher R. Udry
102 South Hall                                   Northwestern University
University of California, Berkeley               Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720                               Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences
emilyaiken@berkeley.edu                          2211 Campus Drive #3247
                                                 Evanston, IL 60208
Suzanne Bellue                                   and NBER
University of Mannheim                           christopher.udry@northwestern.edu
sbellue@mail.uni-mannheim.de
                                                 Joshua Blumenstock
Dean Karlan                                      School of Information
Kellogg Global Hub                               102 South Hall
Northwestern University                          University of California, Berkeley
2211 Campus Drive                                jblumenstock@berkeley.edu
Evanston, IL 60208
and CEPR
and also NBER
dean.karlan@gmail.com
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a sharp decline in living standards across the world, as
policies designed to stop the spread of the disease have disrupted ordinary economic activity.
Economically vulnerable households in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are among
the hardest hit, with over 100 million individuals estimated to have transitioned into extreme
poverty since the onset of the pandemic 7.

To offset the most severe consequences of this sudden income decline, governments and
humanitarian organizations around the world have mobilized relief efforts. Gentilini et al. (2021)
estimates that over 3,300 new social assistance programs have been launched since early 2020 2,
providing over $800 billion dollars in cash transfer payments to over 1.5 billion people (roughly
one fifth of the world's population).

The overwhelming majority of COVID-19 response efforts ­ and the majority of cash transfer
programs globally ­ provide targeted social assistance. In other words, specific criteria are used
to determine potential eligibility, typically some proxy for socioeconomic status. In most wealthy
nations, governments rely on recent household income data to determine program eligibility 8.
However, in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), where economic activity is often
informal and based on home-produced agriculture, governments typically do not observe income
for the vast majority of the population3. Other potential sources of targeting data are often
incomplete or out of date 6,9; for example, only half of the poorest countries having completed a
census in the past 10 years 4. In such contexts, data gaps preclude governments from
implementing well-targeted social assistance programs 5,10.

Here we develop, implement, and evaluate a new approach to targeting social assistance based
on machine learning algorithms and non-traditional "big data" from satellites and mobile phone
networks. This approach leverages recent advances in machine learning that show that such data
can help accurately estimate the wealth of small geographic regions 4,11,12 and individual mobile
subscribers13,14. It also builds on a rich economics literature on the design of appropriate
mechanisms for targeting social assistance 3,15­18. See Methods §1 for a discussion of prior work.

Our results are based on the design and evaluation of Novissi, Togo's flagship emergency social
assistance program. The Government of Togo launched Novissi in April 2020, shortly after the
first COVID-19 cases appeared in the country. As economic lockdown orders forced many
Togolese to stop working and led to widespread food insecurity (Figure S1), Novissi aimed to
provide subsistence cash relief to those most impacted.i Eligible beneficiaries received bi-weekly
payments of roughly USD $10. In an effort to minimize in-person contact, Novissi enrollment
and payment was digital: beneficiaries registered using their mobile phones and transfers were
made via mobile money. Full details on the Novissi program are provided in Methods §2.

When the government first launched Novissi, it did not have a traditional social registry that
could be used to assess program eligibility, and had neither the time nor the resources to build




i
    See https://novissi.gouv.tg/
                                                2
such a registry in the middle of the pandemic.ii Instead, Novissi eligibility was determined based
on data contained in a national voter registry that had been updated in late 2019. Specifically,
benefits were initially disbursed to individuals who met three criteria: (1) "self -targeted"15 by
dialing in to the Novissi platform and entering basic information from their mobile phone and;
(2) registered to vote in specific regions (the program initially focused on the Greate r Lomé
region around the capital city); and (3) self-declared to work in an informal occupation in their
voter registration.iii

Our research efforts focused on helping the government expand the Novissi program from
informal workers in Greater Lomé to poorer individuals in rural regions of the country, and were
designed to meet the government's two stated policy objectives: first, to direct benefits to the
poorest geographic regions of the country; and second, to prioritize benefits to the poorest
mobile subscribers in those regions.iv The approach we developed, which uses machine learning
to analyze non-traditional data from satellites and mobile phone networks, has two distinct steps
(Figure 1).

In the first step, we constructed micro-gridded estimates of the average consumption of every
1km2 region in Togo by applying machine learning algorithms to high-resolution satellite
imagery. Our approach uses pre-trained computer vision algorithms to extract features from the
satellite images, then trains a machine learning algorithm to predict the average consumption of
households in those images, using nationally-representative household survey data as training
data (Methods §3.b)4,12.

In the second step, we estimated the average daily consumption of each mobile phone subscriber
by applying machine learning algorithms to mobile phone metadata provided by Togo's two
mobile phone operators (see Methods §3d for a discussion of data privacy concerns).
Specifically, we conducted surveys with a large and representative sample of mobile phone
subscribers, used the surveys to measure the wealth and/or consumption of each subscriber, and
then matched the survey-based estimates to detailed metadata on each subscriber's history of
phone use. This sample was used to train supervised machine learning algorithms that predict
socioeconomic status from phone use (Pearson  ranges from 0.41-0.46 ­ see Methods §4)13,14,20.
This second step is similar in spirit to a traditional proxy means test (PMT), with two main
differences: we used a high-dimensional vector of mobile phone features instead of a low-
dimensional vector of assets to estimate wealth; and we used machine learning algorithms


ii
    The most recent census, which was completed in 2011, did not contain information on household wealth or
poverty; more recent national surveys on living standards only contacted a small fraction of all households. As
discussed in Methods §1, social registries used to determine potential eligibility for anti-poverty programs in LMICs
frequently rely on proxy means tests or related methods, where the eligibility of each household is determined by
asking household members a number of questions about the assets and characteristics of the household. To construct
a universal registry usually requires that government surveyors visit all households in the count ry, and typically
takes years to organize and execute 19.
iii
    The decision to target informal occupations helped prioritize benefits to people who were forced to stop working
at the onset of the crisis. However, this approach does not necessarily target benefits to the poorest households in the
country (Figure S2 and Methods §5).
iv
    Individuals without access to a mobile phone could not receive Novissi payments, which were digitally delivered
using mobile money. We discuss issues regarding exclusion of those without phones in Methods § 5.f.
                                                           3
designed to maximize out-of-sample predictive power instead of the traditional linear regression
that maximizes in-sample goodness-of-fit21.

Our main analysis evaluates the performance of this new approach to targeting that combines
machine learning and mobile phone data ­ which we refer to more succinctly as the phone-based
approach ­ by comparing targeting errors using the phone-based approach to targeting errors
under three counterfactual approaches: a geographic targeting approach that the government
piloted in summer 2020 (where all individuals are eligible within the poorest prefectures, Togo's
admin-2 level, or poorest cantons, Togo's adm in-3 level); occupation-based targeting (including
Novissi's original approach to targeting informal workers as well as an "optimal" approach to
targeting the poorest occupation categories in the country); and a parsimonious method based on
phone data without machine learning (that uses total expenditures on calling and texting as a
proxy for wealth).

We present results that compare the effectiveness of these different targeting mechanisms in two
different scenarios. First, we evaluate the actual policy scenario faced by the of Togo in
September of 2020, which involved distributing cash to 60,000 beneficiaries within Togo's 100
poorest cantons (the smallest administrative unit in the country, each containing on average 10
villages). This first scenario is evaluated using data collected in a large phone survey we
designed for this purpose and conducted in September 2020. The "ground truth" measure of
poverty in this first scenario is a proxy-means test, as consumption data could not be feasibly
collected in the phone survey. v Second, we simulate and evaluate a more general and
hypothetical policy scenario in which the government is interested in targeting the poorest
individuals nationwide; this scenario is evaluated using national household survey data collected
in the field by the government in 2018-2019. The second simulation uses consumption as the
"ground truth" measure of poverty. These data are described in Methods §3 and details on the
evaluation are in Methods §5.

In the first scenario focused on reaching the poorest people in the 100 poorest cantons, we find
that the phone-based approach to targeting significantly reduces errors of exclusion (true poor
who are mistakenly deemed ineligible) and errors of inclusion (non-poor who are mistakenly
deemed eligible), relative to the other feasible approaches to targeting available to the
Government of Togo (Figure 2a and first four columns of Table 1). We focus on the ability of
each targeting method to reach the poorest 29% in each of the two survey datasets, since the rural
Novissi expansion only had sufficient funding to provide benefits to 29% of individuals in
eligible geographies (Table S5 and Table S6 evaluate performance using alternative poverty
thresholds). Using a PMT as a measure of "true" poverty status, phone-based targeting (AUC=
0.70) outperforms the other feasible methods of targeting rural Novissi aid (e.g., AUC=0.59-0.64




v
 The PMT is based on a stepwise regression procedure, described in Appendix A: Selection of Variables for
Proxy-Means Test, which captures roughly 48% of the variation in consumption. Thus, for the first scenario
focused on the rural Novissi program, all targeting methods are evaluated for targeting quality with respect to this
PMT. The phone-based machine learning model is likewise trained using the PMT as ground truth.
                                                          4
for geographic blanket targeting). As a result, errors of exclusion (defined as 1 ­ Recall) are
lower for the phone-based approach (53%) than for feasible alternatives (59%-81%).

Phone-based targeting likewise outperforms most feasible methods when we simulate the
targeting of a hypothetical national anti-poverty program (Figure 2b and last four columns of
Table 1). Here, the phone-based approach is more effective at prioritizing the poor (AUC = 0.73)
than geography-based alternatives (AUC = 0.65 - 0.68), and likewise leads to lower exclusion
errors (50%) than most feasible alternatives (52%-76%). One exception in this hypothetical
program is occupation-based targeting: while the Novissi program's original criteria of targeting
informal workers would not scale well to a national program (76% exclusion errors), an
alternative "optimal" occupation -based approach that we develop (Methods §5.b), which assigns
all transfers the poorest occupational category (agricultural workers), slightly outperforms
phone-based targeting (48% exclusion errors).

Taken together, the results in Table 1 indicate that the phone-based targeting approach was more
effective in the actual rural Novissi program than it would be in a hypothetical nationwide
program. While there are several differences between the two sets of results that might explain
this gap,vi our analysis suggests that the benefits of phone-based targeting are greatest when the
population under consideration is more homogeneous, and when there is less variation in other
factors (such as place of residence) that are used in more traditional approaches to targeting. For
instance, when we restrict the simulation of the hypothetical national program to households in
rural areas, the gains from phone-based targeting increase (Table S7).

We likewise find that the performance benefits of phone-based targeting increase as programs
seek to target the most extreme poor. This can be seen by comparing Table 1, where targeted
performance is measured by how many of the poorest 29% receive benefits, to Table S5, which
measures whether households below the poverty line ($1.90 per capita daily consumption) are
targeted, and Table S6, which focuses on households below the extreme poverty line ($1.35 per
capita daily consumption). While all targeting methods perform better at targeting the extreme
poor, the differential between the phone-based approach and other methods is greater when the
consumption threshold is lower.

The phone-based approach we develop relies heavily on machine learning to construct a poverty
score for each mobile subscriber, where eligibility is a complex function of how the subscriber
uses their phone (Figure S5). We also consider an alternative approach that does not use machine
learning, but instead simply targets mobile phone subscribers with the lowest mobile phone
expenditures over the preceding months (Methods §4.b). We find that this "p hone expenditure"
model (AUC= 0.57 for rural Novissi and 0.63 in for the hypothetical national program ­ see
Table 1) performs substantially worse than the ML-based model (AUC= 0.70 for rural Novissi


vi
  These differences include: the rural Novissi evaluation is focused in 100 cantons while the hypothetical national
program is evaluated nationwide; the rural Novissi evaluation uses a PMT as ground truth while the national
evaluation a consumption measure; the rural Novissi evaluation is representative of mobile network subscribers
while the national evaluation is representative of the entire population; the rural Novissi evaluation uses data from
2020 while the national evaluation's data is from 2018-2019; and the phone survey used to collect data for the rural
Novissi evaluation is likely of a lower quality than the in-person survey used for the national evaluation.
                                                          5
and 0.73 in for the hypothetical national program). While the phone expenditure model requires
much less data and may be easier to implement, this parsimony increases targeting errors ­ and
may also introduce scope for strategic "gaming" if used repeatedly over time.

We also compare the phone-based approach to alternative targeting approaches that require a
recent and comprehensive social registry. While the Government of Togo did not have such a
registry, this comparison helps situate this method relative to other methods commonly used by
development researchers and policymakers. These results, shown in Panel B of Table 1, can only
be simulated using the national in-person survey, since the phone survey did not collect
consumption data). The results are more ambiguous: the phone-based approach (AUC = 0.70-
0.73) is approximately as accurate as targeting using an asset-based wealth index (AUC = 0.54-
0.75), but less accurate than using a poverty probability index (AUC = 0.81) or perfectly-
calibrated proxy-means test (AUC = 0.85). vii We note, however, that the performance of the
"perfectly calibrated" PMT may substantially over-estimate the performance of a real-world
PMT, which declines steadily over time since calibration ( Methods §5.b)22,23.

Improvements in targeting performance translate to an increase in social welfare. Using the
constant relative risk-aversion (CRRA) utility function, we calculate aggregate welfare under the
phone-based approach and each of the counterfactual targeting approaches. Under the CRRA
assumptions, individual utility is a concave function of consumption. By assuming a fixed
budget ­ which we fix at a size analogous to that of the Novissi rural aid program, which had a
budget of USD 4 million to distribute among 154,238 program registrants ­ and equal transfer
sizes to all beneficiaries, we simulate the distribution of benefits among eligible individuals at
counterfactual targeting thresholds to trace out social welfare curves for each targeting method.
This social welfare analysis also allows us to identify the optimal beneficiary share and
corresponding transfer size. Figure 3 shows the utility curves for each of the targeting methods
simulated, separately for the two datasets. Note that phone-based targeting, geographic
blanketing, and an asset-based wealth index all achieve approximately the same maximum utility
in the hypothetical national program, but phone-based targeting dominates in the rural Novissi
program. Also note that all targeting methods outperform a universal basic income scheme if the
beneficiary share and transfer size is well-calibrated.

These utilitarian welfare gains suggest that society as a whole will benefit from improved
targeting, but do not imply that all subgroups of the population will benefit equally. Indeed, there
is growing concern that algorithmic decision-making can unfairly discriminate against vulnerable
groups24­26. To address these concerns in the context of the Novissi program, we audit the
fairness of each targeting method across a set of potentially sensitive characteristics, while noting
that notions of fairness and parity are contested and often in tension.27 Figure 4 a shows, as an
example, that the phone-based approach does not cause women to be systematically more likely
to be incorrectly excluded by the targeting mechanism from receiving benefits than men (see also
Methods §5.e). Likewise, the phone-based approach does not create significant exclusion errors


vii
  The asset-based wealth index uses principal component analysis to generate an index of poverty based on
ownership of 8-20 assets. The PPI is implemented using IPA's standard poverty scorecard for Togo
(https://www.povertyindex.org/country/togo), based on point scoring for ten variables relating to poverty. The PMT
uses machine learning to select eleven variables that are jointly most predictive of consumption. See Methods § 3.a.
                                                         6
for specific ethnic groups (Figure 4 b), religions, age groups, or type of household, though there
are small differences in targeting accuracy between groups (Figure S7 ). We also compare the
fairness of the phone-based approach to several other targeting approaches by evaluating each
method's demographic parity, i.e., the extent to which each method under- or over-targets
specific demographic subgroups, relative to that group's true poverty rate (Figure 4 c-d and
Figure S8 ). Overall, we find that none of the targeting methods analyzed naively achieves perfect
parity across subgroups; a phenomenon referred to as "no fairness through unawareness."28 The
largest parity differences occur with geographic targeting methods.

This novel approach to targeting requires careful consideration of the ways in which individuals
can be incorrectly excluded from receiving program benefits (Methods §5.f). Our analysis
highlights five main sources of exclusion errors for the expansion of Novissi (Table 2 ): (i)
beneficiaries must have a SIM card and access to a mobile phone (2018 -2019 field survey data
indicate that 65% of adults and 85% of households have a phone; see also Figure S9 ); (ii) they
must be a registered voter (roughly 87% of adults); (iii) they must self-target and attempt to
register (roughly 40% of eligible individuals attempted); (iv) they must succeed in registering,
which requires basic reading and digital literacy (72% succeed); (v) they must be successfully
identified as eligible by the ML algorithm (47% recall, per Table 1). Many of these sources of
possible exclusion overlap; Table S8 thus estimates, based on the 2020 phone survey, the extent
to which each successive step in registration creates additional exclusions. These results
highlight the fact that algorithmic targeting errors are an important source of program exclusion,
but that real-world programs also face structural and environmental constraints to inclusion.

More broadly, our analysis shows how non-traditional "big" data can help identify the poor who
are meant to benefit from an emergency social assistance program. The identification is
imperfect: there are important errors of both exclusion and inclusion when relying on these data
sources. There are also important limitations to this approach, for instance regarding data access
and privacy; several such considerations are discussed in Methods §6. Moreover, our results do
not imply that mobile phone-based targeting should replace traditional approaches reliant on
proxy means tests or community-based targeting. Rather, these new methods provide a rapid and
cost-effective supplement that may be most useful in crisis settings or in contexts where
traditional data sources are incomplete or out of date. We believe future work should explore
how real-time data sources, such as the phone data used by Novissi, can be best combined with
more traditional field-based measurements, so that these complementary data sources can be best
integrated in the design of inclusive systems for social protection.




                                                7
                                               Methods
1. Related work

There is a rich history of theoretical and empirical work that compares and evaluates methods for
targeting social transfer programs. While there is increasing interest in "universal basic income",
in which everyone is eligible for transfers, most countries use one or more targeting mechanisms
to determine eligibility 3. Typically, the goal of targeting is to ensure that the poorest individuals
receive transfers.

Many programs include some degree of self-targeting, in which beneficiaries are required to take
some action in order to receive benefits 15,29,30. If the benefits of the program, relative to the costs
associated with that action, are higher for poorer people, self -targeting can direct a greater share
of benefits to the poor. Geographic targeting is also common, whereby benefits are restricted to
individuals who live in specific regions31,32. Empirical evidence on geographic targeting
indicates that more granularly targeted programs can be more effective at prioritizing the poor,
but the implementation of such programs requires fine-grained poverty maps and distribution
mechanisms that can be deployed in small regions 33­35. With proxy means tests (PMT), a
number of variables are collected for each household, which are then used to impute an
approximate measure of consumption or wealth for that household. 16,36 Likewise, a simple
poverty scorecard or poverty probability index (PPI) uses a small number of variables to impute
a poverty score. 22,37 PMTs and PPIs are frequently used in LMICs, but do require that the
government collect and maintain a comprehensive social registry that records the in formation of
each household. Finally, community-based targeting (CBT) approaches rely on members of the
community to identify the poorest households in the area 38,39. CBT-based approaches do not
always target the lowest-consumption households, but allow the community to define their own
notion of poverty, which can lead to higher satisfaction among community members 29 but may
also lower perceptions of program legitimacy 40.

2. The COVID-19 pandemic in Togo and the Novissi program

Togo is a small country of roughly 8 million in West Africa. Over 50% of the population lives
below the international poverty line. Shortly after the first COVID-19 cases were confirmed in
Togo in early March 2020, the government imposed economic lockdown orders to prevent the
spread of the disease. These lockdowns forced many Togolese to stop working, raising concerns
about the potential for rising food insecurity (Figure S1).

On April 8 2020, the government launched the Novissi program, where "Novissi" means
"solidarity" in the Ew é language. According to Minister Cina Lawson, Novissi " was built and
designed in order to help those people who are the most vulnerable population and the most
impacted by the anti-COVID measures."viii Novissi was initially designed to provide benefits to
informal workers in Greater Lomé, the large metropolitan area surrounding the capital city where


viii
   https://undp-ric.medium.com/cina-lawson-a-covid-cash-transfer-programme-that-gives-more-money-to-women-
in-togo-2386c5dff49
                                                    8
the lockdown orders were initially focused. The rationale for targeting informal workers was that
they were more likely to be vulnerable, and more likely to be impacted by the lockdown orders.

To determine eligibility for Novissi, the government relied upon a national voter registry that
was updated in late 2019, in which individuals indicated their home location and occupation. At
the time, the voter registry contained 3,633,898 entries, which the electoral commission reports
is equivalent to 87% of the total adult population (see Table 2 for details).

Receiving Novissi benefits required that individuals register by dialing in to the Novissi USSD
platform from a mobile phone. Thus, registration initially required (i) a valid and unique voter ID
linked to an eligible occupation from an eligible location; (ii) a valid SIM card, and (iii) access to
a mobile phone. A smartphone was not required for registration; the USSD platform was
accessible from a basic phone. Since phone sharing is common in Togo, multiple SIM cards
could be registered through a single phone (so long as each SIM was then linked to a valid voter
ID). See Methods §5.f for a discussion of the extent to which voter and phone requirement may
have led to program exclusions.

Eligible female beneficiaries were then paid 12,250 FCFA (USD $22.50) per month; men
received 10,500 FCFA (USD $20) per month. The payments were disbursed in two bi-weekly
installments, for three months, using existing mobile money infrastructure managed by the
country's two mobile network operators. The system was designed to be 100% digital , so that
registration, eligibility determination, and payment could all be accomplished without face -to-
face contact. Novissi was promoted actively through radio advertisements and community
leaders, and 4.4 million registration attempts were reported on the day the program launched. ix In
this first phase of Novissi, which focused on Greater Lomé, 511,611 beneficiaries received
payments.

Our analysis focuses on a second phase of Novissi, which was initiated after the Novissi program
in Greater Lomé had terminated. Specifically, in partnership with the NGO GiveDirectly, the
government wished to expand Novissi eligibility to the rural poor. The policy mandate from the
government was to (i) prioritize benefits to people living in Togo's 100 poorest cantons (of the
397 cantons nationally), where the number 100 was selected by the government in order to
balance the desire to focus on the poorest villages, without focusing excessively on specific
regions; and (ii) prioritize the poorest individuals in those 100 cantons.

During the second phase of Novissi, registration and enrollment used several of the same steps
described above: individuals were required to have a voter ID registered in one of the 100
poorest cantons, and they had to self -register using a mobile phone with a unique SIM card.
However, the individual's occupation was not used to determine eligibility; instead, the
estimated wealth of the individual, based on the ML methods described in this paper, were used
to limit eligibility to the estimated poorest subscribers in those 100 cantons.




ix
  https://undp-ric.medium.com/cina-lawson-a-covid-cash-transfer-programme-that-gives-more-money-to-women-
in-togo-2386c5dff49
                                                    9
3. Data Sources

         a. Survey Data

Our core analysis relies heavily on two surveys conducted by Togo 's Institut National de la
Statistique et des Etudes Economiques et Démographiques (INSEED). The first survey, which is
nationally representative, was conducted in the field in 2018 and 2019 (N = 6,171). The second
survey was conducted over the phone in September 2020, and is representative of mobile
network subscribers inferred to be living in rural cantons eligible for Novissi aid (N = 8,915).x

2018-2019 Field Survey : Our first survey dataset was obtained from a nationally representative
household survey. Specifically, 540 enumeration areas (EAs) were drawn at random from Togo 's
approximately 6,000 EAs, with weight proportional to the size of the EA in the last national
census (conducted in 2011). 12 households were then drawn at random from each of the selected
EAs to be interviewed, for a total of 6,172 households. Surveys, which lasted about three hours,
were conducted in two waves, with the first wave between October and December 2018 and the
second wave between April and June 2019. We remove one observation that is missing
consumption expenditure and asset data, leaving 6,171 observations. Interviews took place with
the head of household when possible, and alternatively with the most knowledgeable adult
present.

As part of the survey 's recontact protocol, phone numbers were requested from a representative
of each household; 4,618 households (75%) of households are matched to a phone number. The
data do not include an identifier for which member of the household the phone number belongs
to. 4,171 households have phone numbers that contain at least one transaction in our mobile
phone transaction logs in the three months prior to their survey date (91% of households with
phone numbers), leading to a matched survey-mobile phone dataset of N = 4,171. Note that this
matched dataset is not nationally representative nor necessarily representative of mobile phone
subscribers, as there is selection in which households and household members provide phone
numbers.

2020 Phone Survey : Our second survey dataset is obtained from a phone survey conducted over
two weeks in September 2020. The survey lasted approximately 40 minutes, and co vered
demographics, asset ownership, and well-being. Phone numbers for the 2020 phone survey were
drawn from mobile phone transaction logs and the sample is representative of subscribers
inferred based on their mobile phone data to be living in rural cantons eligible for Novissi aid
(See Appendix B: Sampling for 2020 Phone Survey). Note that since the sample is drawn based
on inferred location, not all interviewees necessarily reside in an aid -eligible canton. The survey




x
 We use these two different survey datasets because neither dataset is sufficient by itself for the anlaysis we require:
The 2020 survey did not collect consumption data, which is important for evaluating cert ain counterfactuals, and the
2018-19 survey only surveyed a small number of households in the 100 poorest cantons that were eligible for
Novissi. We had planned to conduct a large in-person survey in early 2021 that would provide the single point of
focus for this paper, but were forced to postpone the survey indefinitely due to a resurgence in COVID-19.
                                                          10
includes a question on canton of residence, and 68% of observations report living in a Novissi-
eligible canton.

Of the phone numbers drawn, 28% respond, consent to the survey, and complete the entire
survey. In total, after removing low-quality surveys and those missing poverty outcomes, the
dataset contains 8,915 observations corresponding to individual subscribers. We reweight the
survey for nonresponse using the same mobile phone features and machine learning methods
described in Methods §4. Specifically, we train a gradient boosting model (implemented with
LightGBM) to predict response from mobile phone features, and produce predictions of response
probability out-of-sample over 5-fold cross validation. Our sample weights consist of the inverse
of the draw probability and the inverse of the predicted probability of response.

Construction of Poverty Outcomes : We construct four poverty outcomes from the survey data:
consumption expenditure (captured in the 2018-2019 field survey only), an asset-based wealth
index, a poverty probability index (PPI), and a proxy-means test (PMT).
       -   Consumption expenditure: The consumption expenditure outcome is only available in the
           dataset from the 2018-2019 field survey. Disaggregated expenditures for more than 200
           food and nonfood items are elicited in each household interview. The consumption
           aggregate is then adjusted for a price index calculated at the prefecture level. The final
           outcome measure is per-capita adult equivalent household consumption expenditure,
           which we transform to USD per day.
       -   Asset index: We calculate a PCA asset index for households in the 2018-2019 field
           survey and for the households associated with individuals interviewed in the 2020 phone
           survey. Asset indices are constructed with Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The
           asset index is constructed from 24 underlying binary asset variables in the 2018-2019
           field survey and 10 underlying binary asset variables in the 2020 phone survey. The asset
           indices for the two surveys are constructed independently, from different sets of assets,
           and therefore do not share a basis vector. The basis vector for each index is shown in
           Table S1. The asset index explains 31.50% of the variance in asset ownership in the
           2018-2019 field survey, and 53.45% of the variance in asset ownership in the 2020 phone
           survey. However, the variance explained in the two indices should not be directly
           compared since there are far fewer assets recorded in the 2020 phone survey than in the
           2018-2019 field survey. We also note that the asset index for the 2020 phone survey
           dataset is dominated by variation in ownership of three assets (toilet, radio, and
           motorcycle; see Table S1) and is therefore considerably less smooth than the asset index
           in the 2018-2019 phone survey dataset.
       -   Poverty probability index (PPI): We use the scorecard for the current poverty probability
           index used by Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA). xi The index is calibrated based on a
           nationally representative survey conducted by INSEED in 2015 (N= 2,335). "Poverty
           probability" is scored based on ten household questions, including region of residence,
           education of adults and children, asset ownership, and consumption of sugar. We



xi
     https://www.povertyindex.org/country/togo
                                                  11
            calculate the PPI only for households in the 2018-2019 field survey, as the data necessary
            for all components were not collected in the 2020 phone survey.
        -   Proxy-means test (PMT): Using the data from the 2018-2019 field survey, we follow a
            stepwise forward selection process to select the 12 asset and demographic variables that
            are jointly most predictive of per-capita household consumption (see Appendix A:
            Selection of Variables for Proxy-Means Test for details). We use these variables to
            construct a consistent proxy-means test (PMT) for the 2018-2019 field survey and the
            2020 phone survey. Following recent literature, we use a regularized linear model (Ridge
            regression) rather than a simple linear regression to maximize out-of-sample
            accuracy 21,26. For the 2018-2019 field survey, PMT "consumption" estimates are
            produced out-of-sample over 10-fold cross validation. For the 2020 phone survey, we
            train the Ridge regression on the entire 2018-2019 field survey sample and use the fitted
            model to produce PMT "consumption" estimates for each phone survey observation.
            Over 10-fold cross validation, the PMT explains 48.35% of the variance in log-
            transformed consumption expenditure in the 2018-2019 field survey. The weights for the
            PMT are included in Table S2. Since they are trained to predict consumption, PMT
            "consumption" estimates can be interpreted as estimated USD/day.

Construction of Occupation Categories: We use self-reported occupation (of the household head
for the 2018-2019 field survey, and of the respondent for the 2020 phone survey) to categorize
occupations and later simulate occupation-based targeting. We first classify each of the self -
reported occupations according to the occupation categories in the Novissi registry. We identify
which of these categories are informal (in the Novissi registry, more than 2,000 unique
occupations are considered informal ­ some of the most common ones are venders, hairdressers,
taxi drivers, tailors, construction workers, and the unemployed). We further classify occupations
in 10 broad categories according to the Afrostat system xii. Table S3 records these categories,
along with the proportion in each category in each of the two surveys and associated poverty.

            b. Poverty Maps

To simulate geographic targeting, we rely on poverty maps of Togo 's prefectures (admin-2 level,
40 prefectures) and cantons (admin-3 level, 397 cantons). In the 2018-2019 field survey, the
latitude and longitude of each household were recorded by enumerators as part of the interview,
so we map each observation to a prefecture and canton using the geographic coordinates. For the
2020 phone survey, we ask each respondent to report their prefecture and canton of residence.

Prefecture poverty map : INSEED completed a survey-based poverty mapping exercise in 2017.
Specifically, a proxy-means test was calibrated on a small consumption sample survey conducted
in 2015 (N = 2,335). 26,902 households were then surveyed in the field over three weeks in 530
EAs, sampled to be representative at the prefecture level. The interview included questions on
demographics, education, asset ownership, and household characteristics that made up the PMT.
The calibrated PMT was then used to infer the "consumption" of each household, and
observations were aggregated to estimate the percentage of the population living under the Togo -


xii
      https://www.afristat.org/nomenclatures/
                                                   12
specific poverty line of USD 1.79/day in each prefecture. Figure S3 shows the resulting poverty
map. For validation, we evaluate the correlation between prefecture-level poverty rates from the
poverty mapping exercise and average consumption in the 2018-2019 field survey. The Person
correlation coefficient is -0.78, and the Spearman correlation coefficient is -0.70.

Canton poverty map: When COVID-19 first appeared in Togo in early 2020, it had been at least
ten years since a household survey had been conducted in Togo that was representative at the
canton level. Togo 's last census was conducted in 2011, but did not include information on
income, consumption, or asset ownership. We therefore rely on recently-produced publicly
available satellite-based estimates of poverty which use deep learning models trained on DHS
data from neighboring countries to estimate average wealth of each 1km2 satellite tile in Togo. 12
We overlay the resulting tile-level wealth estimates with high resolution estimates of population
density inferred from satellite imagery 41 to obtain population-weighted average wealth estimates
for each canton, shown in Figure S3. For validation, we evaluate the canton-level correlation
between average wealth from the satellite-based poverty map and average consumption in the
2018-2019 field survey (though note that the latter survey is not representative at the canton
level). The Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.57, and the Spearman correlation coefficient is
0.52.

       c. Mobile Phone Metadata

We obtain mobile phone metadata (call detail records, or CDR) from Togo 's two mobile network
operators for certain time periods in 2018-2021. We focus on three slices of mobile network
data: October - December 2018, April - June 2019, and March - September 2020. The three-
month periods in 2018 and 2019 are matched to households interviewed in the first and second
wave of the field survey, respectively. The seven-month period in 2020 is matched to outcomes
for individuals interviewed in the phone survey in September 2020.

Our CDR data contain the following information:
   -   Calls: Caller phone number, recipient phone number, date and time of call, duration of
       call, ID of the cell tower through which the call is placed.
   -   SMS messages: Sender phone number, recipient phone number, date and time of the
       message, ID of the antenna through which the message is sent.
   -   Mobile data usage: Phone number, date and time of transaction, amount of data
       consumed (upload and download combined).
   -   Mobile money transactions: Sender phone number, recipient phone number (if peer-to-
       peer), date and time of the transaction, amount of transaction, and broad category of
       transaction type (cash in, cash out, peer-to-peer, or bill pay).

October-December 2018 and April-June 2019 CDR: Between October 1 and December 30,
2018, there were a total of 4.84 million unique mobile network subscribers between the two
mobile phone networks (where a subscriber is any phone number that places at least one call or
SMS network on a network). Between April 1 and June 31, 2019, there were a total of 4.89
million mobile network subscribers. We identify spammers on the network as any phone number
that placed an average of over 100 calls or 100 SMS messages per day, and remove any
                                               13
transactions associated with these numbers from our dataset. We remove 232 spammers in the
2018 time period and 162 spammers in the 2019 time period. In the 2018-2019 CDR, we observe
only calls, SMS messages, and mobile money transactions (we do not observe mobile data
usage).

March-September 2020 CDR: For data between March 1 and September 30, 2020, we observe a
total of 5.83 million mobile network subscribers (note that this subscriber population does not
necessarily reflect a 19% increase in subscribers from 2018-2019, since the slice is seven months
rather than three months and there is significant month-to-month churn in subscribers). We
identify spammers as described above, resulting in the removal of transactions associated with
107 spammers from the 2020 CDR dataset. In the 2020 CDR, we observe calls, SMS messages,
mobile data usage, and mobile money transactions.

Featurization: For each subscriber observed on the network in each of the three time periods, we
calculate a set of 857-1,042 "CDR features" that describe aspects of the subscriber's mobile
phone behavior. These include:
    - Call and SMS features: We use open-source library bandicoot42 to produce around 700
       features relating to the calls and SMS messages each subscriber places and receives.
       These range from general statistics (e.g. number of calls/SMS messages, balance of
       incoming vs. outgoing transactions), to social network characteristics (e.g. number an d
       diversity of contacts), to measures of mobility based on cell tower locations (e.g. number
       of unique towers, radius of gyration).
    - Location features: Based on the locations of each of the cell towers in Togo, we calculate
       information about where each subscriber places their transactions. Specifically, we
       calculate the number and percentage of calls placed in each of Togo 's 40 prefectures, and
       the number of unique antennas, cantons, prefectures, and regions that each subscriber
       visits.
    - International transaction features: Using country codes associated with phone numbers,
       we calculate the number of outgoing international transactions, separately for calls and
       SMS messages. We also calculate the total time spent on outgoing international calls.
    - Mobile money features: For each of four variables relating to transaction size ---
       transaction amount, percent of balance, balance before transaction, and balance after
       transaction --- we calculate the mean, median, minimum, and maximum, separately for
       incoming and outgoing mobile money transactions. We also calculate the total transaction
       count for each subscriber (separately for incoming and outgoing) and the total number of
       unique mobile money contacts (separately for incoming and outgoing). We perform these
       calculations for all transactions together, as well as separately by transaction type (cash
       in, cash out, peer-to-peer, bill payments, and other transactions).
    - Mobile data features: We calculate the total, mean, median, minimum, and maximum
       mobile data transaction for each subscriber, as well as the standard deviation in
       transaction size. We also calculate the total number of mobile data transactions and the
       number of unique days on which data is consumed. Note that mobile data features are
       only calculated for the 2020 CDR period, as our 2018-2019 CDR does not include mobile
       data records.

                                               14
   -   Operator: In our feature dataset we include a dummy variable for which of the two
       mobile network operators each subscriber is associated with.

Matching survey and CDR datasets: Using phone number collected in surveys, we match survey
observations to CDR features. As noted in Methods §3, there are 4,618 households in the 2018-
2019 field survey that provide a phone number, of which 4,171 match to CDR (90% of
households with phone numbers, and 68% of households overall). We match households
surveyed in the first survey wave to features generated in the October-December 2018 CDR
period, and households surveyed in the second survey wave to features generated in the April-
June 2019 CDR period. Since the 2020 survey was sampled based on the CDR dataset, all 8,915
observations in the 2020 survey dataset are matched to CDR.

       d. Data Privacy Concerns

The CDR data we obtained for each subscriber contain personally identifying information (PII)
in the form of the subscriber's phone number (it does not contain the individual's name, address,
or other PII), as well as other potentially sensitive information such as data about the subscriber's
network and cell tower locations. To protect the confidentiality of these data, we pseudonymized
the CDR prior to analysis by hash-encoding each phone number into a unique ID. The data are
stored on secure university servers to which access is limited based on a data management plan
approved by U.C. Berkeley 's Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects.

We obtained informed consent from all research subjects in the phone survey prior to matching
CDR records to survey responses. However, there are still open concerns around the use of CDR
by bad actors, particularly as even pseudonymized datasets can frequently be de -anonymized for
a subset of observations.43,44 Active research on applying the guarantees of differential privacy to
CDR datasets and associated machine learning models holds promise for balancing the utility of
CDR data with privacy concerns. 45,46 For additional discussion of these considerations, see
Methods §6.

4. Predicting poverty from mobile phone data

       a. Machine Learning Methods

We follow the machine learning methods described in prior work 13,14,20 to train models that
predict poverty from CDR features. Specifically, we train a gradient boosting regressor with
Microsoft's LightGBM for the two matched survey-CDR datasets separately. We tune
hyperparameters for the model over 3-fold cross validation, with parameters chosen from the
following grid:
    - Winsorization of features: {No winsorization, 1% limit}
    - Minimum data in leaf: {10, 20, 50}
    - Number of leaves: {5, 10, 20}
   -   Number of estimators: {20, 50, 100}
   -   Learning rate: {0.05, 0.075, 0.1}

                                                 15
We train and evaluate the model over 5-fold cross validation, with hyperparameters tuned
independently on each fold, to obtain out-of-sample estimates of accuracy and out-of-sample
predictions of poverty for each observation in our matched survey datasets. We then re -train the
model on all survey data (for each of the two datasets separately), record feature importances
(the total number of times a feature is split on over the entire forest), and use the final model to
generate wealth predictions for every subscriber on the mobile phone network during the
relevant time period.

We experiment with training models in this way for each of the relevant poverty outcomes:
consumption expenditure, PMT, and asset index for the 2018-2019 field survey dataset and PMT
and asset index for the 2020 phone survey dataset. Evaluations of model accuracy are found in
Table S4 and feature importances for each model are shown in Figure S5. The correlation
between the phone-based poverty predictions and a traditional PMT is 0.41, as trained and
evaluated on the 2020 phone survey dataset (Table S4, Panel C). When trained and evaluated
using the national 2018-2019 household survey with consumption data, the correlation between
the phone-based poverty predictions and consumption is 0.46 (Table S4, Panel A).

We note that in examining the feature importances, location-related features (number and percent
of calls placed in each prefecture of the country) are very important. The correlation between
phone-based poverty predictions using only these location features and a standard PMT is 0.35
when trained and evaluated with the 2020 phone survey. The correlation between the location-
only phone-based poverty predictions and consumption is 0.42 when trained and evaluated with
the 2018-2019 field survey, only a small drop in accuracy from the full phone-based poverty
scores. Other important features in the full phone-based poverty scores relate to nighttime calling
behavior, mobile data usage, and mobile money usage (see Figure S5).

        b. Parsimonious Method: "Phone Expenditure"

In addition to the machine learning method for wealth prediction described above, we are
interested in the performance of an intuitive, parsimonious method for approximating poverty
with CDR. We focus on a measure of "phone expenditure " on the basis of costs of all calls
placed and SMS messages sent by each subscriber. We apply standard rates for calls and SMS
messages in Togo: 30 CFA (USD 0.06) to send an SMS message and 50 CFA (USD 0.09) per
minute of call time.xiii We use these prices to back out the (approximate) amount spent by each
subscriber from their outgoing mobile phone transaction logs. We find that the "phone
expenditures" method is significantly less accurate than the ML-based method, with a correlation
of 0.13 with both the 2020 phone survey PMT and the 2018-2019 household survey's
consumption measure (Table S4, Panels A and C).




xiii
  These prices represent a typical Togolese phone plan, though there is considerable diversity in special promotions
and friends-and-family plans available from Togo's two mobile phone operators, Moov and Togocom.
                                                        16
5. Targeting evaluations

         a. Experimental Design

We simulate CDR-based and counterfactual targeting methods for reaching the poorest
individuals in Togo, using the two survey datasets described in Methods §3.a. For the 2018-2019
in-person survey dataset, the ground-truth wealth measure is consumption expenditure: we
evaluate how well proxy measures of poverty reach those with the lowest consumption. For the
2020 phone survey dataset, the ground-truth wealth measure is the proxy-means test (since
consumption information, which is more complicated and time-consuming to enumerate, was not
collected in the phone survey).

Our evaluations measure how effectively several different targeting methods, described below,
are at reaching the poorest individual mobile phone owners in each of the two survey
populations. We focus on individuals rather than households because the Novissi program was
designed and paid as an individual benefit. While social assistance programs in other countries
sometimes determine benefits based on household composition, there is no notion of a household
unit in the Novissi program (in part because the government does not possess data that links
individuals to households)xiv.

Likewise, our focus on mobile phone owners reflects the fact that the Novissi system in Togo
distributed payments via mobile money; as such, anyone without access to a phone could not
receive benefits irrespective of the targeting method ­ see Methods §f for a discussion of
exclusion errors resulting from this constraint. In practice, this only affects the analysis using the
2018-2019 in-person survey, where 4,171 of 6,171 respondents provided a valid phone number.
For analysis using the 2020 phone survey, we include all respondents, since every respondent
had access to a phone. Future work could compare phone-based targeting to counterfactual
targeting methods that could be implemented in-person, and thus account for exclusion errors
resulting from phone ownership.

         b. Targeting Methods and Counterfactuals

Our evaluations use the two survey datasets to measure the targeting performance of three
targeting methods that were feasible when implementing the Novissi program: geographic
blanketing (targeting everyone in certain geographies), occupation-based targeting (targeting
everyone in certain occupation categories), and phone-based targeting.

With geographic targeting , the primary counterfactual approach considered by the government
of Togo in implementing its rural assistance program, we assume that the program would target


xiv
   Note that in the 2020 phone survey the unit of observation is the individual, while in the 2018 -2019 field survey
the unit of observation is the household: in practice, this means that our simulations with the 2018-2019 field survey
dataset reflect a program that would provide benefits only to heads of household, and we do not account for
household size in considering exclusion errors or social welfare. Future work could model phone-based targeting on
a household basis by collecting phone numbers for all household members and calculating aggregate benefits
assigned to each household; given survey data limitations this analysis is beyond the scope of this paper.
                                                         17
geographic units in order from poorest to wealthiest, and that all individuals in targeted units
would be eligible for benefits. We report results from geographic targeting at the prefecture level
(admin-2 region, using survey-based estimates of wealth) and canton level (admin-3 region,
using satellite-based estimates of wealth). See Figure S3 and Methods §3.b for the poverty maps
used for geographic targeting.

In occupation-based targeting , we first evaluate the effectiveness of targeting informal workers ,
which is the eligibility criteria used by Novissi when it was first launched in April 2020, and
which served as the basis for paying roughly 500,000 urban residents. In pra ctice, this involves
categorizing the occupation of every individual respondent in both surveys as either formal or
informal (including unemployed), applying the same definition of informality that was used by
the Novissi program. In the simulations, informal workers are targeted first (in random order if
there are more informal workers than can receive benefits) and formal workers are targeted last
(also in random order, if the available benefits exceed the number of informal workers).

We also develop and test a hypothetical occupation-based approach, which we refer to as optimal
occupation-based targeting, which assumes that the policymaker had high-quality consumption
data on the consumption of workers in each occupation and used that information to targe t the
poorest occupations first. While this approach was not considered in Togo's pandemic response,
it was feasible with the data sources available in Togo at the time, and represents an upper-bound
on the performance of a hypothetical occupation-based targeting system. We simulate this
optimal occupation-based approach by calculating the average consumption of each occupation
in the 2018-2019 field survey; occupations are then targeted in order of increasing average
consumption. The average consumption of each occupation category is shown in Table S3. Note
that since agricultural workers are the poorest category and make up 29% of the observations in
the 2018-2019 field survey dataset and 41% of the observations in the 2020 phone survey
dataset, in practice the precision and recall metrics reported in our targeting simulations reflect
systems of occupation-based targeting that would prioritize agricultural workers only.

Of primary interest in the targeting evaluation is the performance of the targeting approaches
based on mobile phone data. The phone-based (ML) approach is the one described in the main
text, which uses machine learning to construct a poverty score from rich data on mobile phone
use and prioritizes the individuals with the lowest poverty scores. For reference, we also
calculate the performance of a more parsimonious phone (expenditures) model, which prioritizes
the individuals with the smallest total phone expenditures (Methods §4.b).

For completeness, our simulations also include results from targeting methods that were not
feasible for the Novissi program, as the data required to implement those methods were not
available when Novissi was launched (though Togo plans to create a foundational unique ID
system and comprehensive social registry in 2022). In particular, we simulate targeting using an
asset-based wealth index , constructed as described in Methods §3.a. For the hypothetical
national simulations using the 2018-2019 field survey dataset, we also simulate targeting using a
poverty probability index (PPI) and proxy-means test (PMT). We cannot simulate PPI or PMT-
based targeting using the 2020 phone survey since the necessary data were not collected.



                                                18
An important caveat is that the PMT that we use in the 2018-2019 survey is "perfectly
calibrated" in the sense that it is both trained and evaluated on the same sample. In real-world
settings, the predictive accuracy of a PMT declines as the time increases between the time of
calibration and the time of application 22,23. As such, the performance of the PMT we report is
likely an upper-bound of the performance of a real-world PMT.

For the PMT in the 2018-2019 field survey dataset, as well as for CDR-based wealth estimates in
both datasets, predictions are produced out-of-sample over cross validation so that they can be
fairly evaluated in targeting simulations. Specifically, in each case, the training dataset is divided
into 10 cross validation folds; the machine learning model is trained on 9 of the 10 folds and
used to produce predictions for the final fold. The training-and-prediction regime is repeated for
all 10 folds.

        c. Measures of Targeting Quality

For each targeting method, we calculate two "threshold-agnostic" metrics of targeting accuracy ­
metrics that capture relationships between continuous measures of poverty rather than focusing
on accuracy for targeting a specific portion of the population. These are:
    -   Spearman correlation coefficient: Spearman's rank correlation coefficient is the Pearson
        correlation between the rank values of the true and proxy measures of poverty. We focus
        on the Spearman correlation rather than standard Pearson correlation as a measure of
        targeting quality because targeting concerns itself only with the ordering of observations
        according to poverty. Spearman 's correlation coefficient is calculated as follows:

                                             6 =1( -  )
                                                        2
                                        =
                                               ( 2 - 1)

        where N is the total number of observations, ri is the rank of observation i according to
        the ground truth poverty measure, and  is the rank of observation i according to the
        proxy poverty measure.
    -   ROC curves and Area Under the Curve (AUC): Following Hanna & Olken (2018)3, we
        trace Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves that describe the quality of a
        targeting method at counterfactual targeting thresholds (Figure S6, left figures). At each
        counterfactual targeting threshold T we simulate targeting T% of observations according
        to the proxy poverty measure in question and calculate the true positive rate (TPR) and
        false positive rate (FPR) of the classifier with respect to reaching the T% poorest
        according to the ground-truth poverty measure. By varying T from 0% to 100%, we
        construct the ROC curves shown in Figure S6. The area under the curve (AUC) is used to
        summarize the targeting quality, with a random targeting method achieving an AUC of
        0.5 and perfect targeting an AUC of 1. For convenience, we also include "Coverage vs.
        Recall" figures (right figures of Figure S6) that show how program recall varies as the
        eligible percentage of the population increases. Note that since recall is another name for
        the true positive rate, panels b and d represent a rescaling of the ROC curves in panels a
        and c.

                                                 19
We then focus on analyzing aid programs that target the poorest 29% of individuals as the
Novissi aid program aimed to reach the poorest 29% of registrants in eligible cantons. The 29th
percentile corresponds to a consumption threshold of USD 1.17/day in the 2018-2019 field
survey dataset, and a PMT threshold of USD 1.18/day in the 2020 phone survey dataset. We
calculate the following metrics to describe how accurately targeting the poorest 29% according
to each targeting method reaches (1) the 29% truly poorest, (2) those below the international
poverty line of USD 1.90/day (57% of observations in the 2018-2019 field survey, and 76% of
observations in the 2020 phone survey), and (3) those below the extreme poverty line, which was
defined as three-quarters of the poverty line, or USD 1.43/day (41% of observations in the 2018-
2019 field survey, and 53% of observations in the 2020 phone survey):
     -   Accuracy: Classification accuracy measures the proportion of observations that are
         identified correctly (targeted observations that are poor according to the ground -truth
         poverty measure, and non-targeted observations that are not poor according to the
                                                            +
         ground-truth wealth measure).  =
                                                        +++
     -   Precision: Precision measures the proportion of targeted observations that are poor
                                                                         
         according to the ground-truth poverty measure.  = +
     -   Recall: Recall measures the proportion of all poor observations that are reached by a
                                              
         given targeting method.  =
                                                     +
Note that the poverty lines are applied to consumption expenditure in the 2018 -2019 field survey
dataset, and to the proxy-means test estimates in the 2020 phone survey dataset.

         d. Social Welfare

Using the two matched survey-CDR datasets, we calculate aggregate utility under each of the
targeting methods using a social welfare function. Following Hanna & Olken (2018)3 we rely on
constant relative risk-aversion (CRRA) utility, which models individual utility as a function of
pre-transfer consumption and transfer size:

                                                     =0( +  )
                                                              1-
                                                =
                                                        1 - 

Where N is the population size, yi is the consumption of individual i, and b i the benefits assigned
to the individual. Following Hanna & Olken (2018)3, we use a coefficient of relative risk-
aversion  = 3. To reflect the policy design of the Novissi program, we assume that all
beneficiaries who receive a benefit receive the same value b i = b.xv To construct the social
welfare curves, we:
     -   Calculate a total budget available for each of the two datasets. We focus on programs that
         have a budget size analogous to that of rural Novissi, which aimed to distributed
         approximately USD 4 million among the 154,238 program registrants, or USD 25.93 per



xv
  In principle, the benefit b i paid to i could depend on characteristics of i, such as i's level of poverty. While such an
approach would substantially increase total welfare, in practice it is much more difficult to implement.
                                                           20
       voter. We therefore assign each dataset a total budget of USD 25.93 N, where N is the
       total size of the dataset.
   -   Simulate targeting T% of observations on the basis of each of our counterfactual targeting
       approaches.
   -   Assign equal benefits to each of the targeted observations, with the budget divided evenly
       among targeted observations (so lower targeting thresholds T correspond to more benefits
       for targeted individuals).
   -   Calculate aggregate utility by summing over benefits and consumption for each
       individual with the CRRA utility function. Note that non-targeted individuals are
       included in the welfare calculation; they are merely assigned 0 benefits. For the 2018-
       2019 field survey dataset we use consumption expenditure for yi for the 2020 phone
       survey dataset we use the PMT estimates.
   -   By varying T between 0% and 100% of observations targeted, we trace out the social
       welfare curves shown in Figure 3.

       e. Fairness

We are interested in auditing our targeting methods for fairness across sensitive subgroups. Note
that notions of parity and fairness are debated in machine learning and policy communities:
Kleinberg et al. (2016)27 describe how the three most popular parity criteria --- demographic
parity (benefits assigned to subgroups proportionally to their size), threshold parity (use of the
same classification threshold for all subgroups), and error rate parity (equal classification error
across subgroups) --- are in tension with one another. Moreover, Noriega et al. (2020)26 describe
how tensions over parity criteria, prioritized subgroups, and positive discrimination lead to
complicated prioritization compromises in the administration of targeted social protection
programs.

Here we focus on two targeting-specific parity criteria:
   -   Demographic parity: A targeting method satisfying demographic parity will assign
       benefits to a subgroup proportionally to the subgroup 's presence in the population of
       interest. We evaluate demographic parity among the poor: that is, we compare the
       proportion of each subgroup living in poverty (below the 29th percentile in terms of
       consumption) to the proportion of each subgroup that is targeted (below the 29th
       percentile in terms of the proxy poverty measure used for targeting).

                       +     +  
               =          -
                             

   -   Normalized rank residual: We are interested in whether certain subgroups are
       consistently ranked higher or consistently ranked lower than they "should " be by the
       counterfactual targeting approaches. We therefore compare the distributions of rank
       residuals across subgroups and targeting methods:

                                                  - 
                                            =
                                                   
                                                21
          where  is the poverty rank of individual i according to the proxy poverty measure and ri
          is the poverty rank of individual i according to the ground-truth poverty measure.

We focus on seven dimensions for parity: gender, ethnicity, religion, age group, disability status,
number of children, and marital status. We also evaluate parity across whether an individual is
"vulnerable," where vulnerability is defined as one of the following traits: {female, over age 60,
has a disability, has more than five children, is single}. We conduct this analysis with only the
2018-2019 field survey dataset, as these demographic variables were not all collected in the 2020
phone survey. We use demographic information from the head of household .

          f. Program Exclusions

We present information on sources of exclusion from the Novissi program that are not inherently
related to targeting. These statistics are drawn from diverse sources of administrative and survey
data, specifically:
      -   Voter ID penetration: According to government administrative datasets, 3,633,898
          individuals were registered to vote in Togo by late 2019. The electoral commission of
          Togo reports that this corresponds to 86.6% of eligible adults. While the total adult
          population in Togo is hard to pin down (the last census was in 2011), Togo's national
          statistical agency (https://inseed.tg/) estimates that there are 3,715,318 adults in Togo,
          whereas the United Nations estimates 4.4 million adults in Togo 47, implying a voter ID
          penetration rates of 82.6% or 97.8%.
      -   Phone penetration: In the 2018-2019 field survey, 65% of individuals report owning a
          mobile phone (Figure S9a); 54% of individuals in rural areas report owning a mobile
          phone. 53% of women and 79% of men report owning a mobile phone; 85% of
          households nationally include at least one individual who owns a phone (Figure S9b).
          These household estimates likely represent a lower bound, given the steady increase in
          phone penetration between 2018 and 2020. The Togolese government estimates 82%
          SIM card penetration in the country (though some people may have multiple SIM
          cards)xvi. Based on data from the mobile phone companies, we observe 5.83 million
          unique active SIMs in Togo between March and September 2020.
      -   Program awareness: Since individuals had to register for the Novissi program to receive
          benefits, program advertising and population awareness was a key goal. The program was
          advertised via radio, SMS, field teams, and direct communication with community
          leaders at the prefecture and canton level. In total, 245,454 subscribers attempt to register
          for the program. Although we do not observe the prefecture and canton of subscribers
          who attempt but do not succeed in registering in our administrative data, we know that
          87% of successful registrants are in cantons eligible for benefits. Assuming the rate is
          approximately the same for attempters, we expect that around 213,545 of the attempters




xvi
   "Programme digital de transferts monétaires en réponse à la COVID-19", accessed July 14, 2021 from
http://www.fondation-farm.org/zoe/doc/colocnovissi.pdf

                                                      22
       are in eligible cantons. The total voting population in eligible cantons is 528,562, for an
       estimated attempted registration rate of 40.40%.
   -   Registration challenges: Registration for the Novissi program required the completion of
       a short (5 question) USSD survey. Of the 245,454 subscribers that attempted to register
       for the program, 176,517 succeed, for a 71.91% rate of registration success.

Overlaps among sources of exclusion: The above sources of exclusion are not independent and
are therefore not cumulative. For instance, individuals who are not registered to vote may also be
systematically less likely to have a mobile phone. For this reason, we use the 2020 phone survey
dataset ­ restricted to respondents who report living in an eligible canton ­ to calculate overlaps
in sources of exclusion to the poor, including Voter ID possession, program awareness,
registration challenges, and targeting errors using the CDR-based targeting method. We cannot
account for mobile phone ownership in this analysis since the 2020 survey was conducted over
the phone. The resulting attrition table is available in Table S8.

6. Limitations and Concerns

While mobile phone data can create new options for the accurate targeting of humanitarian aid,
there are several important limitations. A full discussion of the social, political, and ethical
implications of these issues has been the focus of prior work and is beyond the scope of this
article48­52; we nonetheless highlight a few key issues that we believe require careful
consideration before these methods can be implemented in a policy environment:

Phone ownership and access: As discussed in Methods §5.f, many individuals in LMICs do not
own mobile phones. Thus, any targeting system based on mobile phone data may exclude those
without phones from receiving program benefits. In the case of the Novissi program, the
government used the mobile money system to disburse the cash transfers as a way to minimize
human contact during the pandemic. Thus, in Togo, the use of phone data for targeting did not
create further exclusions than those already created by the payment mechanism. However, in
general, incomplete mobile phone access highlights the need to allow for alternative pathways
for individuals to register and receive benefits, and to create additional mechanisms for appeals,
grievance redress mechanisms, and manual enrollment.

Data privacy: Mobile phone metadata, even when pseudonymized, contains sensitive
information. Methods §3.d describes several steps taken to protect the confidentiality of the data
used in this project. More generally, special considerations arise when using personal data from
vulnerable populations53, and human rights doctrine emphasizes that any form of
communications surveillance should be "necessary and proportionate"54.

In implementing the approach described in this paper, we developed an IRB protocol, as well as
a data management plan, that was approved by U.C. Berkeley's Co mmittee for the Protection of
Human Subjects. We followed principles of data minimization to limit the data collected and
stored, and implemented organizational safeguards to restrict access to data. As an example, only
IRB-approved researchers ever received access to CDR; data from the phone companies were
shared with neither the Government of Togo nor GiveDirectly. Even the poverty scores derived
from the phone data were restricted to IRB-approved researchers; the only data the government
                                              23
received was the list of SIM cards belonging to eligible beneficiaries below the targeted poverty
threshold.

Future projects using mobile phone data for targeting should ensure that principles of data
minimization and data sunsetting restrict the use of sensitive data to social protection objectives
and limit the potential for "function creep."55 Further research on applying the guarantees of
differential privacy to mobile phone metadata45,46 or implementing federated learning systems 56
could reduce the risk of data misuse or central data breaches.

Data access and consent: The fact that our approach requires access to mobile phone data owned
by private companies poses an obstacle to the immediate and widespread use of such data for
targeting humanitarian aid. There now exist several general frameworks and recommendations to
facilitate the use of CDR in humanitarian applications49,57. Yet such frameworks are still nascent,
and without careful consideration may exclude important stakeholders and perspectives 52; they
also widen the scope for private companies to influence humanitarian and development
decisions58. There also exist many ethical frameworks rely on informed consent from
participants for the use of personal data, including digital data such as CDR. 59,60 Future programs
should consider how consent pathways can be integrated with phone-based targeting, including
opt-in (calculating poverty scores only after consent is provided) and opt-out (scrubbing data if
consent is not provided at the time of registration) options.

Data Representativity: To train the machine learning models, ground truth measures of
consumption and wealth were collected using in-person and phone surveys. Since response rates
were imperfect in the phone survey, we reweighted survey observations to make the training data
more representative of all mobile subscribers (Methods §3.a). However, there are limits to the
representativity of our training data, as dynamics of phone ownership and phone sharing vary
across population subgroups (Figure S9), and reweighting is an imperfect proxy (Methods §3.a).

To test for systematic bias based on data representativity, we perform ex-post audits to limit the
likelihood that the trained models systematically disadvantage specific subgroups of the
population (Methods §5.e), and find that the phone-based targeting method is no more biased
that counterfactual targeting approaches. We believe such audits are essential to future work on
wealth prediction and targeting based on nontraditional data. Audits could be improved with
additional context-specific research about which sub-populations are at the greatest risk for
systematic exclusion (for example, in this paper we test for bias across age groups, genders,
ethnicities, and more), and on considering alternative definitions for bias and fairness.26,27

Manipulation and gaming: When mobile phone data are used to determine eligibility for social
benefits, individuals have incentives to strategically a lter their behavior in order to "game" the
system. This dilemma is not unique to phone-based targeting; it is a key consideration in the
design of any targeting mechanism 61,62, and one that affects traditional proxy means tests and
poverty scorecards 63,64. However, recent evidence suggests that such distortionary effects may be
limited 65, and complex eligibility criteria (such as the gradient boosting procedure described in
Methods §4) should limit the scope for such gaming66. With Novissi in Togo, the one-off nature
of the program likely eliminated most scope for strategic behavior; however, if such an approach

                                                24
were used contin uously over time, alternative "manipulation -proof" approaches to machine
learning may be more appropriate 67.




                                              25
                                     Acknowledgements
Isabel Onate Falomir, Shikhar Mehra, Suraj Nair, Adrian Dar Serapio, Nathaniel Ver Steeg, and
Rachel Warren provided invaluable research assistance on this project. This project would not
have been possible without the dedication of our project partners in Togo, especially Minister
Cina Lawson, Shegun Bakari, Stanislas Telou, Leslie Mills, Kafui Ekouhoho, Morlé Koudeka,
and Attia Byll. The team at GiveDirectly was instrumental in implementing the Novissi
expansion studied in this paper (especially Han Sheng Chia, Michael Cooke, Kristen Lee, Alex
Nawar, and Daniel Quinn). We thank Esther Duflo, Luis Encinas, Tina George, Rema Hanna,
Ethan Ligon, and Ben Olken for helpful feedback. We are grateful for financial support from
Google.org, data.org, the Center for Effective Global Action, the Jameel Poverty Action Lab, the
Global Poverty Research Lab at Northwestern University, and the World Bank, which financed
the phone surveys and data collection under the WURI program. Blumenstock is supported by
NSF award IIS ­ 1942702. Authors retained full intellectual freedom in conducting this research,
and as such all opinions and errors are our own.

                                       Data Availability
The data used in this analysis include data that are available from public online repositories, data
that are publicly available upon request of the data provider, and data that are not publicly
available because of restrictions by the data provider.

                                      Code Availability
The code used for these analyses will be made publicly available through the GitHub repository
located at https://github.com/emilylaiken/togo-ml.




                                                26
                                         References
1.    Egger, D. et al. Falling living standards during the COVID-19 crisis: Quantitative evidence
      from nine developing countries. Science Advances 7 , eabe0997 (2021).
2.    Gentilini, U., Almenfi, M., Orton, I. & Dale, P. Social Protection and Jobs Responses to
      COVID-19: A Real-Time Review of Country Measures. World Bank Policy Brief (2020).
3.    Hanna, R. & Olken, B. A. Universal Basic Incomes versus Targeted Transfers: Anti-
      Poverty Programs in Developing Countries. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 , 201­226
      (2018).
4.    Yeh, C. et al. Using publicly available satellite imagery and deep learning to understand
      economic well-being in Africa. Nature Communications 11 , 2583 (2020).
5.    Bank, W. World Development Report 2021: Data for Better Lives . (The World Bank,
      2021).
6.    Jerven, M. Poor numbers: how we are misled by African development statistics and what to
      do about it. (Cornell University Press, 2013).
7.    Lakner, C., Yonzan, N., Mahler, D., Aguilar, R. A. & Wu, H. Updated estimates of the
      impact of COVID-19 on global poverty: Looking back at 2020 and the outlook for 2021 .
      https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/updated-estimates-impact-covid-19-global-poverty-
      looking-back-2020-and-outlook-2021.
8.    Mirrlees, J. A. An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation. The Review of
      Economic Studies 38 , 175 ­208 (1971).
9.    Serajuddin, U., Wieser, C., Uematsu, H., Dabalen, A. L. & Yoshida, N. Data deprivation:
      another deprivation to end. 1 ­ 24
      http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/700611468172787967/Data-deprivation-
      another-deprivation-to-end (2015).
10.   Coady, D., Grosh, M. & Hoddinott, J. Targeting outcomes redux. The World Bank
      Research Observer 19 , 61 ­85 (2004).
11.   Jean, N. et al. Combining satellite imagery and machine learning to predict poverty.
      Science 353 , 790­ 794 (2016).
12.   Chi, G., Fang, H., Chatterjee, S. & Blumenstock, J. E. Micro-Estimates of Wealth for all
      Low- and Middle-Income Countries. In Submission (2021).
13.   Blumenstock, J. E., Cadamuro, G. & On, R. Predicting poverty and wealth from mobile
      phone metadata. Science 350, 1073 ­1076 (2015).
14.   Blumenstock, J. E. Estimating Economic Characteristics with Phone Data. American
      Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 108 , 72 ­ 76 (2018).
15.   Nichols, A. L. & Zeckhauser, R. J. Targeting Transfers through Restrictions on Recipients .
      The American Economic Review 72 , 372­ 377 (1982).
16.   Grosh, M. E. & Baker, J. L. Proxy means tests for targeting social programs. (The World
      Bank, 1995). doi:10.1596/0-8213-3313-5.
17.   Alatas, V., Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Olken, B. A. & Tobias, J. Targeting the Poor:
      Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia. American Economic Review 102 , 1206­ 40
      (2012).
18.   Blumenstock, J. Machine learning can help get COVID-19 aid to those who need it most.
      Nature 581 , (2020).
19.   Lindert, K., Karippacheril, T. G., Caillava, I. R. & Chávez, K. N. Sourcebook on the
      Foundations of Social Protection Delivery Systems . (World Bank Publications, 2020).

                                               27
20. Aiken, E., Bedoya, G., Coville, A. & Blumenstock, J. E. Targeting Development Aid with
    Machine Learning and Mobile Phone Data. Working Paper (2020).
21. McBride, L. & Nichols, A. Retooling Poverty Targeting Using Out-of-Sample Validation
    and Machine Learning. World Bank Economic Review 32 , 531 ­550 (2018).
22. Brown, C., Ravallion, M. & van de Walle, D. A poor means test? Econometric targeting in
    Africa. Journal of Development Economics 134 , 109 ­124 (2018).
23. Skoufias, E., Diamond, A., Vinha, K., Gill, M. & Dellepiane, M. R. Estimating poverty
    rates in subnational populations of interest: An assessment of the Simple Poverty
    Scorecard. World Development 129, 104887 (2020).
24. Eubanks, V. Automating inequality: How high-tech tools profile, police, and punish the
    poor. (St. Martin's Press, 2018).
25. Barocas, S., Hardt, M. & Narayanan, A. Fairness and Machine Learning . (fairmlbook.org,
    2018).
26. Noriega-Campero, A. et al. Algorithmic targeting of social policies: fairness, accuracy, and
    distributed governance. in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness,
    Accountability, and Transparency 241 ­251 (ACM, 2020). doi:10.1145/3351095.3375784.
27. Kleinberg, J., Mullainathan, S. & Raghavan, M. Inherent Trade-Offs in the Fair
    Determination of Risk Scores. arXiv:1609.05807 [cs, stat] (2016).
28. Dwork, C., Hardt, M., Pitassi, T., Reingold, O. & Zemel, R. Fairness Through Awareness.
    arXiv:1104.3913 [cs] (2011).
29. Alatas, V. et al. Self-Targeting: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia. Journal of
    Political Economy 124 , 371­ 427 (2016).
30. Kleven, H. J. & Kopczuk, W. Transfer Program Complexity and the Take-Up of Social
    Benefits. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 , 54­ 90 (2011).
31. Baker, J. L. & Grosh, M. E. Poverty reduction through geographic targeting: How well
    does it work? World Development 22 , 983 ­995 (1994).
32. Schady, N. R. Picking the Poor: Indicators for Geographic Targeting in Peru. Review of
    Income and Wealth 48 , 417­ 433 (2002).
33. Coady, D. P. The Welfare Returns to Finer Targeting: The Case of The Progresa Program
    in Mexico. Int Tax Public Finan 13 , 217 ­ 239 (2006).
34. Elbers, C., Fujii, T., Lanjouw, P., Özler, B. & Yin, W. Poverty alleviation through
    geographic targeting: How much does disaggregation help? Journal of Development
    Economics 83 , 198 ­213 (2007).
35. Smythe, I. & Blumenstock, J. E. Geographic Micro-Targeting of Social Assistance with
    High-Resolution Poverty Maps. in In Submission (KDD) (2021).
36. Filmer, D. & Pritchett, L. H. Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure Data --Or
    Tears: An Application To Educational Enrollments In States Of India*. Demography 38 ,
    115 ­ 132 (2001).
37. Desiere, S., Vellema, W. & D'Haese, M. A validity assessment of the Progres s out of
    Poverty Index (PPI)TM. Evaluation and Program Planning 49 , 10­ 18 (2015).
38. Alderman, H. Do local officials know something we don't? Decentralization of targeted
    transfers in Albania. Journal of Public Economics 83 , 375­ 404 (2002).
39. Galasso, E. & Ravallion, M. Decentralized targeting of an antipoverty program. Journal of
    Public Economics 89 , 705­ 727 (2005).



                                              28
40. Premand, P. & Schnitzer, P. Efficiency, Legitimacy, and Impacts of Targeting Methods:
    Evidence from an Experiment in Niger. The World Bank Economic Review (2020)
    doi:10.1093/wber/lhaa019.
41. Tiecke, T. G. et al. Mapping the world population one building at a time.
    arXiv:1712.05839 [cs] (2017).
42. De Montjoye, Y.-A., Rocher, L. & Pentland, A. S. bandicoot: a python toolbox for mobile
    phone metadata. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 17 , 6100 ­6104 (2016).
43. de Montjoye, Y.-A., Hidalgo, C. A., Verleysen, M. & Blondel, V. D. Unique in the Crowd:
    The privacy bounds of human mobility. Scientific Reports 3 , 1376 (2013).
44. Cecaj, A., Mamei, M. & Bicocchi, N. Re-identification of anonymized CDR datasets using
    social network data. in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
    Communication Workshops (PERCOM WORKSHOPS) 237 ­ 242 (2014).
    doi:10.1109/PerComW.2014.6815210.
45. Alaggan, M., Gambs, S., Matwin, S. & Tuhin, M. Sanitization of Call Detail Records via
    Differentially-Private Bloom Filters. in Data and Applications Security and Privacy XXIX
    (ed. Samarati, P.) vol. 9149 223 ­ 230 (Springer International Publishing, 2015).
46. Mir, D., Isaacman, S., Caceres, R., Martonosi, M. & Wright, R. DP-WHERE:
    Differentially private modeling of human mobility. in 580­ 588 (2013).
    doi:10.1109/BigData.2013.6691626.
47. United Nations. 2019 Revision of World Population Prospects. United Nations Department
    of Economic and Social Affairs (2019).
48. Mann, L. Left to Other Peoples' Devices? A Political Economy Perspective on the Big
    Data Revolution in Development. Development and Change 49 , 3 ­ 36 (2018).
49. Kerry, C. F., Kendall, J. & de Montjoye, Y.-A. Enabling Humanitarian Use of Mobile
    Phone Data. Brookings Issues in Technology Innovation (2014).
50. Blumenstock, J. E. Don't forget people in the use of big data for development. Nature 561 ,
    170 ­ 172 (2018).
51. Ohlenberg, T. AI in Social Protection ­ Exploring Opportunities and Mitigating Risks .
    (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), 2020).
52. Abebe, R. et al. Narratives and Counternarratives on Data Sharing in Africa. in
    Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
    329 ­ 341 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2021). doi:10.1145/3442188.3445897.
53. Taylor, L. No place to hide? The ethics and analytics of tracking mobility using mobile
    phone data. Environ Plan D 34 , 319 ­336 (2016).
54. Necessary and Proportionate. International Principles on the Application of Human Rights
    to Communications Surveillance. (2013).
55. Taylor, L. No place to hide? The ethics and analytics of tracking mobility using mobile
    phone data. Environ Plan D 34 , 319 ­336 (2016).
56. Li, T., Sahu, A. K., Talwalkar, A. & Smith, V. Federated Learning: Challenges, Methods,
    and Future Directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 37 , 50­ 60 (2020).
57. Oliver, N. et al. Mobile phone data for informing public health actions across the COVID-
    19 pandemic life cycle. Science Advances eabc0764 (2020) doi:10.1126/sciadv.abc0764.
58. Taylor, L. & Broeders, D. In the name of Development: Power, profit and the datafication
    of the global South. Geoforum 64 , 229 ­237 (2015).
59. Cate, F. H. & Mayer-Schönberger, V. Notice and consent in a world of Big Data.
    International Data Privacy Law 3 , 67 ­ 73 (2013).
                                              29
60. Ioannidis, J. P. A. Informed Consent, Big Data, and the Oxymoron of Research That Is Not
    Research. The American Journal of Bioethics 13 , 40 ­42 (2013).
61. Goodhart, C. Monetary Relationships: A View from Threadneedle Street . (University of
    Warwick, 1975).
62. Akerlof, G. A. The economics of `tagging' as applied to the optimal income tax, welfare
    programs, and manpower planning. The American economic review 68 , 8 ­19 (1978).
63. Martinelli, C. & Parker, S. W. Deception and Misreporting in a Social Program. Journal of
    the European Economic Association 7 , 886 ­908 (2009).
64. Camacho, A. & Conover, E. Manipulation of Social Program Eligibility. American
    Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 , 41 ­65 (2011).
65. Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Olken, B. A. & Sumarto, S. The (lack of) Distortionary Effects of
    Proxy-Means Tests: Results from a Nationwide Experiment in Indonesia .
    http://www.nber.org/papers/w25362 (2018) doi:10.3386/w25362.
66. Finkelstein, A. E-Z Tax: Tax Salience and Tax Rates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
    124 , 969 ­ 1010 (2009).
67. Björkegren, D., Blumenstock, J. E. & Knight, S. Manipulation-Proof Machine Learning.
    arXiv:2004.03865 [cs, econ] (2020).




                                             30
                                            Figures




Figure 1 | Overview of targeting methodology for rural Novissi. a) Regional targeting. High-
resolution satellite imagery (left) is analyzed with deep learning algorithms to generate poverty
estimates for 1km2 grid cells (middle), which are overlayed with population data to produce
canton-level estimates of wealth. Individuals registered in the 100 poorest cantons (right) are
eligible for benefits. b) Individual targeting. A machine learning algorithm is trained using
representative survey data to predict consumption from features of phone use (Methods §4). The
algorithm constructs poverty scores that are correlated with ground-truth measures of
consumption (left). Subscribers who register for the program in targeted cantons with estimated
consumption less than USD $1.25/day are eligible for benefits (right). The red distribution shows
the predicted wealth distribution of the entire population of Togo; the blue distribution shows the
predicted wealth distribution in the 100 poorest cantons; and the green section indicates the
predicted wealth distribution of Novissi beneficiaries.

                                                31
Figure 2 | Comparing Novissi targeting to alternatives. The performance of phone-based
targeting (green) in comparison to alternative approaches that were feasible (red) and infeasible
(grey) in Togo in 2020. Targeting is evaluated for (a) The actual rural Novissi program, which
focused on Togo's 100 poorest ca ntons (using a 2020 survey representative of mobile
subscribers in the 100 cantons, where PMT is a ground truth for poverty since consumption data
was not collected in the phone survey); and (b) a hypothetical nationwide anti-poverty program
(using a national field survey conducted in 2018-2019, where consumption is a ground truth for
poverty). Darker bars indicate recall and precision (left axis); lighter bars indicate Area Under
Curve (right axis). Standard deviations, produced from 1,000 bootstrap simulations, shown as
whiskers. This figure highlights a subset of the results contained in Table 1 .
                                                 32
Figure 3 | Welfare analysis of different targeting mechanisms. Aggregate social welfare is
calculated (assuming CRRA utility) under counterfactual targeting approaches. We assume a
fixed budget of USD 4 million and a population of 154,238, with an equal transfer size for all
beneficiaries. Utility curves for feasible targeting mechanisms are shown in solid lines; infeasible
targeting mechanisms are shown in dashed lines. The horizontal dotted line indicates total social
welfare for a universal basic income program that provides (very small) transfers to the entire
population; vertical dotted lines indicate the targeting threshold and associated transfer size that
maximizes social welfare for each targeting mechanism. Targeting is evaluated for (a) an anti-
poverty program in Togo's 100 poorest cantons; and (b) a hypothetical nationwide anti-poverty
program.
                                                33
Figure 4 | Fairness of targeting for different demographic subgroups. Above: Distributions
of differences between ranking according to predicted wealth from the ML approach and ranking
according to true wealth (using the 2018-2019 field survey matched to CDR, N = 4,171),
dissagregated by gender (a) and ethnicity (b). Left-skewed bars indicate groups that are
consistently under-ranked; right-skewed bars indicate groups that are consistently over-ranked.
Below: Evaluation of demographic parity across subgroups by comparing the proportion of a
subgroup targeted under counterfactual approaches to the proportion of the subgroup that falls
into the poorest 29% of the population (using data from the 2018-2019 field survey matched to
CDR, N = 4,171). Bubbles show the percentage point difference between the proportion of the
subgroup that is targeted and the proportion that is poor according to ground-truth data. Large
red bubbles indicate groups that are over-targeted; large blue bubbles indicate groups that are
under-targeted.




Tables


                                              34
                         Targeting Novissi in rural Togo               Hypothetical nationwide program
                         Based on 2020 Phone Survey (N = 8,915)       Based on 2018-2019 Field Survey (N = 4,171)


                        Spearman     AUC       Accuracy Precision     Spearman    AUC       Accuracy Precision
                                                        & Recall                                     & Recall

Panel A: Targeting methods considered by the Government of Togo in 2020
 Prefecture        0.30      0.64      65%        39%          0.34     0.66                  68%        45%
 (Admin-2 regions)        (0.017)    (0.008)      (0.87%)   (1.51%)     (0.017)   (0.008)     (0.74%)   (1.27%)

 Canton                   0.19        0.59        61%        33%         0.39      0.68       70%        48%
 (Admin-3 regions)        (0.019)    (0.009)      (0.78%)   (1.35%)     (0.016)   (0.008)     (0.71%)   (1.23%)

 Phone                    0.13        0.57        60%        32%         0.26      0.63       65%        40%
 (Expenditures)           (0.020)    (0.010)      (0.71%)   (1.23%)     (0.017)   (0.009)     (0.81%)   (1.40%)


 Phone                    0.38        0.70        69%        47%         0.45      0.73       71%        50%
 (Machine Learning)       (0.017)    (0.009)      (0.87%)   (1.18%)     (0.015)   (0.007)     (0.74%)   (1.28%)


Panel B: Common alternative targeting methods that could not be implemented in Togo in 2020
 Asset Index     0.10        0.55      60%        30%            0.51    0.75      74%                   54%
                          (0.018)    (0.009)      (0.48%)   (0.83%)     (0.014)   (0.007)     (0.69%)   (1.19%)

 PPI                                [data not available]                 0.63      0.81       77%        60%
                                                                        (0.011)   (0.006)     (0.73%)   (1.25%)

 PMT                                [data not available]                 0.72      0.85       78%        63%
                                                                        (0.009)   (0.005)     (0.70%)   (1.20%)


Panel C: Additional counterfactual targeting methods that were feasible in Togo in 2020
 Random            0.00       0.50       59%       30%            0.00      0.50      59%                29%
                          (0.021)    (0.082)      (0.74%)   (0.26%)     (0.019)   (0.010)     (0.79%)   (1.36%)

 Occupation               -0.11       0.45        55%        22%        -0.09      0.46       56%        24%
 (As implemented)         (0.019)     (.007)      (0.62%)   (1.07%)     (0.019)   (0.095)     (0.53%)   (0.91%)

 Occupation               0.25        0.61        66%        41%         0.41      0.69       72%        52%
 (Optimally designed)     (0.016)    (0.008)      (0.58%)   (1.00%)     (0.016)   (0.008)     (0.72%)   (1.25%)


Table 1 | Performance of targeting mechanisms . Targeting performance using mobile phone
data and machine learning (highlighted) in comparison to counterfactual targeting strategies. The
"true poor" are those who, according to survey data, are in the poorest 29% o f the population
(the 29% threshold reflects the budget constraint of the rural Novissi expansion). The first four
columns evaluate targeting with a 2020 phone survey representative of subscribers in Togo's 100
poorest cantons, using a PMT as ground truth for poverty since consumption data were not
collected. The last four columns evaluate targeting using nationally representative household
survey data collected in 2018-2019, using consumption as a ground truth. Panel A compares the
phone-based PMT (highlighted) to alternative targeting methods that the Government of Togo
considered prior to expanding Novissi to rural areas. Panel B shows the performance of targeting
methods that are commonly implemented but were infeasible in Togo at the time. Panel C
indicates the performance of other targeting methods the government could have used. Accuracy,
precision, and recall are evaluated by the extent to which they reach the poorest 29% (by
construction, precision and recall are equal in this simulation). Standard deviations, produced
from 1,000 bootstrap simulations, shown in parentheses.
                                                            35
       Exclusion     Proportion
                                                                 Data and Calculations
        Source        Included
 Voter ID             83% - 98% According to administrative data, 3,633,898 individuals are registered to vote in
 possession                        Togo. The electoral commission of Togo reports that this corresponds to 86.6% of
                                   eligible adultsxvii. The total adult population in Togo is not certain (the last census
                                   was in 2011), but Togo's national statistical agency (https://inseed.tg/) estimates that
                                   there are 3,715,318 adults in Togo; the United Nations estimates 4.4 million adults47.
                                   These imply a voter ID penetration rate of either 82.6% and 97.8%, respectively
 SIM card and 65% - 85% 65% of individuals interviewed in the 2018-2019 field survey (N = 6,171) report
 mobile phone           owning a mobile phone; 85% of individuals are in a household with one or more
 access                 phones. See Figure S9. It is likely that phone penetration in Togo increased between
                                   the time of the field survey and the Novissi expansion in mid-2020; the Togolese
                                   government estimates 82% SIM card penetration in the country (though some people
                                   may have multiple SIM cards)xviii.
 Program              35% - 46% 245,454 unique subscribers attempted to register for the rural Novissi program. The
 awareness                         total voting population of eligible areas is 528,562, implying a maximum registration
                                   rate of 46.44%. However, not all 245,454 registration attempts were made by people
                                   living in eligible areas; examining administrative data on home location from
                                   successful registrations we estimate that 87% of registration attempts came from
                                   eligible areas, implying an attempted registration rate of 40.40%. An alternative way
                                   to estimate attempted registration rates involves comparing the number of
                                   registration attempts made by phones below the poverty threshold (69,753) to our
                                   estimate of the number of voters in eligible cantons below the poverty threshold
                                   based on inferred home locations from mobile phone data (174,425, see Appendix II
                                   for details), which implies an attempted registration rate of 34.79% after scaling by
                                   87% (to account for registrations that came from outside of eligible areas).
 Registration            72%       Registration for the Novissi program requires entering basic information into a
 challenges                        USSD (phone-based) platform. According to program administrative data, of the
                                   245,454 subscribers who attempted registration, 176,517 (71.95%) eventually
                                   succeeded. The average registration required four attempts.
 Targeting               47%       Based on the estimates from our targeting simulations using the 2020 phone survey
 errors                            (Table 1), the exclusion error rate of the phone-based targeting algorithm is 53%.


Table 2 | Sources of exclusion from rural Novissi benefits. We use multiple sources of
administrative data, survey data, and government sources to estimate the extent to which
different elements of the Novissi program design may have led to errors of exclusion. Novissi
eligibility requirements include: voter ID possession (to provide identification and home
location), access to a mobile phone (to fill register using the USSD platform), program
awareness (to know that the program exists and to attempt to register), ability to register via the
USSD platform (which requires basic digital literacy), as well as targeting errors from the phone-
based machine learning algorithm. While this table calculates sources of exclusion as though
they were all independent, Table S8 uses survey data to calculate overlaps in exclusions.




xvii
        https://www.republicoftogo.com/Toutes-les-rubriques/Politique/86-6-des-Togolais-ont-une-carte-d-electeur
xviii
        Ibid.
                                                            36
                                     Supplementary Information


Appendix A: Selection of Variables for Proxy-Means Test

Our proxy-means test is used in analysis for both the 2018-2019 field survey (where we evaluate
the PMT's accuracy as a targeting mechanism) and the 2020 phone survey (where we use the PMT
as a measure of ground-truth poverty in the absence of a consumption measure). We construct the
PMT using all observations from the 2018-2019 field survey (N=6,171). We begin by identifying
all information on demographics and asset ownership collected in the field survey that may
correlated with poverty. In total, we identify 56 variables, including information on household
assets and housing quality, education, marital status, age, ethnicity, health, location, and more.

Our goal is to identify a small subset of variables that are most predictive of house hold
consumption. We use stepwise forward selection of predictors to greedily identify the most
predictive feature subsets of size K, for K ranging from 1 to 30. Specifically, we randomly divide
our survey observations into a training set (75%) and test set (25%). For K=1, we train a machine
learning model to predict household consumption xix from each feature individually, and select the
feature associated with the best model. For K=2 , we test adding each remaining feature to our
model, and select the feature that adds the most predictive power. We continue the process for all
K up to 30.

We perform the stepwise forward selection process first for a Ridge regression (where the optimal
L2 penalty is selected via awide grid) and second for a random forest (where the optimal ensemble
size is chosen from {50, 100} via 3-fold cross validation and the optimal tree depth is chosen from
{2, 4, 6, 8}). Figure S10 plots the predictive accuracy (measured with r 2 score) for each value of
K for the two models.

We observe that the random forest is not significantly more accurate than the regression, and note
a greater degree of overfitting with the random forest. We therefore select the Ridge regression, as
it has the advantages of simplicity and interpretability without sacrificing accuracy. We identify
an "elbow" in the accuracy progression at K=11 features, so we use the feature subset of size K=11
in our PMT. These features and the weights associated with them are recorded in Table S2.




xix
  While in the rest of this paper we use price-index adjusted per capita household consumption, in this exercise our
outcome variable is raw household consumption (because the data necessary to construct price index adjusted
consumption was not available to us at the time the exercise was carried out prior to the 2020 phone survey).
                                                        37
Appendix B: Sampling for 2020 Phone Survey

The 2020 phone survey was sampled to be as representative as possible of mobile phone
subscribers living in the cantons of Togo eligible for rural Novissi. The sample frame for the survey
is all mobile phone subscribers active on one of the two mobile networks in Togo between March
1 and September 30, 2020 (N=5.83 million). Sampling is based on four metrics associated with
each mobile phone subscriber: inferred probability of living in a rural Novissi-eligible area,
registration to a previous Novissi program, inferred wealth based on our CDR+ML methods, and
total mobile phone expenditure.

Inferred probability of living in a rural-Novissi eligible area

We use machine learning methods to predict the probability that each of the 5.83 mobile network
subscribers is living in one of the 100 cantons of Togo that are eligible for rural Novissi. We train
the machine learning model on the dataset of all subscribers that registered for Novissi when it
was first available in the Greater Lomé region (while only residents of Greater Lomé were eligible
for this program, any registered voter in Togo could sign up for the platform for immediate
eligibility in future programs). In total, this dataset includes 1.3 million subscribers with Novissi
registration data matched to CDR. Novissi registration data crucially includes the canton in which
each subscriber registered to vote (we refer to this information as ground -truth home cantons).

The raw training dataset is not representative of mobile network in Togo, as a nonrandom subset
of subscribers register for Novissi (for example, more than half of the registered subscribers are in
the Greater Lomé region). To make the training data more representative, we calculate the expected
proportion of subscribers in each canton based on the total number of voters registered in each
canton and individual mobile phone penetration measured at the prefecture level (based on the
2018-2019 field survey). We "balance" the training dataset by sampling observations at random
from cantons with a disproportionately high number of registrants until the proportions in the
training dataset reflect the expected proportion of mobile network subscribers in each canton.

Finally, we train a machine learning model to predict whether each subscriber is in the 100 eligible
cantons. As in poverty prediction, we use a gradient boosting model with optimal hyperparameters
chosen via cross-validation. The model uses CDR features relating to location ­ specifically the
(normalized) number of unique days on which each subscriber places a transaction in each canton
of Togo. The model obtains an AUC score of 0.90 over cross-validation, and an overall accuracy
of 93%. We use the machine learning model to produce estimates of the likelihood that all 5.83
million mobile network subscribers live in an eligible canton.

Registration to a previous Novissi program

As noted above, around 22% of mobile network subscribers were already registered in the Novissi
system prior to rural Novissi, and therefore are associated with a ground-truth home canton based
on the canton in which they are registered to vote. In our dataset of inferred home location
likelihoods, we assign any subscriber registered to vote in one of the 100 targeted cantons a 100%
likelihood of geographical eligibility (N=86,856). We assign any subscriber registered to vote
outside of these cantons a 0% likelihood of geographical eligibility (N=1,046,905).
                                                 38
 Based on total number of voters registered in targeted cantons and mobile phone penetration in
these areas, we estimate that around 240,000 subscribers live in eligible cantons. We identify the
240,000 subscribers most likely to be living in a targeted canton (including all 86,856 subscribers
registered in targeted cantons). Only these 240,000 subscribers are eligible to be surveyed.

Inferred poverty based on CDR

We use ground-truth poverty data collected in a previous nationally-representative phone survey
conducted in June 2020 to train a machine learning model to predict poverty from CDR. We follow
the methods described in Methods §15, using the PMT as ground truth and CDR features from
March 1 to September 30, 2020. We use the machine learning model to predict the poverty of each
of the 5.83 million mobile phone subscribers on the networks.

Mobile phone expenditure

We construct the measure of total phone expenditure for each subscriber described in Methods §4.

Survey sampling

We seek to maximize power around the targeting thresholds by oversampling observations close
to the targeting thresholds. We divide the 240,000 subscribers into four quartiles based on
inferred poverty based on CDR and mobile phone expenditure. We overlap the quartiles to form
eight "cells", based on the combination of the two targeting methods (for example, cell AA
represents being in the lowest quartile by both targeting methods, while cell AD represents being
in the lowest quartile by one method and the highest quartile by another method, and so on). We
assign a weight of 0.20 to cells AD and BC, a weight of 0.15 to cells AC and BD, a weight of
0.10 to cells AB and AA, and a weight of 0.05 to cells CD and DD. We sample from our dataset
of 240,000 subscribers with the associated probability. We use the inverse of these sampling
probabilities as sample weights in our downstream analysis, in combination with response
weights (see Methods §10).




                                                39
                                  Supplementary Figures

               "In the past week, on how many days did you or someone in your
              household have to reduce the number of meals eaten in a day?"
                      Results from phone survey in Togo, conducted June 2 -14, 2020 (N=15,107)




Figure S1 | Food insecurity in Togo . In June 2020, we conducted a phone survey of 15,107
mobile phone owners in Togo. Survey weights are used to make responses representative of the
population of mobile phone owners in Togo.




                                                    40
Figure S2 | Wealth of formal vs. informal workers. Results based on analysis of nationally-
representative household survey data collected by the Government of Togo in 2018-2019 (N =
6,171). Data is collected at the household-level, we assign a household-level informal occupation
indicator if at least one of the adult household members is unemployed or employed in an
informal occupation. See Methods §3.




Figure S3 | Poverty maps. (a) Prefecture (admin-2) poverty map inferred from 2017 field
survey (N = 26,902), showing the percent of the population living under the poverty line by
prefecture. Overlayed with locations of survey observations in black points. (b) High-resolution
estimates of consumption derived from satellite imagery. (c) High-resolution estimates of
population density derived from satellite imagery. (d) Canton (admin-3) poverty map inferred
from satellite imagery by combining high-resolution consumption estimates and population
density estimates to calculate weighted average consumption per canton.

                                               41
Figure S4 | CDR features. Comparing the distribution for CDR features for those above and
below the international poverty line (USD 1.90/day) in the 2018-2019 field survey dataset.




                                             42
Figure S5 | Feature importances for ML models. Feature importances for the machine
learning models trained to predict (a) Proxy Means Test from CDR, using a 2020 phone survey
of mobile subscribers in Togo's 100 poorest cantons ( N = 8,915); and (b) consumption from
CDR in the 2018-2019 field survey dataset (N = 4,171). Feature importance is calculated based
on the total number of times a feature is split upon in the prediction ensemble. Features are color-
coded as follows: CDR features are shown in blue, location features in green, mobile money
features in red, and mobile data features in purple.




                                                43
Figure S6 | Targeting performance at different levels of program coverage. Top figures (a
and b) show performance for the rural Novissi program, evaluated using 2020 phone survey.
Bottom figures (c and d) correspond to the hypothetical national program, evaluated using the
2018-2019 field survey. ROC curves on left (a and c) indicate the true positive and false positive
rates at different targeting thresholds, as described in Methods §5.c. Coverage vs. Recall figures
on right (b and d) show how precision and recall vary as the percentage of the population
receiving benefits increases, i.e., they indicate the precision and recall for reaching the poorest
k% of the population in programs that target the poorest k% . (Precision and recall are thus the
same for each value of k by construction ­ see Methods §5.c).


                                                44
Figure S7 | Fairness with normalized rank residuals. Boxplots showing distributions of
normalized rank residuals (see Methods §5.e) aggregated by subgroup, using the 2018-2019 field
survey dataset (N = 4,171). Left-shifted boxes indicate groups that are consistently under-ranked
by a given targeting mechanism, right-shifted boxes indicate groups that are consistently over-
ranked by a given targeting mechanism.




                                               45
Figure S8 | Fairness with demographic parity . We evaluate demographic parity across
subgroups by comparing the proportion of a subgroup targeted under counterfactual approaches
                                             46
to the proportion of the subgroup that falls into the poorest 29% of the population (using data
from the 2018-2019 field survey matched to CDR, N = 4,171). Bubbles show the percentage
point difference between the proportion of the subgroup that is targeted and the proportion that is
poor according to ground-truth data. Large red bubbles indicate groups that are over-targeted;
large blue bubbles indicate groups that are under-targeted.




                                                47
Figure S9 | Mobile phone penetration and coverage in Togo. Based on nationally-
representative household survey data collected in 2018-2019, we estimate a) the percentage of
adults in Togo with one or more mobile phone, disaggregated by age and gender (vertical bands
indicate 95% confidence intervals); b) the percentage of households in Togo with one or more
mobile phones, disaggregated by the age of the head of household; and c) the percentage of
individuals in each prefecture with one or more mobile phones. Using data on the location and
signal strength of all cell towers in Togo, made available by Togocel (one of the two phone
companies in Togo), we calculate d) the signal strength across Togo; and e) the fraction of the
population in each canton with access to a usable signal, where signal greater than -86 dBm is
generally considered usable, and sub-canton estimates of population density are derived from
satellite imagery and downloaded from the Humanitarian Data Exchange 41.




                                              48
Figure S10 | Selection of variables for proxy-means test. Each plot shows the accuracy
(measured by r2 score) of a proxy-means test using the most predictive feature subset of size K,
where K is plotted on the x-axis. The left plot shows the accuracy obtained by a Ridge
regression; the right plot shows the accuracy obtained by a random forest. Feature subsets are
selected via stepwise forward selection.




                                               49
                                     Supplementary Tables



                    Asset                   Magnitude                Magnitude
                                      (2018-2019 Field Survey)   (2020 Phone Survey)
          Electricity access                   0.38
          Toilet                               0.37                     0.41
          TV                                   0.35
          Electricity grid                     0.35
          Garbage disposal                     0.33
          Waste disposal                       0.33
          Iron                                 0.26                     0.06
          Radio                                0.20                     0.23
          Clean water (wet season)             0.16
          Clean water (dry season)             0.16
          Refrigerator                         0.12                     0.02
          Walls                                0.12
          Floor                                0.11
          Mobile phone                         0.11
          Water disposal                        010
          Motorcycle                           0.10                     0.88
          Computer                             0.09                     0.02
          Roof                                 0.08
          Stove                                0.07                     0.06
          Car                                  0.06                     0.00
          Tablet                               0.01                     0.00
          Air conditioner                      0.01                     0.00
          House                                0.00
          Electricity (offgrid)                0.00

Table S1 | Asset-based wealth index. Magnitude of first principal component for 2018-2019
field survey and 2020 phone survey.




                                                50
Feature                                               Feature (continued)            
Car                           2.77                    HHW Education 4              -0.18
Stove                         1.77                    Pref. Lacs                   -0.18
Refrigerator                  1.32                    Pref. Sotouboua              -0.18
HHH Education 8               1.12                    Pref. Kloto                  -0.21
HHH Education 9               0.91                    HHW Education 6              -0.21
HHH Hospitalization           0.81                    Pref. Kpele                  -0.21
Iron                          0.63                    Pref. Bas-Mono               -0.23
HHH Education 3               0.55                    Pref. Lome Commune           -0.23
TV                            0.50                    Pref. Danyi                  -0.24
All children in school        0.48                    Pref. Yoto                   -0.26
Pref. Cinkasse                0.39                    Pref. Agoe-Nyive             -0.27
Pref. Tchamba                 0.33                    HHH Education 5              -0.27
Toilet                        0.26                    No children in school        -0.31
HHH Education 7               0.17                    Pref. Assoli                 -0.32
Pref. Est-Mono                0.14                    Pref. Kpendjal-Ouest         -0.33
HHW Education 0               0.12                    Pref. Zio                    -0.33
Pref. Tchaoudjo               0.09                    Pref. Amou                   -0.34
Pref. Bassar                  0.09                    HHW Education 3              -0.34
Pref. Haho                    0.07                    Pref. Plaine du Mo           -0.34
Pref. Dankpen                 0.04                    Pref. Anie                   -0.34
Pref. Moyen-Mono              -0.03                   Pref. Tandjoare              -0.35
Pref. Oti-Sud                 -0.06                   Pref. Binah                  -0.37
Pref. Oti                     -0.08                   Pref. Ave                    -0.39
Pref. Wawa                    -0.11                   Pref. Keran                  -0.41
Pref. Vo                      -0.11                   Pref. Kpendjal               -0.46
Pref. Ogou                    -0.12                   HHW Education 2              -0.50
Pref. Tone                    -0.14                   Pref. Kozah                  -0.51
Pref. Agou                    -0.15                   HHH Education 2              -0.57
Pref. Akebou                  -0.17                   Pref. Blitta                 -0.61
HHW Education 1               -0.17                   HHH Education 1              -0.63
Some children in school       -0.17                   Pref. Golfe                  -0.68
Number of children            -0.17                   Pref. Doufelgou              -0.75

Table S2 | Proxy means test. Weights for linear model, trained on 2018-2019 phone survey (N
= 6,171).

                                            51
                                 2018-2019 Field Survey (N=6,171) 2020 Phone Survey (N=8,915)
                                 Consumption     Proportion    N      Proportion       N
 Intellectual Professions        $4.11 (3.55)        7%       277        7%           577
 Intermediate Professions        $3.95 (3.56)        5%       197        3%           264
 Administrators                  $3.89 (3.57)        1%        32        0%            16
 Managers and Directors          $3.70 (3.03)        3%       106        0%            36
 Unemployed/Unknown              $3.19 (2.44)        8%       339        3%           275
 Direct Services and Merchants   $2.75 (2.11)        23%      940       28%          2,111
 Industry/Artisans               $2.47 (1.83)        15%      587       12%          1,026
 Military Professions            $2.45 (1.25)        0%        17        1%            26
 Elementary Professions          $2.21 (1.83)        2%        65        3%           249
 Factory Workers                 $2.17 (1.44)        7%       267        2%           165
 Agricultural Professions        $1.53 (0.94)        29%      1,744     41%          4,170

Table S3 | Occupation categories. Average daily per capita consumption per occupation
category, with counts by category, separately for the 2018-2019 field survey and 2020 phone
survey. Occupation categories for the 2018-2019 survey are for the household head, for the 2020
survey are for the individual respondent.




                                                52
                                         Consumption         PMT        Asset Index
              Panel A: 2018-2019 Field Survey (N = 4,171)

              ML                              0.46            0.62         0.74
              Single Feature                  0.13            0.16         0.11

              Panel B: 2018-2019 Field Survey, Rural Only (N = 2,306)

              ML                              0.31            0.44         0.51

              Single Feature                  0.09            0.12         0.08

              Panel C: 2020 Phone Survey (N = 8,915)

              ML                               --             0.41         0.40
              Single Feature                   --             0.13         0.14


Table S4 | Performance of phone-based approach to predicting wealth and consumption.
Accuracy (Pearson correlation coefficients) for predicting poverty measures from CDR. ML
predictions are produced over 5-fold cross validation and evaluated for pooled correlation. The
"single feature" model estimates wealth and consumption based on the individual's total
expenditures on calling and texting.




                                               53
                        Targeting Novissi in rural Togo              Hypothetical nationwide program
                        Based on 2020 Phone Survey (N = 8,915)      Based on 2018-2019 Field Survey (N = 4,171)

                        Accuracy      Precision           Recall     Accuracy       Precision        Recall

Panel A: Targeting methods considered by the Government of Togo in 2020

 Prefecture               47%            86%              34%            60%           68%            39%
 (Admin-2 regions)       (0.67%)        (1.16%)           (0.46%)       (0.67%)        (1.15%)        (0.67%)

 Canton                   44%            80%              31%            62%           71%            41%
 (Admin-3 regions)       (0.87%)        (1.51%)           (0.59%)       (0.69%)        (1.19%)        (0.68%)

 Phone                    41%            76%              30%            57%           63%            36%
 (Expenditures)          (0.77%)        (1.32%)           (0.52%)       (0.91%)        (1.56%)        (0.90%)


 Phone                    48%            87%              34%            63%           72%            42%
 (Machine Learning)      (0.76%)        (1.30%)           (0.51%)       (0.69%)        (1.19%)        (0.69%)


Panel B: Common alternative targeting methods that could not be implemented in Togo in 2020
 Asset Index     42%            77%           30%              65%           76%           44%
                         (0.52%)        (0.89%)           (0.35%)       (0.69%)        (1.19%)        (0.68%)

 PPI                               [data not available]                  69%           83%            48%
                                                                        (0.66%)        (1.14%)        (0.66%)

 PMT                               [data not available]                  71%           87%            50%
                                                                        (0.56%)        (0.97%)        (0.56%)

Panel C: Additional counterfactual targeting methods that were feasible in Togo in 2020
 Random            39%           73%           29%               49%           49%                    28%
                         (0.76%)        (1.31%)           (0.51%)       (0.88%)        (1.51%)        (0.87%)

 Occupation               38%            71%              28%            48%           46%            27%
 (As implemented)        (0.77%)        (1.33%)           (0.52%)       (0.61%)        (1.05%)        (0.60%)

 Occupation               46%            84%              33%            64%           74%            43%
 (Optimally designed)    (0.61%)        (1.06%)           (0.42%)       (0.68%)        (1.18%)        (0.68%)



Table S5 | Performance of targeting households below the poverty line. Analysis is similar to
that presented in Table 1, but targeting is evaluated on the extent to which each method (still
targeting the poorest 29%) provides benefits to individuals consuming less than the international
poverty line of USD $1.90 per person per day (76% of observations in the 2020 phone survey
dataset and 57% of observations in the 2018-2019 field survey). Spearman correlation and AUC
are not reported here as they do not depend on the classification threshold, and are thus identical
to the values reported in Table 1.




                                                             54
                        Targeting Novissi in rural Togo              Hypothetical nationwide program
                        Based on 2020 Phone Survey (N = 8,915)      Based on 2018-2019 Field Survey (N = 4,171)

                        Accuracy      Precision           Recall     Accuracy       Precision        Recall

Panel A: Targeting methods considered by the Government of Togo in 2020

 Prefecture               59%            61%              37%            67%           51%            44%
 (Admin-2 regions)       (0.94%)        (1.49%)           (0.99%)       (0.73%)        (1.26%)        (1.09%)

 Canton                   54%            53%              32%            69%           54%            47%
 (Admin-3 regions)       (0.86%)        (1.47%)           (0.91%)       (0.73%)        (1.26%)        (1.08%)

 Phone                    53%            50%              31%            64%           45%            39%
 (Expenditures)          (0.85%)        (1.32%)           (0.90%)       (0.85%)        (1.46%)        (1.25%)


 Phone                    61%            64%              39%            69%           55%            48%
 (Machine Learning)      (0.77%)        (0.94%)           (0.81%)       (0.73%)        (1.27%)        (1.09%)


Panel B: Common alternative targeting methods that could not be implemented in Togo in 2020
 Asset Index     53%            51%           31%              72%           60%           51%
                         (0.54%)         (0.009)          (0.57%)       (0.71%)        (1.23%)        (1.05%)

 PPI                               [data not available]                  76%           67%            57%
                                                                        (0.73%)        (1.26%)        (1.09%)

 PMT                               [data not available]                  78%           70%            60%
                                                                        (0.70%)        (1.20%)        (1.03%)

Panel C: Additional counterfactual targeting methods that were feasible in Togo in 2020
 Random            53%           51%           31%               56%           33%                    28%
                         (0.84%)        (1.31%)           (0.88%)       (0.81%)        (1.39%)        (1.20%)

 Occupation               47%            41%              25%            54%           29%            25%
 (As implemented)        (0.76%)        (1.17%)           (0.80%)       (0.55%)        (0.96%)        (0.82%)

 Occupation               59%            61%              37%            71%           58%            50%
 (Optimally designed)    (0.68%)        (1.61%)           (0.71%)       (0.74%)        (1.28%)        (1.10%)



Table S6 | Performance of targeting households below the extreme poverty line. Analysis is
similar to that presented in Table 1, but targeting is evaluated on the extent to which each method
(still targeting the poorest 29%) provides benefits to individuals consuming less than the
international extreme poverty line, set at 75% of the international poverty line or USD $1.43 per
person per day (53% of observations in the 2020 phone survey dataset and 41% of observations
in the 2018-2019 field survey). Spearman correlation and AUC are not reported here as they do
not depend on the classification threshold, and are thus identical to the values reported in Table
1.




                                                             55
                      Targeting hypothetical nationwide program ­ but only in rural areas
                             Based on 2018 Phone Survey Restricted to Rural Areas (N = 2,306)

                               Spearman                AUC                 Accuracy         Precision & Recall

 Panel A: Targeting methods that were feasible in Togo in 2020
 Prefecture                       0.16                  0.57                 64%                  37%
 (Admin-2 regions)                (0.023)              (0.011)               (0.97%)              (1.67%)

 Canton                           0.19                  0.59                 63%                  36%
 (Admin-3 regions)                (0.025)              (0.013)               (0.98%)              (1.69%)

 Phone                            0.15                  0.59                 63%                  36%
 (Expenditures)                   (0.024)              (0.012)               (1.05%)              (1.81%)


 Phone                            0.30                  0.65                 67%                  43%
 (Machine Learning)               (0.023)              (0.012)               (1.00%)              (1.73%)


 Panel B: Common alternative targeting methods that could not be implemented in Togo in 2020
 Asset Index              0.36                 0.68                 67%                  44%
                                  (0.023)              (0.011)               (1.01%)              (1.74%)

 PPI                              0.55                  0.77                 72%                  52%
                                  (0.017)              (0.009)               (1.07%)              (1.84%)

 PMT                              0.61                  0.80                 73%                  54%
                                  (0.016)              (0.007)               (1.06%)              (1.84%)


 Panel C: Additional counterfactual targeting methods that were feasible in Togo in 2020
 Random                     0.00                 0.50                 59%                         29%
                                  (0.024)              (0.012)               (1.04%)             (1.79%%)

 Occupation                      -0.13                  0.44                 54%                  21%
 (Novissi)                        (0.024)              (0.011)               (0.89%)              (1.53%)

 Occupation                       0.31                  0.63                 63%                  37%
 (Optimal)                        (0.023)              (0.010)               (0.62%)              (1.06%)



Table S7 | Performance of targeting the hypothetical national program, when restricted to
rural areas. Analysis is similar to that presented in the last four columns of Table 1, but analysis
is restricted to the 2,306 survey respondents (of the 4,171 total) who live in rural areas.




                                                        56
Exclusion Source                   N      Succeed     Drop Out   % of Total Remaining
All poor                          3,172     --           --            100.00%

Own a voter ID                    3,170   99.77%       0.23%           99.77%
Attempt to register for Novissi   2,230   60.56%      39.44%           60.43%

Succeed in registration           1,826   78.68%      21.32%           47.54%

Targeted by phone PMT             1,242   60.43%      39.57%           28.73%


Table S8 | Overlapping sources of exclusion from rural Novissi. Progressive sources of
attrition from the rural Novissi program, where each row shows exclusion conditional on
exclusions from preceding rows. Results are estimated using the 2020 phone survey (N = 8,915).
Values reweighted using sample weights.




                                                 57
