                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LONG RUN EFFECTS OF AID:
                   FORECASTS AND EVIDENCE FROM SIERRA LEONE

                                       Katherine Casey
                                      Rachel Glennerster
                                       Edward Miguel
                                       Maarten J. Voors

                                      Working Paper 29079
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29079


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021


We thank the Decentralization Secretariat, the GoBifo Project, Local Councillors in Bombali and
Bonthe districts, and a panel of experts for their collaboration. We thank Samuel Asher, Angelica
Eguiguren, Erin Iyigun, Andres F. Rodriguez, Mirella Schrijver, Eleanor Wiseman and the
Innovations for Poverty Action team in Freetown for excellent research assistance and fieldwork.
We thank Macartan Humphreys, Stefano Della Vigna, Eva Vivalt, and numerous seminar
participants and the 2018 BITSS Forecasting Conference for valuable comments. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the UK Economic and Social Research Council, the
Governance Initiative at J-PAL, NWO 451-14-001 and the Stanford Institute for Innovation in
Developing Economies. Human subjects approval was obtained from the Sierra Leone Ethics
and Scientific Review Committee, Stanford University (#38846), MIT COUHES (#1612798296)
and Wageningen University. This RCT was pre-registered in the American Economic
Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number 1784. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Katherine Casey, Rachel Glennerster, Edward Miguel, and Maarten J. Voors. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long Run Effects of Aid: Forecasts and Evidence from Sierra Leone
Katherine Casey, Rachel Glennerster, Edward Miguel, and Maarten J. Voors
NBER Working Paper No. 29079
July 2021
JEL No. H41,I25

                                        ABSTRACT

We evaluate the long-run effects of a decentralized approach to economic development, called
community driven development (CDD), a prominent strategy for delivering foreign aid. Notably
we revisit a randomized CDD program in Sierra Leone 11 years after launch. We estimate large
persistent gains in local public goods and market activity, and modest positive effects on
institutions. There is suggestive evidence that CDD slightly improved communities' response to
the 2014 Ebola epidemic. We compare estimates to the forecasts of experts from Sierra Leone
and abroad, working in policy and academia, and find that local policymakers are overly
optimistic about CDD's effectiveness.

Katherine Casey                               Edward Miguel
Stanford University                           Department of Economics
Graduate School of Business                   University of California, Berkeley
655 Knight Way                                530 Evans Hall #3880
Stanford, CA 94305                            Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                      and NBER
kecasey@stanford.edu                          emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu

Rachel Glennerster                            Maarten J. Voors
Foreign, Commonwealth and                     Development Economics Group
Development Office                            Wageningen University
22 Whitehall                                  Hollandseweg 1, 6706 KN, Wageningen
London, SW1A 2EG                              The Netherlands
United Kingdom                                maarten.voors@wur.nl
rachel.glennerster@fcdo.gov.uk
1. Introduction

Since the 1990s, community driven development (CDD) has emerged as a dominant approach to

distributing foreign aid to poor and vulnerable communities. At its core, CDD devolves control

over the selection, implementation and management of local public goods to communities (White

1999, Mansuri and Rao 2013). This highly decentralized and participatory approach has two main

goals: to bolster local public infrastructure and associated economic activity through the provision

of block grants; and to democratize community decision-making via social facilitation focused on

the inclusion of marginalized groups. As a leading donor, the World Bank alone spent $85 billion

over the first two decades of CDD programming (Mansuri and Rao 2013), and currently maintains

$19.2 billion in active investments across 78 countries (Wong and Guggenheim 2018).

       Meta-analysis of recent field experiments suggests that CDD effectively delivers local

infrastructure, accompanied by little discernable impact on institutional outcomes, at least in the

short run (Casey 2018). There is almost no data on how CDD performs over the longer term. This

is an important lacunae to fill in light of the often elusive nature of aid sustainability (Kremer and

Miguel 2007), and the open question of whether external reforms to strengthen institutions can

indeed succeed when afforded a sufficiently long time horizon. CDD offers an instructive

application for these questions, given its policy prominence and commensurate resource allocation,

as well as the fact that early programs are now "aging" into a stage where it is possible to assess

longer run effects (Bouguen et al 2018).

       This study makes three primary contributions. First, it experimentally evaluates the

impacts of a high-profile CDD program in Sierra Leone more than a decade after implementation

began, using an array of measures to capture public goods provision, economic activity, social

capital and local institutions. Second, it assesses whether the public infrastructure and collective




                                                                                                    1
organizing support provided by the CDD program enabled communities to better prepare for and

more effectively respond to the hardships brought on by the 2014 Ebola public health crisis. And

third, it compares program effects observed on the ground with the prior beliefs and forecasts of a

large number of experts located in Sierra Leone and abroad, and working in both policy and

academia.

           Our analysis centers on the "GoBifo" 1 CDD program, which was implemented by the

Government of Sierra Leone's Decentralization Secretariat with support from the World Bank. A

first intense phase of the program ran from 2005 to 2009, where treatment communities each

received roughly $5,000 in block grants and six months of dedicated social facilitation.

Participating communities established village development committees (VDC), mandated to

include representatives of marginalized groups, which were trained and encouraged to make the

selection and implementation of local projects in a democratic manner. Program staff closely

monitored community observance of these participation and inclusion rules, and both their

administrative records and our survey data document widespread adherence. VDC members then

had the opportunity to learn-by-doing in managing a series of small-scale public projects funded

by the grants, and liaised regularly with members of local elected government. A second less

intense phase of the program commenced in 2010, which provided additional grants to a subset of

treatment communities and continued some lighter touch engagement with project staff.

           This is an informative context to study the long run effects of CDD (our first contribution).

To start, the treatment was relatively intense, well-implemented and impactful in the short run. In

earlier work, we found substantial positive impacts on local public goods and economic activity,

and stronger links between the community and local government, over the first 4 years of program



1
    "GoBifo" means "move forward" in the local Krio language.


                                                                                                      2
activity (Casey, Glennerster and Miguel 2012).        Given the high rates at which aid-funded

infrastructure has been found to fall into disrepair in similar contexts (Miguel and Gugerty 2005),

it is useful to assess whether public infrastructure provided under CDD fares any better,

particularly as it is constructed at relatively low cost (Wong 2012).

       Our earlier work also found precisely estimated null results of CDD on a broad range of

measures capturing institutional change, a finding that has since been challenged on both

theoretical and econometric grounds, which thus provides a further motivation for a longer term

follow-up. Conceptually, some critics argue that the initial evaluation timeline may have been too

short to capture impacts on slowly evolving institutions, especially if institutional change follows

a non-linear trajectory (Woolcock 2013). Statistically, Anderson and Magruder (2017) reanalyze

the earlier data using more flexible, and thus higher powered, econometric methods, and find

support for positive short-run effects of CDD on participation in local governance, which is one

of several institutional dimensions examined. Partially in response to these perspectives, we

returned (in 2016) to all 236 originally sampled communities, seven years after the short-run data

collection (in 2009) and eleven years after program launch (in 2005), in order to assess long-run

changes in institutions, and evaluate the persistence of CDD investments in local public goods.

       The second contribution of this paper is to investigate the transferability of efforts to build

infrastructure and promote collective action in coping with unanticipated shocks. The 2014

outbreak of the Ebola Virus Disease in West Africa is the largest ever recorded. The crisis resulted

in over 4,000 deaths in Sierra Leone alone (of roughly 11,000 in total in the broader region). Some

of the actions the government asked communities to take to prepare for and respond to cases--

such as create community by-laws, report suspected cases, and disseminate prevention

information--could be facilitated by local institutional capacity of the kind GoBifo aimed to build,




                                                                                                    3
which our experimental design enables us to evaluate.

        Third and finally, we elicited the prior beliefs of experts about the prospects for long-run

change, and compare their predictions to our empirical estimates. We collected this data in 2016-

17 which, to our knowledge, is among the first such elicitations for a field experiment. This enables

us to assess the accuracy and variability of well-informed forecasters in this context. Specifically,

we collected priors regarding the long run effects of CDD on both institutional and infrastructural

outcomes from 126 experts familiar with CDD, a group that includes practitioners in Sierra Leone

and multi-lateral institutions, like the World Bank, as well as research faculty in economics and

political science, and their graduate students. This exercise adds a few data points to broader efforts

to systematically document prior beliefs and compare them to outcomes obtained in lab and field

settings (see Della Vigna and Pope 2018, Vivalt and Coville 2020, Vivalt et al. 2021). 2



2. Material and methods

2.1 Intervention and Research Timeline

This experiment tracks 236 communities in Sierra Leone over an 11 year period (see Figure 1).

The communities are located in two districts, Bombali and Bonthe, which were selected with an

eye toward balancing regional diversity, political affiliation and ethnic composition, while

simultaneously targeting poor rural areas that had previously received little aid. Half of these

communities were randomly assigned to participate in the GoBifo CDD program and the

remaining half were assigned to the control group that received no assistance. Baseline data was

collected in 2005 before program activity commenced.

        Program implementation began with facilitators helping treatment communities assemble


2
 A platform has been established to collect these forecasts systematically: see Della Vigna, Pope and Vivalt (2019)
and https://socialscienceprediction.org/.


                                                                                                                  4
a village development committee (VDC), which was required to include both women and young

men (both considered marginalized groups), and then training VDC members in methods to select,

plan, implement and monitor local development projects in an inclusive and democratic way. The

first intense phase of GoBifo (2005 to 2009) disbursed roughly $5,000 per treatment community,

or approximately $100 per household, for use in constructing small-scale public goods (like

latrines, community centers, and cement floors for drying agriculture produce) or enterprise

support (like training and start-up capital for carpentry and garment dying). During weekly visits,

GoBifo staff conducted trainings, facilitated meetings, and tracked participation in program

activities. Accumulated over the course of the first few years of the program, these visits and

trainings translated into six months of dedicated in-person support per community. The motivating

idea for these investments in local organizational capacity is that they could permanently lower

the fixed cost of collective action--which could be applied to future community decisions and

development activities--and thereby place communities on a stronger development trajectory that

outlasts the direct financing stage.

       To capture the short- to medium-run impacts of the program, the research team collected

data in 2009. Data collection was organized under 12 hypotheses about how CDD could alter

community outcomes: 3 of these hypotheses concern the "hardware" of development, like public

goods provision and economic activity; and the remaining 9 capture measures of institutional

"software," like social capital, inclusion and participation (see Table A2 for a detailed list). These

hypotheses were developed in partnership with the CDD practitioner team in 2005. Casey,

Glennerster and Miguel (2012) analyze the 2009 data and find strong positive impacts for the

hardware family of outcomes, and a series of precisely estimated null results for the software

family. This empirical pattern broadly resonates with other short-run experimental studies of CDD




                                                                                                    5
programs in Afghanistan (Beath, Christia and Enikolopov 2013), the Democratic Republic of

Congo (Humphreys, Sanchez de la Sierra and van der Windt 2019) and Liberia (Fearon,

Humphreys and Weinstein 2015).

           After this first assessment, a second less intensive phase of GoBifo began in 2010. The

program disbursed additional grants to 60 of the 118 treatment communities, amounting to $1,300

per community to support youth empowerment activities ("youth" is defined by the government

as individuals under 35 years of age). 3 Once again, no activities were implemented in the control

communities. Facilitation staff in both district headquarters (as well as management staff in the

capital) were employed full time throughout this second period, and remained on government

payroll at least through the long-run data collection, in 2016-18. They continued some project

facilitation activities in treatment villages, although we lack reliable data on the frequency of these

interactions, and our impression is that the level of program support for treatment villages was

minimal after 2012.

           In 2016, field enumeration teams returned to the original sample of 236 villages in order

to collect long-run data, covering both the original 12 research hypotheses as well as a new

hypothesis about community responses to the 2014 Ebola epidemic. Analysis in this paper thus

evaluates the persistence of the initial financial and organizational investments made under the

first intense phase of Gobifo, plus any additional effects of the subsequent treatment "dose"

delivered in the second phase. Total project costs for the first phase (2005-2009) are approximately

$2 million, and for the second, less active phase (2010-2018) nearly $3 million, given the

continuation of project staffing, transport and overhead for several years. From a broader policy

perspective, we evaluate a $5 million investment in CDD that was at least nominally operational



3
    This subset of 60 of the treatment communities was not randomly selected.


                                                                                                     6
for more than a decade.



2.2 Long-run Data Collection

The 2016 long-run data collection aimed to replicate as closely as possible the infrastructure and

institutional measures collected in 2009, as well as extend consideration to new measures capturing

community responses to the Ebola crisis. To do so, field teams conducted focus group discussions

with local leaders, and physically inspected a suite of community amenities and observable

indicators of market activity. Note that while the 2009 data collection included both household-

and community-level surveys, budgetary constraints limited the 2016 collection to community-

level outcomes only. Where possible, we include community-level analogues of omitted

household-level indicators, however the set of indicators collected in 2016 remains a subset of that

collected in 2009. We pre-registered all outcomes and analysis in the AEA registry (see

https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1784 and pre-analysis plan in Appendix C).

       To bolster our ability to accurately capture the somewhat elusive concept of local

institutions, we supplement survey indicators with observed communal behavior. This exercise

aims to loosely replicate the structured community activities (or "SCAs") that we developed in

2009 and discuss in Casey, Glennerster and Miguel (2012). As background, the 2016 activities

relate to a project challenge competition that the elected district councils were running at the time.

This competition awarded $2,500 grants to support local public infrastructure projects, selected

based on the quality of proposals submitted by communities. To publicize this opportunity, field

team supervisors held a public meeting in all study communities. Supervisors explained what was

required to enter the competition (namely, developing a project idea and completing a standardized

but somewhat technical 3-page proposal), and asked community members to nominate five people




                                                                                                    7
who had the requisite skills to lead the community through the proposal process. The enumeration

teams then stood back outside the meeting and allowed communities to deliberate as they saw fit.

Enumerators discretely observed the ensuing proceedings and recorded information on how the

deliberation unfolded, the presence and engagement of youth and women, and the influence of

local leaders on the process. These measures of observed behavior expand and deepen our analysis

of local institutional performance.



2.3 Expert Prior Elicitation

To capture the expectations of experts about what the 2016 data collection would reveal, we asked

knowledgeable policy makers and academics to make a series of predictions before we analyzed

any of the data. The expert survey asked for forecasts in three areas: the long-run effects of CDD

on (i) infrastructure and (ii) institutions, and (iii) the response of communities to the district

government grants competition.

       We first asked experts to make predictions about the same 12 hypotheses that we used in

our earlier work. For each hypothesis, the survey instrument restates the hypothesis (e.g.

"Hypothesis 1: GoBifo Project Implementation"), provides an example of indicators used to

measure the hypothesis (e.g. "Examples of indicators include the presence of a village

development committee and formal bank account for village project expenses"), and asks for a

prediction about the long-run results using a slider bar that ranges from -0.50 to +0.50 standard

deviation units (sdu's) (see instrument in Appendix A). As not all experts are familiar with this

metric, the survey describes what standard deviation units are and provides rules of thumb for what

constitutes small versus large effects. We randomly varied whether or not the survey prompted the

expert with the medium run results about CDD (e.g. "our study found medium-run effects for this




                                                                                                 8
hypothesis equal to +0.20 sdu's, which is statistically different from zero with a very high degree

of confidence").

        We then asked experts about the grants competition. This section of the survey provided

background information on the competition and the procedures the field supervisors followed in

publicizing it to communities, including the process for generating nominations for local residents

who could lead the proposal process. The survey then asked for predictions about what percentage

of communities would enter the competition. 4

        One strength of the research design is the broad variety of experts who participated,

including those in the country being studied. Through systematic outreach we collected priors

from 126 experts, including policymakers in Sierra Leone with knowledge of the GoBifo project;

policy experts working for multilateral aid agencies such as the World Bank, primarily based in

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries; faculty in both

economics and political science who have been involved in evaluating CDD projects or related

areas of development (including ourselves, the co-authors of this article); and economics students

in Sierra Leone (undergraduates) and OECD countries (doctoral students). The variety of experts

surveyed allows us to test some commonly held views about whether policymakers and academics

have similar levels of optimism and/or bias regarding intervention impacts, and potential regional

differences in perspective between international experts versus those located in the host country.



2.4 Empirical Strategy

To assess the long-run impacts of CDD we estimate the following model:




4
  This survey section also references a new experiment that we overlaid on top of this long-run CDD sampling
frame, which is analyzed in Casey et al (forthcoming).


                                                                                                               9
                                                      
                                       = 0 + 1  +   +   +                                                       (1)

where outcome Y (e.g. presence of a public good, institutional outcome, or Ebola response

measure), is measured for each community c; CDD is an indicator for participation in the long-run

GoBifo program; Wc is a vector of stratification fixed effects for geographic wards; Xc are

balancing variables used in the original 2005 randomization (community size and distance to

nearest road); and  is an idiosyncratic error term. We further test for heterogeneous treatment

effects along the same eight community-level dimensions we used (and measured) in the short-run

analysis (namely, total households, war exposure, average schooling, distance to road, historical

domestic slavery, district, ethnic fractionalization and chiefly authority, see Appendix Table A3). 5

        Throughout the analysis, we adjust for the fact that we conduct multiple tests on the same

dataset by implementing false discovery rate (FDR) corrections (see Benjamini, Krieger and

Yekutieli [2006] and Anderson [2008]). These adjustments run across the two outcome families,

or across hypotheses within a given family, as relevant. We also report the "naïve" or "per

comparison" p-value for those interested in a particular hypothesis on its own.

        We also test directly for decay in the estimates from the short- to long-run using the

following model:

                                 -  = 0 + 1  +   +   +                                                          (2)

where the dependent variable is the difference in mean effects indices measured in the long-run

survey,  , and short run,  . The coefficient of interest is 1, where 1 < 0 suggests that the

treatment effect has dissipated over time for that outcome. Note that the set of outcomes varies

between the 2009 and 2016 data collection rounds, so each index incorporates the relevant



5
 Consistent with Casey, Glennerster and Miguel (2012), we find little evidence for heterogeneous effects save for
smaller impacts in one of the two study districts, namely Bombali district.


                                                                                                                10
outcomes for that particular survey round (see Appendix Table A1 for estimates limited to the

exact panel outcomes).


3. Results

3.1 Long-run CDD Effects

Infrastructural Hardware Outcomes

We find evidence for positive, highly significant impacts of the CDD program on measures of

development hardware over the long-run. For the overall "family" of infrastructure outcomes,

Table 1, Panel A reports a long-run treatment effect of 0.204 standard deviation units, which is

sizeable in magnitude and statistically significant at the 99% confidence level. Estimates do not

change substantively when we limit the set of outcomes to those that form an exact panel (which

includes 28 of the original 39 outcomes from 2009): the 2016 treatment effect estimate is 0.208

standard deviation units (standard error 0.041) in Appendix Table A1.

       This positive effect reflects gains across the three component hypotheses, which concern

project implementation (e.g., does the community have a VDC?), the stock and quality of local

public infrastructure (e.g., does the community have a functional water well?), and economic

activity (e.g., how many goods are for sale in the community?). For each component hypothesis,

the CDD treatment effect estimate is positive and large in magnitude, ranging from 0.228 to 0.253

standard deviation units. The estimates are highly statistically significant (in column 1), even after

accounting for the fact that we are testing multiple hypotheses on the same dataset (in column 3).

Considering decay over time, the family-level long-run effect of 0.204 standard deviation units is

two thirds the size of the effect estimated in the short-run, which was 0.298 standard deviation

units (in column 4). This suggests a considerable degree of persistence, even years after most




                                                                                                   11
direct financial support ceased. The estimated decay, where one third of the original effect has

dissipated, is statistically distinct from zero (column 5).

       Looking at a few of the specific measures within each hypothesis provides a clearer sense

of the magnitude for these effects. For the first hypothesis about project implementation, consider

the specific measure of whether or not the community has a village development committee

(VDC). In the short-run data, treatment communities were more likely to have a VDC by 40

percentage points (on a base rate of 45.8 percent in control communities, see Casey, Glennerster

and Miguel 2012). In the long-run, this treatment advantage has reduced to a 17 percentage point

difference (see Appendix Table A5 for treatment effect estimates for all individual outcome

measures). The prevalence of a VDC in control communities has remained roughly constant over

time (at 43.2 percent in 2016). These VDC estimates illustrate the broader trend for this hypothesis

overall, which had both the largest estimated short-run effect (of 0.703 standard deviation units in

column 4) and exhibited the strongest decay over time (of -0.449 standard deviation units in

column 5) among the hypotheses in this family.

       By contrast, there is no statistically detectable change from the short- to long-run for the

second hypothesis about impacts of the program on the stock and quality of local public goods.

At the level of individual outcomes, this effect captures enduring improvements in the availability

of functional agricultural drying floors, traditional birth attendant huts, and court "barries" (or

public buildings for dispute resolution), among others (see Appendix Table A5). For the third

hypothesis, measures of economic welfare suggest that one third of the initial gains dissipated over

time. The remaining benefits reflect persistent increases in local market activity, including

enumerator observation of petty traders active in the community on the day of the 2016 field visit.




                                                                                                 12
       In our view, these results showing persistent gains in the "hardware" family of

development outcomes are impressive, and particularly so given the challenges of working in a

post-conflict environment. While our experimental design does not allow us to directly compare

infrastructure provision under CDD versus other delivery mechanisms, there are some useful

benchmarks in the literature. Miguel and Gugerty (2005), for example, find that nearly half of

borehole water wells built by a European bilateral aid donor in Kenya in the 1980's were no longer

functional within a decade of construction. Our estimated loss is only one third for CDD

investments over a comparable time frame. The comparatively strong CDD performance is

particularly encouraging given that CDD projects tend to be implemented at lower cost than other

government service delivery mechanisms (Wong 2012), raising the question of whether they were

done to a lower standard. While we cannot parse mechanisms underlying the CDD effect, these

relatively favorable results are at least consistent with CDD advocates' claims about the value of

local participation in aligning investments with demand and thereby bolstering utilization and

maintenance over time (Dongier et al. 2002).

       The Sierra Leone results provide evidence for stronger positive effects when compared to

the one other longer-run CDD experiment that we are aware of in the literature, namely Mvukiyehe

and van der Windt (2020) in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). While they find some

positive effects for the persistence of physical infrastructure, they estimate null results for long-

run impacts on service delivery, economic welfare, social inclusion and local institutions. Our

study is distinct from theirs in that it operates over a longer time horizon (returning 11 versus 8

years after project launch) and follows up on stronger short-run results (see Humphreys, Sánchez

de la Sierra and Van der Windt 2019 on null results for the DRC program), which provides a more

relevant setting for investigating the persistence of effects.




                                                                                                  13
Institutional Software Outcomes

Analysis of the 2016 data yields small positive estimates for the long-run effects of CDD on local

institutions. Combining all 61 individual outcomes grouped under this family into an equally

weighted index yields a positive, precisely estimated, but small in magnitude treatment effect of

0.062 standard deviation units (standard error 0.024) in Table 1, panel B. When we break these

estimates into the nine distinct hypotheses about how CDD might alter institutions, three

hypothesis-level estimates are positive--namely for collective action, trust, and groups and

networks--and at least marginally significant on a per-comparison basis (in column 2). Yet none

of the hypothesis-level estimates remain significant after adjusting for multiple inference (column

3). One way to interpret this pattern of results is that if we conceive of all outcomes measuring a

latent variable associated with institutional quality, CDD had a small positive impact, but the effect

is not large enough to detect effects along any of the nine underlying channels.

       Somewhat resonant with this interpretation, we do not find much evidence for detectable

differences in behaviors observed relating to the project challenge application. Combining all 13

SCA measures, the overall treatment effect is -0.001 with standard error 0.046 (see Appendix

Table A4). On a per comparison basis, only one individual indicator registers a statistically

significant effect, which is a large positive effect on the time that the community took to generate

its list of 5 nominees. In a companion paper, we analyze a broader array of outcomes related to

the grants competition and find weak evidence for CDD effects on intermediate measures--like

the village chief's willingness to delegate proposal authority to one of the community nominees--

but null results for the ultimate outcomes of interest, which is winning one of the actual grants (see

Casey et al., forthcoming).




                                                                                                   14
        How does the small positive long-run effect on institutions compare to what was measured

in the short-run? While the 2016 point estimate is more than twice as large in magnitude as the

null result for 2009 (0.065 versus 0.028 standard deviation units), the estimated decay over time

is not statistically distinct from zero (in column 5). Yet recall that these two estimates operate

over different subsets of indicators, as the long-run data collection does not include household

surveys. 6 If we limit consideration to outcomes that were collected in identical fashion across the

two survey rounds, the overall CDD treatment effect remains similar for 2016 (at 0.064, standard

error 0.027, in Appendix Table A1). The 2009 effect, however, is somewhat larger and becomes

statistically significant (at 0.086 standard deviation units, standard error 0.030). This increase in

the 2009 effect could reflect differences in reporting between households and community leaders

(although it is unclear to us ex ante which group is more or less susceptible to social desirability

bias), or could be due to sampling variation created by focusing on a subset of outcomes.



3.2 CDD Impacts during a Public Health Crisis

The 2016 data collection affords a rare opportunity to measure community responses to the Ebola

public health crisis of 2014 and assess whether the positive long-run effects of CDD on local

infrastructure and institutions better equipped communities to cope with the associated hardship.

Analysis in this section covers a variety of related outcomes, such as the creation of an Ebola task

force and knowledge about the epidemic (on symptoms, transmission and control).

        The estimated treatment effect for CDD on the index of the 13 combined Ebola knowledge




6
  Compared to the infrastructure family, which is based primarily on enumerator assessments of physical goods in
both rounds, the lack of household data matters more here. Specifically, the 2009 round paired all community-level
indicators (e.g. a count of how many people are observed at a particular community meeting) with reports from
representative households (e.g. did any member of this household attend this particular meeting?), so excluding the
household reports from the 2016 round cuts the number of institutional measures by roughly one half.


                                                                                                                15
items and response actions is small in magnitude and not statistically distinguishable from zero

(0.042 standard deviation units, with a standard error of 0.036 in Table 2). For Bombali district,

which was harder hit by Ebola, the effect is also null (-0.001, 0.053, N = 156 communities,

Appendix Table A6); while for Bonthe district, it is positive and significant (0.109, 0.053, N = 80).

For individual outcomes, while we find no change in knowledge of Ebola, we do see some

evidence that communities had taken more action. In Table 2, communities were 4% more likely

to have established Ebola related by-laws (significant at 95 percent confidence) and 8% more likely

to have established an Ebola task force (not significant). In a combined index of all response

actions, we find a positive and marginally significant effect of 0.090 standard deviation units

(standard error 0.053) in the full sample. Taken together, this provides suggestive evidence that

the CDD program may have generated some benefits for villages during the Ebola crisis, although

the effect magnitudes are modest.

         The positive result on Ebola response actions aligns with effects found for a different,

contemporaneous community program in Sierra Leone. Christensen et al (2021) analyze the

impact of a randomized accountability program that facilitated community monitoring of local

health clinics. 7 The program was implemented in Sierra Leone before the Ebola outbreak. Just

prior to the crisis, they find that the program interventions built confidence in health workers and

improved the perceived quality of care. During the crisis, this led to more reporting of Ebola cases

and lower mortality from the disease. While our results are weaker, they add support for the

possibility that community mobilization may be an effective strategy to generate collective action

under crisis conditions.




7
 The program consisted of an additional treatment arm that provided non-financial recognition for clinic staff.
Results across both arms were similar, though generally stronger for the community monitoring intervention.


                                                                                                                  16
3.3 Expert Forecasts

Are these results on the long-run effects of CDD in line with what informed individuals would

have expected? Figure 2 presents expert predictions, collected before any data analysis, to help

answer this question. The panels display forecasts for three distinct areas: CDD effects on

infrastructure (Panel A), CDD effects on institutions (Panel B), and community entry into the

grants competition (Panel C). For each type of expert (e.g. policymaker or academic faculty), the

hollow circles portray individual expert predictions, the solid circle denotes the mean prediction

for the group, and the whisker plot portrays the 95% confidence interval. We compare these

forecasts to the realized effect size documented in the 2016 data, which is presented by a solid

horizontal line, with dashed lines demarcating the accompanying 95% confidence interval.

       Starting with long-run impacts on CDD-funded infrastructure investments, Panel A reveals

that expert predictions were highly variable yet largely accurate on average. Pooled together, the

experts predicted a long-run treatment effect of 0.218 standard deviation units (standard error

0.126), which is statistically indistinguishable from the estimated effect (of 0.204). A notable

feature of these forecasts is the wide dispersion--ranging from zero to 0.5 standard deviation

units--which is evident both within and across the different types of expert. It further appears that

policymakers in Sierra Leone were relatively more optimistic about persistent infrastructure gains

and faculty more pessimistic. The predictions of economics students track those of policymakers

in their respective regions.

       For institutions, the most striking feature of Panel B is how relatively optimistic experts in

Sierra Leone were about the scope for long-run impacts. Policymakers and students alike in Sierra

Leone predicted average effects in the range of 0.25 standard deviation units, which turned out to

be a substantial overestimate compared to the realized effect size (of 0.066). Policymakers and




                                                                                                  17
students in the OECD on average were roughly on target. While we cannot reject that economics

and political science faculty were correct on average, they were more pessimistic: a substantial

number of them (11 out of 23) predicted precisely zero long-run effects, which falls outside the

95% confidence interval of the observed point estimate. 8 If we pool all expert predictions together,

the long-run forecast for institutional change significantly exceeds what was estimated in the short-

run (0.095 predicted by experts, compared to 0.028 units in Casey, Glennerster and Miguel 2012).

This difference remains statistically distinct from zero even when limited to the subgroup of

experts who were randomly chosen to be primed with additional information on the short-run

results (results not shown).

        The substantial ex ante disagreement among seemingly well-informed experts about

CDD's long-run institutional impacts makes the 2016 data collection an interesting empirical

exercise, and particularly so in light of the accumulation of shorter-run null results for institutional

outcomes from several studies (see Wong 2012, King and Samii 2014, White et al. 2017, and

Casey 2018 for cross-country reviews). Moreover, the divergence between policymakers in Sierra

Leone and academics lends some credence to concerns about optimism bias among policymakers

and gripes (from policymakers) about hard-to-please academics, although note the substantial

variation in priors among both types of expert. This potential disconnect does not appear to be as

severe for policymakers based in the OECD countries, suggesting that the feedback loop between

academic results and policy perceptions may be working relatively well for policymakers who are

more proximate to rich country scholars, perhaps due to more frequent interactions at conferences

and policy fora.



8
 The co-authors of this paper, whose forecasts are excluded from Figure 2, predicted more pessimistic long-run
outcomes with an average of 0.147 (standard deviation 0.144) for hardware outcomes and 0.008 (standard deviation
0.017) software outcomes.


                                                                                                              18
       By contrast, all expert opinion diverged substantially from observed outcomes regarding

entry into the infrastructure grants competition. As a group, the experts predicted a baseline take

up rate of 42 percent, which reflects the sentiment of one expert who cautioned that "it is very

likely that $2,500 is just too small an amount to get enough communities to bother with applying."

In practice, we found a take up rate of 98%, which surprised all experts and far exceeded any

prediction in the sample (in Panel C). Appendix Table A7 shows that experts on average expected

CDD treatment communities to take up the grants opportunity at slightly higher rates than controls

(by 7 percentage points), a difference that we do not observe in practice.



4. Discussion and Conclusion

Community driven development commands a substantial share of foreign aid allocations. Its short-

run effects have been fairly extensively studied by randomized controlled trials in several different

countries. This study broadens the evidence base by: (i) extending the time horizon to capture

longer run effects than any existing study in the literature (to our knowledge), (ii) evaluating

impacts during a subsequent public health crisis, and (iii) comparing expert forecasts to observed

impacts.

       First, following up with communities more than a decade after baseline data collection, we

document strong persistence of CDD impacts on local public infrastructure, commensurate with

two-thirds of the short-run gains (measured seven years prior). We find modest positive long-run

effects on local institutions, which runs contrary to our own prior beliefs, although it is likely that

these effects are too small (+0.062 standard deviation units on average) to be of much practical

consequence.

       Second, we find suggestive evidence that these positive long-run effects on infrastructure




                                                                                                    19
and, to a lesser extent, institutions helped communities respond somewhat more effectively to the

2014 Ebola epidemic. While it is too early to understand the effect that GoBifo may have had on

community preparedness and outcomes during the ongoing (at time of writing) COVID-19

pandemic, nor do we have the data to do so, this finding from the Ebola crisis opens the possibility,

at least speculatively, that earlier CDD programming may translate into positive gains during

crisis.

          Finally, comparing the empirical estimates to expert forecasts, we find wide dispersion in

prior beliefs, a high degree of accuracy for some types of experts on particular outcomes,

accompanied by systematic underestimation for others. Taken together, the forecasts offer a few

data points on the question of when and how expert predictions may be useful in research: we see

(i) wide dispersion of views regarding the durability of infrastructure, (ii) disagreement across

expert type for institutional change, and (iii) systematic underestimation for community entry into

the grants competition. One striking pattern is the consistent optimism regarding this type of

foreign aid among Sierra Leonean policymakers, in contrast to the overall pessimism among

researchers. This could be problematic if their sanguine view of institutional change drives the

continued popularity of CDD programming. If, by contrast, policymakers are primarily motivated

by the positive infrastructural effects, this would be less of a concern.

          While expert prior opinions may be useful for predicting some effects but not others, it

remains unclear (to us) how to distinguish these cases ex ante. As more studies collect prior beliefs

about the efficacy of policy interventions, a practice that is gaining some traction, the research

community will be able to build a more thorough understanding of what types of impacts experts

can reliably predict, and which types of experts--those with country knowledge, for instance,

practitioner experience or academic training--are most accurate.




                                                                                                  20
References

Anderson, M, 2008. "Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early

    Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedaian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training

    Projects", Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103 (484): 1481­1495.

Anderson M.L., and J. Magruder, 2017. "Split-Sample Strategies for Avoiding False Discoveries",

    NBER Working Paper 23544

Beath A, Christia F, Enikolopov R. 2013. "Do Elected Councils Improve Governance?

    Experimental Evidence on Local Institutions in Afghanistan" MIT Political Science

    Department Research Paper No. 2013-24.

Benjamini, Y., A. Krieger, and D. Yekutieli, 2006. "Adaptive Linear Step-Up Procedures That

    Control the False Discovery Rate", Biometrika, 93: 491­507.

Bouguen, A., Y. Huang, M. Kremer and E. Miguel, 2018. "Using RCTs to Estimate Long-Run

    Impacts in Development Economics", Annual Review of Economics, 11: 523-561.

Casey, K. R. Glennerster, E. Miguel and M. Voors, forthcoming. "Skill Versus Voice in Local

    Development", Review of Economics and Statistics.

Casey, K., 2018. "Radical Decentralization: Does Community Driven Development Work?"

    Annual Review of Economics, 10: 139-165.

Casey, K., R. Glennerster and E. Miguel, 2012. "Reshaping Institutions: Evidence on Aid Impacts

    Using a Pre-Analysis Plan", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4):1755-1812.

Christensen, D., O. Dube, J. Haushofer, B. Siddiqi and M. Voors, 2021. "Building Resilient Health

    Systems:    Experimental    Evidence    from    Sierra   Leone    and   The    2014    Ebola

    Outbreak", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 136(2): 1145­1198.

DellaVigna, S. and D. Pope. 2018. "What Motivates Effort? Evidence and Expert Forecasts",




                                                                                              21
    The Review of Economic Studies, 85(2): 1029­1069.

DellaVigna, S., D. Pope and E. Vivalt, 2019. "Predict Science to Improve Science", Science,

    366 (6464): 428­29

Dongier, P, Domelen JV, Ostrom E, Rizvi A, Wakeman W, et al., 2002. Chapter 9:

    Community-Driven Development. In Volume 1 ­ Core Techniques and Cross-Cutting

    Issues. World Bank, Washington D.C.

Fearon J., M. Humphreys and J. Weinstein, 2015. "How Does Development Assistance Affect

   Collective Action Capacity? Results from a Field Experiment in Post-Conflict Liberia"

   American Political Science Review 109(3):450-69.

Humphreys, M., R. Sánchez de la Sierra, and P. Van der Windt, 2019. "Exporting democratic

   practices: Evidence from a village governance intervention in Eastern Congo", Journal of

   Development Economics, 140: 279-301.

King E, Samii C. 2014. Fast-Track Institution Building in Conflict-Armed Countries? Insights

   from Recent Field Experiments. World Development 64:740-54.

Kremer, M. and E. Miguel, 2007. "The Illusion of Sustainability", Quarterly Journal of

    Economics, 122(30): 1007­1065.

Mansuri G, Rao V. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work? Policy Research

    Report. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Miguel, E., and M.K. Gugerty, 2005. "Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions, and Public Goods in

    Kenya", Journal of Public Economics 89:2325-68.

Mvukiyehe, E., and P. van der Windt, 2020. "Assessing the Longer Term Impact of Community-

    Driven Development Programs Evidence from a Field Experiment in the Democratic

    Republic of Congo", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 9140




                                                                                               22
Vivalt, E., and A. Coville, 2020. "How Do Policy-Makers Update Their Beliefs?" Working

    Paper.

Vivalt, E., A. Coville and S. KC. 2021. "Weighing the Evidence: Which Studies Count?"

    working paper

White, H. 1999. "Politicizing Development? The Role of Participation in the Activities of Aid

    Agencies" In: Foreign Aid: New Perspectives ed. Kanhaya L, Gupta. Boston: Kluwwe

    Academic Publishers.

Woolcock, M. 2013. "Using Case Studies to Explore the External Validity of 'Complex'

    Development Interventions", Evaluation, 19(3): 229­248.

Wong S. 2012. "What Have Been the Impacts of World Bank Community-Driven Development

    Programs? CDD Impact Evaluation Review and Operational Research Implications"

    Washington D.C.: World Bank.

Wong, Susan; Guggenheim, Scott. 2018. "Community-Driven Development: Myths and

    Realities", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper; No. 8435.




                                                                                            23
                            Figure 1: Research Design and Timeline




Notes: CDD treatment assignments are displayed in rounded boxes, research activity and data collection
in solid gray shaded boxes, and external events and activities in dashed boxes.




                                                                                                   24
                                Figure 2: Expert Predictions of Long-run CDD Effects and Grants Competition

              Panel A: Long-run                                   Panel B: Long-run                               Panel C: Entry into the
            Infrastructure Change                                Institutional Change                              Grants Competition




Notes: This figure presents expert predictions collected during December 2016 and July 2017 before any data analysis. Panels A and B present
expectations for CDD treatment effects measured in standard deviation units. The realized effect size is presented with solid horizontal lines and the
accompanying 95% confidence interval is demarcated by dashed horizontal lines. Panel C presents expectations about the percent of CDD control
communities that would enter the grants competition. The realized point estimates are: a) 0.204 standard deviation unit CDD treatment effect for
infrastructure in Panel A; i) 0.062 standard deviation unit CDD treatment effect on institutions for Panel B; and c) 98.3% percent of communities
entered the grants competition for Panel C. For Panels A and B, expert predictions were closer to the realized value for the version of the survey
that provided the short to medium run results for institutional change (p-value <0.01) but not statistically distinct for infrastructure (p-value=0.27).
Stars above the 95 percent confidence interval denote forecasts that are significantly different from the realized effect.




                                                                                                                                                     25
                                 Table 1: Long Run CDD Treatment Effects
                                              Treatment        Naïve          FDR q -       Treatment        Change
                                             effect 2016      p -value         value       effect 2009      over time
                                     (1)                         (2)             (3)            (4)          (1) - (4)
Panel A: Infrastructure "Hardware" Family
 All outcomes (30 unique outcomes)            0.204***          <0.01          0.001         0.298***       -0.094***
                                               (0.040)                                        (0.031)         (0.036)
   Project implementation                     0.253***          <0.01          0.001         0.703***       -0.449***
                                               (0.067)                                        (0.055)         (0.080)
   Local public goods                         0.228***          <0.01          0.001         0.204***          0.024
                                               (0.046)                                        (0.039)         (0.041)
   Economic welfare                           0.240***          <0.01          0.001         0.376***        -0.136**
                                               (0.056)                                        (0.047)         (0.062)
Panel B: Institutions "Software" Family
 All outcomes (61 unique outcomes) 0.062**                      0.011          0.124           0.028          0.034
                                     (0.024)                                                  (0.020)        (0.027)
   Collective action                           0.098**          0.049          0.172           0.012          0.086
                                               (0.050)                                        (0.037)        (0.061)
   Inclusion                                    0.028           0.417          0.557           0.002          0.026
                                                (0.034)                                       (0.032)        (0.045)
   Local authority                              -0.032          0.573          0.563           0.056          -0.088
                                               (0.056)                                        (0.037)        (0.070)
   Trust                                        0.107*          0.065          0.172           0.042           0.064
                                               (0.057)                                        (0.046)        (0.081)
   Groups and networks                         0.149**          0.038          0.172           0.028           0.121
                                               (0.071)                                        (0.037)        (0.074)
   Access to information                        -0.036          0.591          0.563           0.038          -0.075
                                               (0.067)                                        (0.037)        (0.072)
   Participation in governance                   0.079          0.191          0.276         0.090***         -0.011
                                               (0.060)                                        (0.045)        (0.065)
   Crime and conflict                           -0.002          0.971          0.636           0.010          -0.012
                                               (0.063)                                        (0.043)        (0.074)
   Political and social attitudes                0.154          0.216          0.276           0.041           0.113
                                               (0.124)                                        (0.043)        (0.126)
Observations                                     236
Notes: i) significance levels based on naive p-values and indicated by * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01, ii) specifications
include strata for geographic ward and two balancing variables (distance to road and community size) from the original
randomization; iii) robust standard errors; iv) all estimates are for hypothesis-level equally weighted mean effects
indices, expressed in standard deviation units (see Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007); v) the dependent variable in column 5
is the difference in 2009 and 2006 indices, where the set of component measures varies across survey round (see
Appendix Table A3 for exact panel specification); and vi) 2009 data sourced from Casey, Glennerster and Miguel (2012).




                                                                                                                         26
                                Table 2: CDD Treatment Effects on Ebola Knowledge Items and Response Actions
Outcome                                                                                                   Mean,      Treatment Standard p -value FDR q -
                                                                                                         controls      effect    error            value
Mean Effects Index (all 13 indicators)                                                                    0.000        0.045    0.040    0.256      .

Knowledge Items
Mean Effects Index (all 9 knowledge items)                                                                0.000         0.015        0.050      0.766      0.621
Correctly answers "No" to "Can Ebola spread through air?"                                                 0.856        -0.005        0.040      0.896      0.999
Correctly answers "21" to "How many days can it take for the first to symptoms arise?"                    0.669         0.014        0.051      0.791      0.999
Total (of 11 possible) correct answers to questions about how one can get Ebola                           5.220         0.006        0.187      0.974      0.999
Knows correct Ebola hotline number                                                                        1.000         0.000           .          .
Total (of 10 possible) correct answers regarding how to protect yourself against Ebola                    4.975        -0.051        0.201      0.801      0.999
Correctly answers "No" to "Drinking salt water can help cure Ebola?"                                      0.958         0.030        0.019      0.114      0.999
Correctly answers "No" to "Drinking chlorine can help cure Ebola?"                                        1.000        -0.009        0.009      0.321      0.999
Correctly answers "No" to "Can someone spread Ebola before they show symptoms?"                           0.695         0.030        0.052      0.565      0.999
Total correct answers (of 14 possible) regarding symptoms of Ebola                                        7.263        -0.230        0.232      0.324      0.999

Response Actions
Mean Effects Index (all 4 response actions)                                                               0.000        0.090*        0.053      0.091      0.223
Community had an Ebola task force during the Ebola crisis                                                 0.661        0.077         0.052      0.145      0.278
Community created by-laws in relation to Ebola                                                            0.907       0.042**        0.019      0.030      0.137
Communities are more likely to go to formal health facilities (nurse, clinic)                             0.924        0.014         0.030      0.632      0.729
Communities are more likely to go to formal health facilities for Ebola (nurse, clinic)                   0.915        0.000         0.034      0.995      0.991

Observations                                                                                                236
Note: i) significance levels based on naive p-values and indicated by * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01. ii) specifications include strata for geographic ward and two
balancing variables (distance to road and community size) from the randomization; iii) robust standard errors; and iv) this table includes 13 of 15 pre-specified
primary outcomes in our PAP, excluding 2 outcomes that are observed for fewer than 20 communities in the data.




                                                                                                                                                                 27
       ONLINE APPENDIX: MATERIAL NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION


    Long Run Effects of Aid: Forecasts and Evidence from Sierra Leone



Contents:
-   Appendix A: Expert prior elicitation materials
-   Appendix B: Additional Specifications
            -   Appendix Table A1: Long Run CDD Treatment Effects on Exact Panel Outcomes
            -   Appendix Table A2: Research Hypotheses
            -   Appendix Table A3: Treatment Effect Heterogeneity Results
            -   Appendix Table A4: Treatment Effects on Structured Community Activity (SCA)
                Outcomes
            -   Appendix Table A5: Raw Results for CDD Effects on Individual Outcomes
            -   Appendix Table A6: CDD Treatment Effects on Ebola Responsiveness by District
            -   Appendix Table A7: Expert Priors Grant Competition Entry
-   Appendix C: Pre-analysis plan




                                                                                         A1
Appendix A. Expert Prior Elicitation Details

Before collecting and analyzing the data, we first established what experts in the field thought we
would find. To do so, we fielded a survey among different types of experts and asked them to
make predictions in three main areas: i) long-run impacts of CDD on infrastructure; ii) long-run
impacts on measures of institutions; and iii) community performance in the infrastructure grants
competition.
       Experts came from several groups: i) policymakers working for multilateral aid agencies
(including the World Bank, the Department for International Development, the United Nations
Development Programme and the International Rescue Committee) located mostly in OECD
countries; ii) policymakers in Sierra Leone with knowledge of the GoBifo project; iii) economics
graduate students in the United States (at University of California, Berkeley) and the Netherlands
(at Wageningen University); iv) economics undergraduate students in Sierra Leone (at Fourah Bay
College); and v) faculty in economics and political science directly involved in evaluating CDD
projects (including the co-authors of this study) and other development economics researchers.
This yielded 126 completed surveys in total, composed of 25 surveys from policymakers (12 in
the OECD and 13 in Sierra Leone), 78 from students (17 undergraduate and 61 graduate students),
and 23 from faculty. Survey response rates were quite high for all groups (e.g. 84% for faculty
and 99% for graduate students) save the OECD policymakers (39% completion).
       For estimates about long run CDD impacts, the survey refers to the same twelve hypotheses
and comparable empirical measures that are the focus of Casey, Glennerster and Miguel (2012).
For each hypothesis, the survey asks experts to predict the point estimates we would find in the
long-run, in standard deviation units, and also indicate their level of certainty for each prediction
(following DellaVigna and Pope 2018). As in our earlier work, we then group these hypotheses
and predictions into two main families, infrastructure and institutions. There were two versions
of the survey: the first provided detailed information on our medium run results and the second
asked the expert to make predictions without any information provided (see instrument on page
A3). We randomized which version was given to each expert, with a few exceptions (e.g. a small
subset completed both versions). Expert predictions about the infrastructure grants competition
focus on entry as a proxy for overall performance.
       Note that a few different versions of the survey were implemented. The version we display
below is the one that includes the primes regarding the shorter run results. We flag these priming

                                                                                                 A2
sentences below by reproducing them in italics. The alternative version, without primes, excludes
these priming sentences but was otherwise the same. The different colors at the start of the
instrument demarcate small differences in questions across pools of expert, where (i) black is
universal (except questions 1 and 2 which were only given to academic experts, policy experts,
and the co-authors of this study); (ii) blue questions were given only to students in Sierra Leone
and Berkeley; and (iii) red questions were given only to Sierra Leone policymakers and
Wageningen students.




                                                                                              A3
Expert Survey Instrument:
Measuring the Long-Run Effects of Community Driven Development in Sierra
Leone
Researchers: Katherine Casey, Rachel Glennerster, Edward Miguel, and Maarten Voors

Date: [Month, Year]

Overview: In 2012, we published the results of an impact evaluation of a community driven
development (CDD) project in rural Sierra Leone, called GoBifo. That paper focused on the medium-run
effects of CDD on local economic and institutional outcomes. We now plan to implement a new
research project to measure the long-run effects of that project. Before we do so, we would value your
input regarding what you expect these impacts to be, and have therefore prepared this brief (roughly 10
minute) survey.

Your participation is completely voluntary and you are free to leave the survey blank if you do not wish to
participate. We will maintain your confidentiality by not recording any personally identifying information
about you. We foresee little benefit or risk from participation, and cannot and do not guarantee or
promise that you will receive any benefits from this study. If you have any questions about this research,
please contact Katherine Casey at +1 (650) 725-2167. If you have any complaints, please contact the
Stanford Human Subjects Institutional Review Board (IRB) at +1 (866) 680-2906.

1. What is your job/position title?
   ____________________________________________________________________

1. What is your major?
_____________________________________________________________________________

1 . What best describes your professional position and experience? (CIRCLE ONE)
      a. Researcher who has worked on CDD evaluations
      b. Researcher who has not worked directly on CDD
      c. Development practitioner who has worked on implementing CDD projects
      d. Development practitioner who has not worked directly on CDD

2. Have you heard about the project challenge competition currently running in Bombali and
   Bonthe? (CIRCLE ONE)
                                                YES / NO

2. In what year of your program are you?
_____________________________________________________________

2.   Do you have any direct professional experience in Sierra Leone? (CIRCLE ONE)            YES / NO


3. On a scale of 1 to 10, how familiar are you with our 2012 study of a CDD project in Sierra Leone
   entitled "Reshaping Institutions: Evidence on Aid Impacts Using a Pre-analysis Plan"


                                                                                                        A4
   (with 1 representing having never heard of it to 10 being very familiar with the results)? (CIRCLE
ONE)

                  1 ------- 2 ------- 3 ------- 4 ------- 5 ------- 6 ------- 7 ------- 8 ------- 9 ------- 10
                 Never heard of it                                                                                   Very familiar
                 with results




4. On a scale of 1 to 10, how familiar are you with other CDD impact evaluations in low income
   countries
   (with 1 representing having never heard about other CDD studies to 10 being very familiar with the
   results of several studies)? (CIRCLE ONE)

                     1 ------- 2 ------- 3 ------- 4 ------- 5 ------- 6 ------- 7 ------- 8 ------- 9 ------- 10
          Never heard of any                                                                              Very familiar with several




5. Do you think that the World Bank should continue to support community driven development
   (CDD) programs to the extent that it currently does? (CIRCLE ONE)
      a. The World Bank should spend more on CDD than current amount
      b. The World Bank should maintain current levels of spending
      c. The World Bank should spend less on CDD than current amount
      d. Indifferent




                                                                                                                                  A5
Standard Deviation Unit Effect
In what follows, we will ask you to predict how large the long-run treatment effects of the Sierra Leone
CDD project will be. As we measure effects across groups of outcomes, standard practice is to refer to
treatment effect sizes in standard deviation units (sdu's). This makes the effect sizes comparable across
outcome measures. For your reference, the following table provides a rule of thumb interpretation of the
real-world magnitude of standard deviation unit treatment effects of various sizes (in absolute value):


                         Treatment effect size in              Interpretation
                     standard deviation units (sdu's),
                            in absolute value
                                   0.00                        No impact
                                   0.05                     Very small effect
                                   0.10                       Small effect
                                   0.20                   Moderately small effect
                                   0.30                     Moderate effect
                                   0.40                   Moderately large effect
                                  > 0.50                      Large effect




                                                                                                     A6
MEDIUM-RUN RESULTS AND LONG-RUN FORECASTS

The CDD Project "GoBifo" (which means "move forward" in the dominant local language) in Sierra Leone
was implemented from 2005 to 2009. This project provided block grants of US$5,000 (approximately
US$100 per household) to communities in rural Sierra Leone. The grants could be used for the
construction of local public goods, trade skills training, and small business start-up capital. GoBifo
facilitators spent an average of 6 months in each of these villages promoting democratic decision-
making, the participation of socially marginalized groups (such as women and youth), and transparent
local budgeting practices. In addition, 60 of these villages received a follow up grant of $1,300 in 2010
for youth empowerment programs.

The project was implemented as a randomized control trial, where 118 villages participated in the
GoBifo intervention and 118 served as controls that did not receive any project assistance. The original
follow-up survey of medium-run treatment effects was fielded in 2009 and evaluated impacts on 12
hypotheses which we grouped into two broad sets of indicators: a family of "hardware" effects on local
public goods and economic outcomes, and a family of "software" effects including institutional and
social capital measures. We are now going back to the field to measure long-run effects, a full 7 years
after the program ended, and would like to know your views on what you expect the long-run effects of
GoBifo are likely to be.

Since there are several individual outcome measures included under each of the 12 hypotheses, we
measure the average effect across all of them after normalizing measures in standard deviation units
(sdu's). Below we list all 12 hypotheses tested in the study and include examples of indicators used in
the survey. We also provide you with detailed results from our 2012 study of the medium-run effects of
the GoBifo project.

For each of 12 hypotheses below, please mark the scale with an X for the size of the long-run treatment
effect of the GoBifo project that you expect we will find when we return to the field in Sierra Leone to
collect data this November. We would now like to provide you more detailed results from our 2012
study of the medium-run effects of the GoBifo project, and ask you to again predict what you think the
long run effects of GoBifo will be for the following hypotheses.

Hardware family of outcomes

Hypothesis 1: GoBifo Project Implementation.
Examples of indicators include the presence of a village development committee and formal bank account for
village project expenses.

Our study found medium-run effects for this hypothesis equal to +0.70 sdu's, which is statistically different from
zero with a very high degree of confidence.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10           +0.20           +0.30           +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect



Hypothesis 2: Participation in GoBifo improves the quality of local public services infrastructure.


                                                                                                                                                                           A7
Examples include the presence and construction quality of latrines and drying floors.

Our study found medium-run effects equal to +0.20 sdu's, which is statistically different from zero with a very high
degree of confidence.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10          +0.20           +0.30            +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect


Hypothesis 3: Participation in GoBifo improves general economic welfare.
Indicators include the number of petty traders and goods on sale in the community.

Our study found medium-run effects for this hypothesis equal to +0.38 sdu's, which is statistically different from
zero with a very high degree of confidence.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10           +0.20           +0.30           +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect




                                                                                                                                                                           A8
Software family of outcomes

Hypothesis 4: Participation in GoBifo increases collective action and contributions to local public goods.
Indicators include presence of communal farms and community-supported teachers.

Our study found medium-run effects for this hypothesis equal to +0.01 sdu's, which is not statistically different than
zero at traditional confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10           +0.20           +0.30           +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect


Hypothesis 5: GoBifo increases inclusion and participation in community planning and implementation,
especially for poor and vulnerable groups; GoBifo norms spill over into other types of community decisions,
making them more inclusive, transparent, and accountable.
Indicators include taking minutes at community meetings and reporting having fewer problems with financial
misconduct.

Our study found medium-run effects equal to 0.00 sdu's, which is not statistically different than zero at traditional
confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10          +0.20           +0.30            +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect



Hypothesis 6: GoBifo changes local systems of authority, including the roles and public perception of traditional
leaders versus elected local government.
Indicators include the community choosing a village headman younger than 35 years old.

Our study found medium-run effects equal to +0.06 sdu's, which is not statistically different than zero at traditional
confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10          +0.20           +0.30            +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect



Hypothesis 7: Participation in GoBifo increases trust.
Indicators include the presence of cooperative trading groups that span multiple households.

Our study found medium-run effects for this hypothesis equal to +0.04 sdu's, which is not statistically different than
zero at traditional confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?



                                                                                                                                                                           A9
        |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
      <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10           +0.20           +0.30           +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect        `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect



Hypothesis 8: Participation in GoBifo builds and strengthens community groups and networks.
Indicators include presence of fishing groups / cooperatives in the community.

Our study found medium-run effects for this hypothesis equal to +0.03 sdu's, which is not statistically different than
zero at traditional confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


        |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
      <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10           +0.20           +0.30           +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect        `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect



Hypothesis 9: Participation in GoBifo increases access to information about local governance.
Indicators include visits by local government officials and display of government policies or posters in the
community.

Our study found medium-run effects equal to +0.04 sdu's, which is not statistically different than zero at traditional
confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?

        |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
      <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10          +0.20           +0.30            +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect        `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect


Hypothesis 10: GoBifo increases public participation in local governance.
Indicators include the involvement of local government officials in planning or overseeing community development
projects.

Our study found medium-run effects equal to +0.09 sdu's, which is statistically different than zero with a moderate
degree of confidence.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?

        |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
      <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10           +0.20           +0.30           +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect        `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect
                `                                                                no impact                                                                          Large
positive effect


Hypothesis 11: By increasing trust, GoBifo reduces crime and conflict in the community.
Indicators include reports of theft of household items or livestock.

Our study found medium-run effects for this hypothesis equal to +0.01 sdu's, which is not statistically different than
zero at traditional confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?



                                                                                                                                                                        A10
       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10           +0.20           +0.30           +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect



Hypothesis 12: GoBifo changes political and social attitudes, making individuals more liberal towards women,
more accepting of other ethnic groups and "strangers" and less tolerant of corruption and violence.
Indicators include community choosing a woman to be the village chief.

Our study found medium-run effects for this hypothesis equal to +0.04 sdu's, which is not statistically different than
zero at traditional confidence levels.

What do you think the long run treatment effect will be?


       |-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
     <-0.50 sdu -0.40                -0.30          -0.20            -0.10             0             +0.10          +0.20           +0.30            +0.40        >+0.50
Large negative effect       `                                                   no impact                                                              Large positive effect




Overall expectations

You made 12 additional forecasts above about the long-run effects of GoBifo. How many of these
additional forecasts do you think will fall within 10% of the true effect size (in standard deviation unit
terms) that we find in the data we will begin to collect in November? ___________ (out of 12)




                                                                                                                                                                       A11
Appendix B: Additional Specifications
           Appendix Table A1: Long Run CDD Treatment Effects on Exact Panel Outcomes
                                    Treatment                    Naïve         FDR q -       Treatment        Change
                                   effect 2016                  p -value        value       effect 2009      over time
                                       (1)                         (2)           (3)              (4)         (1) - (4)
 Panel A: Infrastructure "Hardware" Family
  All outcomes in family (N = 29)   0.208***                    <0.001          0.001         0.352**        -0.144***
                                     (0.041)                                                  (0.035)          (0.037)
      Project implementation                   0.287***         <0.001          <0.001        0.875***       -0.588***
                                                (0.075)                                        (0.062)         (0.092)
      Local public goods                       0.228***         <0.001          <0.001        0.210***          0.018
                                                (0.046)                                        (0.041)         (0.041)
      Economic welfare                         0.240***         <0.001          <0.001        0.606***        -0.366**
                                                (0.056)                                        (0.061)         (0.062)
 Panel B: Institutions "Software" Family
   All outcomes in family (N =56)               0.064**          0.017          0.009         0.086***         -0.021
                                                (0.027)                                        (0.030)        (0.034)
      Collective action                         0.104*           0.053          0.243          0.072            0.032
                                                (0.053)                                       (0.046)          (0.065)
      Inclusion                                  0.034           0.339          0.513         0.084*            -0.050
                                                (0.036)                                       (0.049)          (0.055)
      Local authority                            -0.032          0.573          0.637          0.110           -0.142*
                                                (0.056)                                       (0.068)          (0.085)
      Trust                                     0.107*           0.065          0.243          0.032             0.074
                                                (0.057)                                       (0.049)          (0.083)
      Groups and networks                       0.149**          0.038           0.243         0.056             0.093
                                                (0.071)                                       (0.045)          (0.080)
      Access to information                      -0.036          0.591           0.637        0.150**         -0.187**
                                                (0.067)                                       (0.072)          (0.092)
      Participation in governance                 0.079          0.191           0.35         0.256**        -0.177***
                                                (0.060)                                       (0.058)          (0.068)
      Crime and conflict                         -0.002          0.971           0.76          0.088            -0.090
                                                (0.063)                                       (0.062)          (0.084)
      Political and social attitudes              0.154          0.216           0.35          -0.020            0.174
                                                (0.124)                                       (0.080)          (0.135)
 Observations                                      236                                           236            236
 Note: i) significance levels based on naive p-values and indicated by * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01; ii) specifications
 include strata for geographic ward and two balancing variables (distance to road and community size) from the
 randomization; iii) robust standard errors; iv) all estimates are for hypothesis-level mean effects indices that equally
 weight component measures and are expressed in standard deviation units (see Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007); v)
 outcomes limited to those that were collected in the exact same fashion in both 2009 and 2016 survey rounds; and vi) 2009
 data sourced from Casey et al (2012).


                                                                                                                      A12
                            Appendix Table A2: Research Hypotheses
Family A: Infrastructural "Hardware"
  H1    GoBifo creates functional development committees
  H2    Participation in GoBifo improves the quality of local public services infrastructure
  H3    Participation in GoBifo improves general economic welfare
Family B: Institutional "Software"
  H4    Participation in GoBifo increases collective action and contributions to local public
  H5    GoBifo increases inclusion and participation in community planning and
        implementation, especially for poor and vulnerable groups; GoBifo norms spill over
        into other types of community decisions, making them more inclusive, transparent and
  H6              bl
        GoBifo changes   local systems of authority, including the roles and public perception
           of traditional leaders (chiefs) versus elected local government
   H7      Participation in GoBifo increases trust
   H8      Participation in GoBifo builds and strengthens community groups and networks
   H9      Participation in GoBifo increases access to information about local governance
   H10     GoBifo increases public participation in local governance
   H11     By increasing trust, GoBifo reduces crime and conflict in the community
   H12     GoBifo changes political and social attitudes, making individuals more liberal towards
           women, more accepting of other ethnic groups and `strangers', and less tolerant of
           corruption and violence
Ebola Response
  H13 Participation in GoBifo increased knowledge, collective action and investments in
        preventative measures during the Ebola crisis
Expert Forecasts
  H14 Estimated long run treatment effects are not the same as the average prior beliefs of
        surveyed experts
  H15 Average prior beliefs and forecast accuracy differ across groups of experts
  H16 Prior beliefs about long run effects of the GoBifo project are more optimistic (e.g.
        predict larger positive long run effects) amongst policy makers compared to
  H17 Predictions under version 1 of the survey (that contains information on the medium
        run effects) are more accurate than under version 2
Notes: i) hypotheses H1 to H12 follow-up on those established for the short-run data collection (Casey,
Glennerster and Miguel 2012); and ii) hypotheses H13 to H17 are new to the long-run data collection round.




                                                                                                      A13
                               Appendix Table A3: Treatment Effect Heterogeneity
                                                                        Mean Effect Index for           Mean Effect Index for
                                                                       Family A: Development            Family B: Institutional
                                                                           Infrastructure                and Social Change
                                                                         (Hypotheses 1-3)                (Hypotheses 4-12)
                                                                                 (1)                              (2)
Treatment Indicator                                                             0.793**                           0.228*
                                                                               (0.203)                          (0.122)
Treatment * Total households in the community                                   -0.002                           -0.000
                                                                               (0.002)                          (0.001)
Treatment * Index of war Exposure                                               -0.306                           -0.005
                                                                               (0.232)                          (0.143)
Treatment * Average respondent schooling                                         0.008                            0.005
                                                                               (0.035)                          (0.020)
Treatment * Distance to motorable road                                           0.005                            0.005
                                                                               (0.017)                          (0.009)
Treatment * Historical extent of domestic slavery                               -0.108                           -0.091
                                                                               (0.086)                          (0.058)
Treatment * Bombali district                                                   -0.457**                          -0.141*
                                                                               (0.089)                          (0.054)
Treatment * Ethnolinguistic fractionalization                                    0.122                           -0.268*
                                                                               (0.239)                          (0.146)
Treatment * Chiefly authority                                                    0.141                           -0.002
                                                                               (0.287)                          (0.207)
Observations                                                                    236                               236
Note: i) significance levels based on naive p-values and indicated by * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.ii) robust standard
errors; iii) includes fixed effects for the district council wards (the unit of stratification); iv) each specification is run on the
post-program data and includes the following control variables: total households per community, distance to nearest motorable
road, index of war exposure, index of history of domestic slavery, and average respondent years of school, plus all of these
control variables--and the district dummy variable--interacted with the GoBifo treatment dummy; v) these mean effect
estimates are limited to the full sample set of outcomes that excludes all conditional outcomes (i.e. those that depend on the
state of another variable--for example, quality of infrastructure depends on the existence of the infrastructure).




                                                                                                                          A14
                        Appendix Table A4: Treatment Effect on Structured Community Activity (SCA) Outcomes

Row Variable                                                                                    Hypothesis    Mean,     Treatment    Standard    Naïve p -    N
                                                                                                             controls     effect       error      value
                                                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)
Index measure for all 13 SCA outcomes                                                                         0.000      -0.001       0.046       0.976       236
  123 Potential managers selection deliberation done in public debate                              H5         1.416       0.013       0.057       0.813       192
  124 Less concentrated deliberation in manager selection                                          H5         2.892       0.023       0.090       0.798       231
  127 Enumerator account of how democratically the group evenutally came to a decision about
      who the potential project managers ranging from 5 = open discussion followed by group        H5         3.364      -0.002       0.094        0.982      235
      vote to 1 = chief and/or elders decide without other input
  130 Time of deliberation of manager selection process                                            H5        32.486      53.665       27.838       0.055      210
  154 Enumerator account of how actively women participated in the deliberation on the
      selection of potential project managers compared to men, ranging from 5 = no difference      H5         2.799      -0.122       0.132        0.357      232
      between women and men to 1 = women not active at all compared to men
  155 Enumerator account of how actively youth participated in the deliberation on the
      selection of potential project managers compared to non-youth (over 35 years), ranging
                                                                                                   H5         3.035      0.173        0.153        0.260      229
      from 5 = no difference between youth and non-youth to 1 = youth not active at all
      compared to non-youth
  160 Enumerator record of total public speakers durings selection of potential project
                                                                                                   H5        43.429      -2.772       2.584        0.285      213
      managers
  161 Enumerator record of total women public speakers during selection of potential project
                                                                                                   H5        13.264      -0.570       1.176        0.628      216
      managers
  162 Enumerator record of total youth (18-35 years) public speakers during selection of
                                                                                                   H5         6.009      -0.402       0.391        0.304      229
      potential project managers
  165 Did a vote occur during the project leader nomination discussion                           H5, H6       1.929      0.023        0.032        0.464      171
  201 Enumerator reports on whether "chief decided" project leader nominations                    H6          0.873      -0.050       0.043        0.242      235
   50 Record of total women (18+ years) in "important people" focus group list                    H5          8.186      0.192        0.229        0.402      236
   52 Record of total youth (18-35 years) in "important people" focus group list                  H5          2.288      -0.209       0.193        0.281      236

Note: i) Row number refers to indicator numbers as listed in the PAP, which can be found here https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1784, ii) significance
levels based on naive p-values and indicated by * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01. iii) specifications include strata for geographic ward and two balancing
variables (distance to road and community size) from the randomization; iv) robust standard errors; and v) this table includes 13 pre-specified primary outcomes
in our PAP, excluding outcomes corresponding to the grants competition (Casey et al., forthcoming).




                                                                                                                                                             A15
                                    Appendix Table A5: Raw Results for CDD Effects on Individual Outcomes
Row Variable                                                                                  Hypothesis     Mean,     Treatment   Standard   Naïve p -   N
                                                                                                            controls     effect      error     value
H1: Implementation
   1 Does this community have a bank account?                                                   H1, H3        0.042      0.240      0.040      0.000      236
   2 Average score of all test takers                                                             H1         41.789      1.142      1.467      0.437      233
   3 Does this community have a Village or Community Development Committee?                   H1, H4, H10     0.432      0.173      0.057      0.003      236
   4 Does this community have a village development plan (i.e. an agreed plan with specific    H1, H10       0.492       0.003      0.057      0.955      236
     priorities for what the community will do for its own development over the next few
     years)?
   5 Was community visited by a Local Councillor in the past year?                              H1, H9       0.263       -0.074     0.046      0.110      236
   6 Was community visited by a Ward Development Committee member in past year?                 H1, H9       0.102        0.019     0.035      0.579      236
H2: GoBifo improves the quality of local public services infrastructure.
   7 When was the last time this community brushed this foot path?                              H2, H4      -35.224      1.123      4.707      0.812      234
   8 Does the community have a court barrie and is it functional?                                H2          0.102        0.218     0.040      0.000      236
   9 Does the community have a community center and is it functional?                            H2          0.068        0.060     0.038      0.112      236
  10 Does the community have a drying floor and is it functional?                                H2          0.178        0.127     0.051      0.014      236
  11 Does the community have a grain store and is it functional?                                 H2          0.119        0.198     0.051      0.000      236
  12 Does the community have a latrine and is it functional?                                     H2          0.076        0.029     0.036      0.413      236
  13 Does the community have a market and is it functional?                                      H2          0.000        0.025     0.013      0.065      236
  14 Does the community have a palava hut and is it functional?                                  H2          0.042        0.019     0.028      0.488      236
  15 Does the community have a public health unit and is it functional?                          H2          0.110       -0.022     0.038      0.566      236
  16 Does the community have a primary school and is it functional?                              H2          0.466        0.125     0.058      0.031      236
  17 Does the community have any wells and are any of them functional?                           H2          0.661        0.000     0.057      0.997      236
  18 Do any of the local sports teams have uniforms / vests?                                     H2          0.153        0.003     0.046      0.946      236
  19 Does the community have a football / sports field and is it functional?                     H2          0.619        0.160     0.054      0.004      236
  20 Does the community have a traditional birth attendant (TBA) house and is it                 H2          0.025        0.124     0.032      0.000      236
  21 Maintenance of bush paths. [0 "very bushy" to 1 "very clear"]                              H2, H4       2.653       -0.049     0.110      0.659      236
  22 Did community recently take project proposal to external funder on its own initiative?     H2, H4       0.246        0.048     0.054      0.371      236
  23 Does this community have a seed bank (i.e. where people can borrow rice or                  H2          0.085        0.049     0.040      0.226      236
     groundnuts to plant and repay after harvest)?




                                                                                                                                                          A16
                             Appendix Table A5: Raw Results for CDD Effects on Individual Outcomes (continued)
Row Variable                                                                                      Hypothesis    Mean,     Treatment   Standard   Naïve p -   N
                                                                                                               controls     effect      error     value
H3: GoBifo improves general economic welfare
  24 Supervisor assessment that community is "much better off" or "a little better off" than         H3         0.364       0.091      0.058      0.115      236
     other communities he/she has been to in this area
  25 When was the last time an outsider trader came to this village to buy agricultural or non-      H3        -12.178      3.468      4.820      0.473      236
     agricultural goods? (date - date of interview)
  26 [From supervisor tour of community] Have you seen anybody selling packaged goods                H3         0.881       -0.015     0.040      0.706      236
     (cigarettes, crackers, etc) in this village today from their own home (i.e. not out of a
     store)?
  27 Number of goods out of 10 common items (bread, soap, garri, country cloth/garra tie-            H3         5.619       0.403      0.247      0.105      236
     dye, eggs/chickens, sheep/goats, palm oil/nut oil, coal, carpenter for hire/shop,
     tailor/dressmaker, blacksmith for hire/shop) that you can buy in this community today
  28 How many people have started a new business (even if it is small or informal) in this           H3         6.297       0.627      0.500      0.211      236
     community in the past 2 years?
  29 How many houses and small shops (including tables, boxes and kiosks) are selling                H3         3.737       0.626      0.343      0.070      236
     packaged goods (like cigarettes, biscuits, etc) inside this community today?
  30 In the past 2 years, have you participated in any skills training (bookkeeping, soap-           H3         2.831       0.270      0.629      0.668      236
     making), adult literacy (learn book) or vocation education courses (carpentry, etc.)?
H4: GoBifo increases collective action and contribution to local public goods.
  31 Does this community have any communal farms?                                                     H4         0.144       0.087     0.049      0.074      236
  32 Does the primary school that children in the community attend have community                     H4         0.746       0.066     0.049      0.180      236
  33 Average quality of proposal as assessed by experts                                               H4        55.309      3.247      1.807      0.074      232
  34 Do any people from different households here come together to sell agricultural goods        H4, H7, H8    0.347       -0.046     0.053      0.391      236
     or other petty trading as a group to markets outside of this village (i.e. heap the goods
     together and send one person to sell; NOT every person totes their own load)?

  35   Average quality of proposal as assessed by policy makers                                      H4         51.262       2.461     1.591      0.123      232
  36   Average completeness of proposal                                                              H4         10.026      -0.013     0.283      0.964      232
  37   Whether the proposal is among the top 20 and a winner (as ranked by the Gobifo staff an       H4          0.093      -0.008     0.037      0.819      236
  38   Do any disabled people hold leadership positions in this community (like member of            H5          0.144       0.033     0.048      0.500      236
       VDC, youth leaders, headman, women's leader, secret society head)?




                                                                                                                                                             A17
                             Appendix Table A5: Raw Results for CDD Effects on Individual Outcomes (continued)
Row Variable                                                                                   Hypothesis        Mean,       Treatment Standard      Naïve p -   N
                                                                                                                controls       effect       error      value
H6: GoBifo changes local systems of authority, including the roles and public perception of traditional leaders (chiefs) versus elected local government.
  55 How old is the current (or acting) village chief/ Headman?                                     H6           -59.301       -0.974       1.830      0.595     228
  56 Enumerator reports on whether "chief decided" project leader nominations                       H6             0.873       -0.050       0.043      0.242     235
  57 Relative view of "do people in this community believe" Local Councilors as opposed to          H6            -0.119       -0.021       0.052      0.684     236
     Chiefdom officials
H7: GoBifo increases trust
  58 Are you a member of any credit or savings (osusu) groups?                                    H7, H8          2.432         0.476       0.285      0.096     236
  59 In general, do people in this community believe the central government officials or do         H7             0.314        0.013       0.051      0.794     236
     they think you need to be careful when dealing with them?
  60 In general, do people in this community believe chiefdom officials or do you have to be        H7             0.195        0.053       0.048      0.274     236
     careful when dealing with them?
  61 In general, do people in this community believe Local Councillors or do you have to be         H7             0.076        0.032       0.037      0.392     236
     careful when dealing with them?
  62 In general, do people in this community believe NGOs / donor projects or do you have           H7             0.500        0.168       0.057      0.004     236
     to be careful when dealing with them?
  63 In general, do people in this community believe people from outside you own village /          H7             0.127        0.088       0.047      0.063     236
     town / neighborhood or do you have to be careful when dealing with them?
  64 In general, do people in this community believe people from you own village / town /           H7             0.703       -0.069       0.057      0.225     236
     neighborhood or do you have to be careful when dealing with them?
H8: Gobifo builds and strengthens community groups and networks
  65 Are there any fishing groups / cooperatives in this community?                                 H8             0.246        0.037       0.042      0.381     236
  66 How many active school PTA groups are there in this village?                                   H8             4.076        0.719       1.208      0.552     236
  67 How many active religious groups (not just going to church/mosque) are there in this           H8             4.102        1.721       2.019      0.395     236
     village?
  68 How many active groups for saving for special events (weddings, funerals) are there in         H8             0.517        0.164       0.116      0.157     236
     this village?
  69 How many active seed multiplication groups are there in this village                           H8             0.254        0.853       0.485      0.080     236
  70 How many active social clubs are there in this village?                                        H8             1.441        0.183       0.164      0.265     236
  71 How many active women's groups (general) are there in this village?                            H8             0.983       -0.039       0.124      0.750     236
  72 How many active youth groups (general) are there in this village?                              H8             1.212        0.013       0.110      0.907     236




                                                                                                                                                                 A18
                            Appendix Table A5: Raw Results for CDD Effects on Individual Outcomes (continued)
Row Variable                                                                                Hypothesis      Mean,      Treatment Standard      Naïve p -      N
                                                                                                           controls      effect        error     value
H5:GoBifo increases inclusion and participation in community planning and implementation, especially for poor and vulnerable groups; GoBifo norms spill over
  39 Did any disabled people (blind, polio, amputee, wheelchair, etc.) attend the last          H5            0.398       0.102        0.063     0.105       236
     community meeting?
  40 In the past one year, have you attended any community meetings?                            H5          -28.644       7.510       7.084      0.290       236
  41 Enumerator record of total women (18+ years) present at community meeting                  H5           13.264      -0.570       1.176      0.628       216
  42 Enumerator record of total youths (18-35 years) present at community meeting               H5            6.009      -0.402       0.391      0.304       229
  43 Did anyone take minutes (written record of what was said) at the most recent               H5            0.220       0.075        0.056     0.182       236
     community meeting?
  44 Less concentrated deliberation in manager selection                                        H5            2.892       0.023        0.090     0.798       231
  46 Enumerator account of how democratically the group evenutally came to a decision           H5            3.364      -0.002       0.094      0.982       235
     about who the potential project managers ranging from 5 = open discussion followed
     by group vote to 1 = chief and/or elders decide without other input
  47 Time of deliberation of manager selection process                                          H5           32.486      53.665       27.838     0.055       210
  48 Enumerator record of total public speakers durings selection of potential project          H5           43.429      -2.772       2.584      0.285       213
     managers
  49 Did a vote occur during the project leader nomination discussion                          H5, H6         1.929       0.023        0.032     0.464       171
  50 Record of total women (18+ years) in "important people" focus group list                   H5            8.186       0.192        0.229     0.402       236
  51 Enumerator account of how actively women participated in the deliberation on the           H5            2.799      -0.122       0.132      0.357       232
     selection of potential project managers compared to men, ranging from 5 = no
     difference between women and men to 1 = women not active at all compared to men
  52 Record of total youth (18-35 years) in "important people" focus group list                 H5            2.288      -0.209       0.193      0.281       236
  53 Enumerator account of how actively youth participated in the deliberation on the selectio  H5            3.035       0.173        0.153     0.260       229
  54 Has this community had any problems with financial mismanagement/corruption in the         H5            0.839      -0.020       0.044      0.657       236
     past 2 years?




                                                                                                                                                            A19
                             Appendix Table A5: Raw Results for CDD Effects on Individual Outcomes (continued)

Row Variable                                                                                 Hypothesis       Mean,      Treatment    Standard    Naïve p -    N
                                                                                                             controls      effect       error      value
H9: GoBifo increases access to information about local governance
   73 Supervisor assessment of whether there are any of the following items--awareness           H9            0.117        0.005      0.018       0.805     236
      campaigns, financial information, development plan, minutes from any meetings,
      government policies, election information--visible anywhere around the village (i.e. on a
      notice board, school, clinic, shop, etc.)?
   74 Has this community been visited by the Paramount Chief in the past year?                   H9            0.127       -0.023      0.040       0.562     236
H10: GoBifo increases public participation in local governance
   75 Did anyone in this community contest the party symbol in the recent local council         H10            0.169       -0.006      0.044       0.899     236
      elections?
   76 Did anyone in this community stand for the most recent paramount chief elections?         H10            0.068        0.032      0.035       0.358     236
   77 Did anyone in this community stand for the most recent section chief elections?           H10            0.280        0.016      0.057       0.777     236
   78 Did anyone in this community stand for the most recent Ward Development Committee         H10            0.212       -0.011      0.048       0.813     236
      elections or get nominated for WDC?
H11: By increasing trust, GoBifo reduces crime and conflict in community.
   79 No conflict that respondent needed help from someone outside the household to             H11          -10.424        0.520      1.103       0.638     236
      resolve in the past one year
   80 In the past 12 months, respondent has not been involved in any physical fighting          H11           -0.568       -0.124      0.270       0.647     236
   81 In the past 12 months, no livestock, household items or money stolen from the             H11          -12.127       -1.406      1.267       0.268     236
   82 During the last 12 months, respondent has not been a victim of witchcraft (juju)          H11           -1.441        0.441      0.351       0.210     236
H12: GoBifo changes political and social attitudes, making individuals more liberal towards women, more accepting of other ethnic groups and "strangers", and
less tolerant of corruption and violence.
  83 Is the current (or acting) village chief/Headman a woman?                                   H12          0.034        -0.010       0.022       0.653     236
  84 Is the current (or acting) village chief/Headman less than 35 years old?                    H12          0.009         0.034       0.021       0.109     228

Notes: i) specifications include fixed effects for the disctrict council wards (the unit of stratification) and the two balancing variables from the randomization
(total households and distance to road) with robust standard errors; iii) "per comparison" p values are appropriate for a priori interest in an individual outcome




                                                                                                                                                              A20
                Appendix Table A6: CDD Treatment Effects on Ebola Knowledge Items and Response Actions by District
Outcome                                                                                                  Mean, Treatment Standard p -value FDR q -
                                                                                                        controls effect    error            value
Panel A: Bombali
Mean Effects Index (all 13 indicators)                                                                    0.000       -0.001        0.053       0.992         .

Knowledge Items
Mean Effects Index (all 9 knowledge items)                                                                0.000       -0.014        0.070       0.838
Correctly answers "No" to "Can Ebola spread through air?"                                                 0.923       -0.053        0.042       0.205      0.999
Correctly answers "21" to "How many days can it take for the first to symptoms arise?"                    0.564       -0.015        0.071       0.829      0.999
Total (of 11 possible) correct answers to questions about how one can get Ebola                           5.154        0.101        0.230       0.663      0.999
Knows correct Ebola hotline number                                                                        1.000        0.000           .           .          .
Total (of 10 possible) correct answers regarding how to protect yourself against Ebola                    5.064        0.101        0.239       0.673      0.999
Correctly answers "No" to "Drinking salt water can help cure Ebola?"                                      0.962        0.022        0.023       0.350      0.999
Correctly answers "No" to "Drinking chlorine can help cure Ebola?"                                        1.000        0.000           .           .          .
Correctly answers "No" to "Can someone spread Ebola before they show symptoms?"                           0.795       -0.009        0.061       0.880      0.999
Total correct answers (of 14 possible) regarding symptoms of Ebola                                        7.641       -0.225        0.309       0.466      0.999

Response Actions
Mean Effects Index (all 4 response actions)                                                               0.000        0.024        0.074       0.747
Community had an Ebola task force during the Ebola crisis                                                 0.808        0.051        0.057       0.377      0.999
Community created by-laws in relation to Ebola                                                            0.987        0.013        0.013       0.321      0.999
Communities are more likely to go to formal health facilities (nurse, clinic)                             0.949        0.010        0.025       0.686      0.999
Communities are more likely to go to formal health facilities for Ebola (nurse, clinic)                   0.962       -0.037        0.037       0.315      0.999

Observations                                                                                               156
Panel B: Bonthe
Mean Effects Index (all 13 indicators)                                                                    0.000      0.109**        0.053       0.043         .

Knowledge Items
Mean Effects Index (all 9 knowledge items)                                                                0.000        0.069        0.073       0.352      0.214
Correctly answers "No" to "Can Ebola spread through air?"                                                 0.725        0.088        0.083       0.291      0.990
Correctly answers "21" to "How many days can it take for the first to symptoms arise?"                    0.875        0.070        0.062       0.263      0.990
Total (of 11 possible) correct answers to questions about how one can get Ebola                           5.350       -0.179        0.328       0.587      0.990
Knows correct Ebola hotline number                                                                        1.000        0.000           .           .          .
Total (of 10 possible) correct answers regarding how to protect yourself against Ebola                    4.800       -0.333        0.371       0.373      0.990
Correctly answers "No" to "Drinking salt water can help cure Ebola?"                                      0.950        0.047        0.033       0.160      0.990
Correctly answers "No" to "Drinking chlorine can help cure Ebola?"                                        1.000       -0.027        0.027       0.326      0.990
Correctly answers "No" to "Can someone spread Ebola before they show symptoms?"                           0.500        0.100        0.098       0.312      0.990
Total correct answers (of 14 possible) regarding symptoms of Ebola                                        6.525       -0.169        0.322       0.601      0.990

Response Actions
Mean Effects Index (all 4 response actions)                                                               0.000       0.181*        0.093       0.056      0.127
Community had an Ebola task force during the Ebola crisis                                                 0.375        0.121        0.109       0.270      0.593
Community created by-laws in relation to Ebola                                                            0.750       0.099*        0.051       0.057      0.296
Communities are more likely to go to formal health facilities (nurse, clinic)                             0.875       0.030         0.076       0.698      0.985
Communities are more likely to go to formal health facilities for Ebola (nurse, clinic)                   0.825       0.063         0.070       0.372      0.593

Observations                                                                                               80

Note: i) significance levels based on naive p-values and indicated by * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01. ii) specifications include strata for geographic ward and two
balancing variables (distance to road and community size) from the randomization; iii) robust standard errors; and iv) this table includes 13 of 15 pre-specified
primary outcomes in our PAP, excluding 2 outcomes that are observed for fewer than 20 communities in the data.




                                                                                                                                                  A21
          Appendix Table A7: Expert Priors Grant Competition Entry

                                                                   Mean            SD
                                                                    (1)            (2)
CDD Control, Chiefly Default                                       35.54          23.03
CDD Control, Technocratic Selection                                44.06          22.33
CDD Control, Technocratic Selection & Training                     53.63          23.52

CDD Treatment, Chiefly Default                                     42.20          21.10
CDD Treatment, Technocratic Selection                              53.90          20.70
CDD Treatment, Technocratic Selection & Training                   65.52          20.89
Notes: Expert priors for each treatment arm, which is CDD crossed with the Technocratic
Selection and Training treatment arms, where the latter two arms are part of a companion
experiment that was overlaid on the CDD study sampling frame and is analyzed in Casey et al.
(forthcoming).




                                                                                               A22
Appendix C: Pre-analysis Plan

We include below the relevant sections of our pre-analysis plan. The plan in its entirety, with time
stamps, can be found in the American Economic Association's registry for randomized control
trials (https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1784), where detailed Excel sheets listing all
outcome variables (referenced as "PAP Sheets 1, 2, 3 and 4") are also available for download.




                                                                                               A23
                      Pre-analysis Plan: Two Approaches to Community Development
                                                     10 March 2017
                              PIs: K. Casey, R. Glennerster, E. Miguel and M. Voors


Overview
This research project has four main components. The first evaluates the long run effects of a community
driven development (CDD) program in Sierra Leone. The project devolved financial and implementation
control over public services to communities, accompanied by intensive social facilitation. The second
assesses a low cost technocratic alternative that identifies and supports high competence community
members to take better advantage of development opportunities. It leverages local talent, addresses
information barriers, and augments existing managerial capital with basic training in project management.
A third component elicits expert beliefs about the efficacy of these two approaches and assesses their
forecast levels and accuracy. A fourth line of inquiry examines whether participation in CDD affected
community response to the Ebola crisis.

Registration timeline
We registered this study with the American Economic Association (AEA) Randomized Control Trial
Registry     on    16     November       2016.         Our      trial   entry      can    be    found     here:
http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1784. On 17 November 2016, we uploaded a data management
plan that outlines who would have access to data when, and commits all PIs to not access any data with
identifying information until after this PAP is lodged. Fieldwork commenced on 18 November 2016. Our
Field Manager Angelica Eguiguren at IPA Sierra Leone was the only person who had access to the data at
all times. She uploaded the data to a secure server and will invite the PIs to that dropbox as soon as the PAP
is lodged. We lodged an email confirming PI adherence to the data management plan on 9 March 2017. We
lodged this PAP on 10 March 2017. We have received IRB clearance from Stanford (#38846), the
Government of Sierra Leone, Office of the Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee (3-11-
2016, Wageningen (18-11-2016), Berkeley (2016099099) and MIT (#1612798296) for this trial.


Part I: Long run effects of CDD
Component Overview: Community Driven Development (CDD) is a participatory approach popular with
foreign aid donors that involves communities directly in the financial management and implementation of
local public goods. CDD has two main aims: i) improve the stock and quality of local public goods via the
provision of block grants; and ii) democratize local decision-making via intensive social facilitation focused
on the participation of marginalized groups.
In earlier work, we analyzed the medium run effects of the "GoBifo" CDD project in Sierra Leone (Casey,
Glennerster and Miguel 2012). 1 GoBifo was implemented from 2005 to 2009 and provided roughly $5,000
in block grants and six months of dedicated social facilitation per community. The medium run study found
substantial positive impacts on local public goods and economic activity, stronger links between the
community and local government, and no evidence for more inclusive local decision-making.




1 Casey K, Glennerster R, Miguel E (2012) Reshaping Institutions: Evidence on Aid Impacts Using a Preanalysis Plan. Quarterly

Journal of Economics 127 (4): 1755-1812.

                                                                                                                      PAP1
During late 2016, we revisited the 236 communities in the original study to assess long term impacts. In the
interim, 60 of the treatment communities received additional support from the GoBifo project. Specifically,
these 60 communities received $1,300 for youth empowerment programs in 2010. We do not know how
exactly the project management staff selected these 60 communities from the pool of 118 treatment
communities, but it was not via random assignment.
Hypotheses: The 12 research hypotheses grouped into two families remain the same as those used in the
earlier study.

       ·    Family A of hardware outcomes: "GoBifo creates functional development committees" (H1);
            "Participation in GoBifo improves the quality of local public services infrastructure" (H2); and
            "Participation in GoBifo improves general economic welfare" (H3).

       ·    Family B of software outcomes: "Participation in GoBifo increases collective action and
            contributions to local public goods" (H4); "GoBifo increases inclusion and participation in
            community planning and implementation, especially for poor and vulnerable groups; GoBifo norms
            spill over into other types of community decisions, making them more inclusive, transparent and
            accountable" (H5); "GoBifo changes local systems of authority, including the roles and public
            perception of traditional leaders (chiefs) versus elected local government" (H6); 2 "Participation in
            GoBifo increases trust" (H7); "Participation in GoBifo builds and strengthens community groups
            and networks" (H8); "Participation in GoBifo increases access to information about local
            governance" (H9); "GoBifo increases public participation in local governance" (H10); "By
            increasing trust, GoBifo reduces crime and conflict in the community" (H11); and "GoBifo changes
            political and social attitudes, making individuals more liberal towards women, more accepting of
            other ethnic groups and `strangers', and less tolerant of corruption and violence" (H12).

Econometric Specifications: For Part I, the primary test of interest is evaluating long run effects of CDD
at the family level. Our core specification evaluates treatment effects for Family A and B, using the
following model:

                                         = 0 + 1  +   +   +                                                                              (1)

where  is the mean index for each family for community c in the 2016 survey round; Tc is the GoBifo
treatment indicator; Xc contains two village-level balancing variables from the randomization process
(distance from a road and total number of households); Wc is a fixed effect for geographic ward, the
administrative level on which the randomization was stratified; and c is the usual idiosyncratic error term.
The parameter of interest is 1, the average long run treatment effect. We will construct mean effects indices
following Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007). 3
To interpret these effects, we will test whether long run effects differ from the medium run effects in areas
where the medium run effects were nonzero (Family A). Here we will test for decay using the following
model:
                                         -  = 0 + 1  +   +   +                                                                           (2)



2   As before, that this is not an explicit objective of the GoBifo project leadership itself, but is a plausible research hypothesis.
3   Kling, J., J. Lieberman and L. Katz (2007) Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects, Econometrica, 75(1); 83­119

                                                                                                                                   PAP2
where the dependent variable is the difference in mean effects indices measured in the 2016 survey,  ,
and 2009,  . The coefficient of interest is 1, where 1 < 0 suggests that the treatment effect has dissipated
over time for that hypothesis. A combination of failing to reject 1 = 0 while rejecting 1  0 suggests that
previously observed treatment effects have dissipated, while failing to reject 1 = 0 and 1  0 presents a
less conclusive middle ground that likely reflects greater noise in measuring long run outcomes and
accompanying reductions in the power to detect treatment effects. Note that the exact set of outcomes
varies between the 2009 and 2016 data collection rounds, so each index will incorporate the relevant
outcomes for that particular survey round (see below).
The second test of interest is running Equations (1) and (2) at the hypothesis level where Equation (2) will
again only be run for hypotheses with non-zero medium run effects.
Throughout our analysis, we will adjust for the fact that we are running more than one test on the same
dataset by implementing false discovery rate (FDR) corrections. Research practice appears to be moving
towards FDR and away from the more conservative familywise error rate (FWER) corrections where there
are several tests of interest. Since our earlier paper used FWER corrections, we will also report them here
to maintain consistency, but note that the preferred specifications use FDR. These adjustments run across
the two families (Family A and Family B) or 12 hypotheses (H1 ­ H12) as relevant. See Benjamini, Krieger
and Yekutieli (2006) and Anderson (2008). 4 For all tests, we will also report the "naïve" or "per
comparison" p-value.
Our third test of interest highlights a few individual outcome measures from a new structured community
activity (SCA). Here we will test for long run effects of GoBifo on the managerial capital of community
members and the quality of proposals submitted to a project challenge competition run by the local District
Councils (discussed in greater detail below). These outcomes measure whether the learning-by-doing
experience of participating in GoBifo translates into long run differences in ability to act collectively and
take advantage of development opportunities. We will test them as part of our larger research framework
under H1 and H4, respectively, but also highlight them on their own as they capture an important channel
through which GoBifo could lead to long run changes.
To further interpret the family- and hypothesis-level results, we will also estimate Equation (1) at the level
of individual outcome (adjusting for FDR across all outcomes under a given hypothesis). Note that this
reporting of all individual outcomes is for illustrative and interpretation purposes only.
Measurement and survey instruments: See ["SES - Endline 2016"]. The main data collection instrument
for the long run effects closely follows the community modules used in the 2009 survey. This includes a
focus group discussion with local leaders and enumerator physical inspection of community amenities and
market activity. Where possible, we have included a community-level analogue of household level
indicators included in the 2009 survey. In addition to economic and social outcomes, we include measures
of institutional outcomes using the new project challenge SCA. These are captured in several instruments
["Managerial capital test", "Manager selection tally sheet enumerator A and B", "Submission survey",
"Submission form", "Technical scoring", "Policy Scoring", "Expert Scoring"]. We did not repeat the
household level survey due to budget constraints.




4 Benjamini, Y., A. Krieger, and D. Yekutieli (2006) Adaptive Linear Step-Up Procedures That Control the False Discovery
Rate, Biometrika, 93: 491­507. Anderson, M (2008) `Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedaian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects,' Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 103 (484): 1481­1495.

                                                                                                                      PAP3
Outcomes: See ["PAP, sheet 1"]. The table maps each individual outcome to the hypothesis of interest. To
facilitate comparison to our earlier work, the first several columns of this table reproduce exactly those in
the Appendix J: Raw Results from the supplementary materials to the 2012 QJE article. The list of
outcomes has evolved in a few key ways. First, the present data collection uses only community modules
and does not conduct household visits. Thus, all household level outcomes (indicated by "HH" in column
K "2009 survey level") are omitted. Where possible, we have included a community-level analogue in the
current survey (see column O "Additional question 2016"). Second, we exclude almost all conditional
outcomes (i.e. those that are contingent on having a specific good in the community) that are only observed
for a subset of villages. Third, as part of our new SCA, we designed measures that mirror some of the
process-oriented 2009 SCA outcomes (e.g. unobtrusively counting the number of women who participate
in a community decision).
The Casey et al (2012) paper included 334 outcomes, excluding the conditional variables a total of 206
variables remain (see Table 2 in the paper). The 2016 survey round includes 101 outcomes. Table 1 displays
the number of outcomes by hypothesis. In total, 96 outcomes exactly match across both rounds. As a
robustness analysis, we rerun Equation (1) and Equation (2) for both survey rounds at the family level
restricting the analysis to the 96 variables that appear in both 2009 and 2016 survey rounds.
Table 1. Non-conditional outcomes by Hypothesis
                                              Matching outcome
 Hypothesis          2009           2016       in both rounds
 Family A
 H1                   7              6               5
 H2                   18             17              17
 H3                   15             7               7
 Family B
 H4                   15            10               6
 H5                   47            19               19
 H6                   25             4               4
 H7                   12             8               8
 H8                   15             9               9
 H9                   17             4               4
 H10                  18             9               9
 H11                   8             4               4
 H12                   9             4               4
 Total                206           101              96



Heterogeneous Treatment Effects: We will test for heterogeneous treatment effects along the same eight
community-level dimensions we used (and measured) in our earlier analysis (total households, war
exposure, average schooling, distance to road, historical domestic slavery, district, ethnic fractionalization
and chiefly authority). As an exploratory exercise, we will use an automated process (LASSO and BART)
to identify other dimensions that are correlated with heterogeneous effects to mine the data in a principled
way.



Part II: Managerial Capital
[PART II IS OMITTED HERE AS IT COVERS THE ANALYSIS IN OUR COMPANION PAPER ­
see Casey, Glennerster, Miguel and Voors (forthcoming)]




                                                                                                       PAP4
Part III: Expert Beliefs
Component Overview: There have now been several randomized control trials of CDD projects in different
countries, most of which find some positive impacts on economic outcomes and little effect on institutions.
A key unanswered question is whether experts--in academia and more importantly in policy--are updating
their beliefs about how effective CDD projects are. This is important in light of the large amounts of foreign
aid at stake ($85 billion spent on CDD in about two decades by the World Bank alone, according to Mansuri
and Rao 2012), and whether the accumulation of evidence impacts the allocation of donor funds. We
surveyed students, academic and policy experts to elicit their beliefs (following DellaVigna and Pope 2016)
about the long run effects of the Sierra Leone CDD project and to forecast how well communities will
perform in the new project competition. 5
We fielded this survey among several distinct groups of experts: i) policy makers working for multilateral
aid agencies (including the World Bank, DfID, UNDP and IRC); ii) policy makers in Sierra Leone with
knowledge of the GoBifo project; iii) economics graduate students in the US (at UC Berkeley) and the
Netherlands (at Wageningen University); iv) economics undergraduate students in Sierra Leone (Fourah
Bay College), v) researchers directly involved in evaluating CDD projects other development (economics)
researchers; and vi) the PIs of this study. There were two versions of the survey: version 1 provided detailed
information on our medium run results and version 2 asked the respondent to make predictions without any
information provided. For the majority of respondents, we randomized whether they completed version 1
or 2. A small subset completed both versions.
Hypotheses:

    ·    Estimated long run treatment effects are not the same as the average prior beliefs of surveyed
         experts (H-III.1)

    ·    Average prior beliefs and forecast accuracy differ across groups of experts (H-III.2)

    ·    Prior beliefs about long run effects of the GoBifo project are more optimistic (e.g. predict larger
         positive long run effects) amongst policy makers compared to researchers (H-III.3)

    ·    Predictions under version 1 of the survey (that contains information on the medium run effects) are
         more accurate than under version 2 (H-III.4)

Econometric Specifications: For Hypothesis H-III.1, we will evaluate whether the average prior belief
across all six groups of experts are statistically distinguishable from the estimated long run treatment effects
by GoBifo family and hypothesis. For H-III.2 we will test whether mean predicted effect size by family
varies across groups, and assess which estimate is closest to the observed long run effects. H-III.3 tests
whether the mean prior of expert groups i and ii more optimistic (predict large positive effects) than that of
groups v and vi, at the family level (one sided test). Tests of H-III.4 whether prior beliefs are more accurate
in version 2 compared to version 1 across all six groups. For H-III.4 we will use all the data. As a robustness
check we will drop data from the subset of respondents that completed both versions of the survey.
We will run several additional descriptive analyses. These include testing whether respondents who report
higher confidence in their estimates, and greater familiarity with the 2012 study, are more accurate in their

5DellaVigna, S. and D. Pope, "Predicting Experimental Results: Who Knows What?" NBER Working Paper No. 22566, August
2016. See also Humphreys, M., R. Sanchez de la Sierra and P. van der Windt (2016) Social Engineering in the Tropics: A
Grassroots Democratization Experiment in Congo, working paper.

                                                                                                                PAP5
predictions. For the new SCA project challenge, we will impute several estimates--regarding GoBifo
treatment effects, the efficacy of training, and the impact of technocratic manager selection--and compare
their mean values and accuracy across expert respondent groups. 6
Measurement and Survey Instruments: See ["Expert Priors Survey"]
Outcomes: See ["PAP, sheet 3"].
Part IV: Impacts on Ebola
Component Overview: The recent outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in West Africa is the largest
ever recorded. The crisis resulted in over 4000 deaths in Sierra Leone alone (about 11000 in total). The two
districts where GoBifo was implemented were differentially effected, Bombali saw 1050 suspected cases
and 391 deaths, while Bonthe was much less hit, with 5 suspected cases and 5 deaths. In addition to
Communities suffered directly due to fear, illness and loss of life, and indirectly due to travel and trade
restrictions resulting from imposed quarantines. The Ebola crisis provided a huge stress on communities at
social, political and economic levels. We analyze if participation in Gobifo put communities in a better
position to implement preventative measures and collaborate with local government. We report two
secondary outcomes (i) we separate impacts on knowledge and collective action, and (ii) we investigate if
Gobifo villages reported different Ebola case-loads.
Hypothesis: Our main hypothesis is that "Participation in GoBifo increased knowledge, collective action
and investments in preventative measures during the Ebola crisis".
Econometric Specifications: same as Equation (1) above. Our dependent variable is a mean effects index
of all Ebola related outcomes. As secondary outcomes, we assess impacts in a mean effects index for
knowledge and collective action outcomes separately.
We asses outcomes for the whole sample and restrict our sample to Bombali, which saw many more Ebola
cases than Bonthe making the collective action outcomes more relevant.
To further interpret the hypothesis-level results, we will also estimate Equation (1) at the level of individual
outcome, adjusting for FDR across outcomes. Note that this reporting of all individual outcomes is for
illustrative and interpretation purposes only.
Measurement and survey instruments: see ["SES - Endline 2016", module J and K].
Outcomes: See ["PAP, sheet 4"].




6 We exclude the study PIs (group vi) from this comparison. While the PIs had no access to the data, we did learn through

communication with the field team that the number of submitted proposals was very high.

                                                                                                                            PAP6
