                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ATHLETES GREATLY BENEFIT FROM PARTICIPATION IN SPORTS AT THE
                   COLLEGE AND SECONDARY LEVEL

                                       James J. Heckman
                                      Colleen P. Loughlin

                                      Working Paper 29072
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29072


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 2021, Revised July 2021




We acknowledge, with thanks, the guidance and encouragement of Greg Curtner, who, as a
lawyer for the NCAA, introduced us to this subject and framed the importance of the question of
whether or not student athletes, especially at the well-known schools, are exploited or whether
they benefit. We further thank Ron Laschever, Josh Sherman, Aniello Bianco, Daniel Stone, and
Fredrick Flyer. The authors have worked on behalf of the NCAA in various litigation matters.
This paper draws heavily on an expert report presented in one of those litigation matters
(Heckman 2017) and published in summary form in Heckman, Loughlin, and Curtner (2021).
The NCAA has not provided financial support for this paper. Opinions and errors are those solely
of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by James J. Heckman and Colleen P. Loughlin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Athletes Greatly Benefit from Participation in Sports at the College and Secondary Level
James J. Heckman and Colleen P. Loughlin
NBER Working Paper No. 29072
July 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. I26,I32,Z2

                                          ABSTRACT

The recent Supreme Court decision NCAA vs Alston (June 2021) has heightened interest in the
benefits and costs of participation in sports for student athletes. Anecdotes about the exploitation
of student athletes were cited in the opinion. This paper uses panel data for two different cohorts
that follow students from high school through college and into their post-school pursuits to
examine the generality of these anecdotes. On average, student athletes' benefit- often
substantially so--in terms of graduation, post-collegiate employment, and earnings. Benefits in
terms of social mobility for disadvantaged and minority students are substantial, contrary to the
anecdotes in play in the media and in the courts.


James J. Heckman
Center for the Economics of
Human Development
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Colleen P. Loughlin
332 South Michigan Avenue
Suite 1300
Chicago, IL 60604-0236
cloughlin@compasslexecon.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29072
      I. Introduction

         In an era of social media determination of facts, the myth of the exploitation of college

athletes is flourishing. Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, Brett Kavanaugh, repeated this myth

among many others stating, "But the student athletes who generate the revenues, many of whom are

African American and from lower-income backgrounds, end up with little or nothing."1 This paper

confronts the anecdotes that drive the myth with data and find it to be false. On average, student

athletes including disadvantaged and minority students benefit from participation in sports at both the

collegiate and secondary school levels.

           This study examines the effect of participation in intercollegiate athletics on the human

capital and economic outcomes for studentathletes attending postsecondary institutions relative to

comparable students who did not participate in intercollegiate athletics. In addition, we examine

outcomes for students participating in intercollegiate football and basketball at Division I and

Football Bowl Subdivision ("FBS") schools, as well as outcomes for all athletes participating in high

school varsity sports and intercollegiate athletics at other types of postsecondary institutions,

compared to those who are otherwise similar but do not participate in athletics.2

           Because participation in athletics may provide benefits (or detriments) throughout several

stages of adolescent and adult life including high school, college, and post college life, it is important

to examine the effects of athletics at various stages of the life cycle. The longitudinal nature of the

data used here allows us to focus on the effects of participation in athletics at different life stages, as



1
  Supreme Court decision in Re: National Collegiate Athletic Association v. Shawne Alston, et al. American Athletic
Conference, et al. v. Shawne Alston, et al., Decided June 21, 2021.
2
  See Appendix A for descriptions of the precise construction of the athletics variables and other variables used in the
analyses.




                                                            3
well as to assess the cumulative effects of athletics participation, since success at each stage can

beget success, or at least help provide the opportunity for future success.

        We use the standard conceptual framework and empirical methodologies used for analyzing

the returns to investment in education and the effect of cognitive and noncognitive factors on

educational, labor market and social outcomes. Using this framework, we examine the role of high

school and intercollegiate athletics in contributing to the outcomes experienced by studentathletes.

        One key area that we explore is how the existence of intercollegiate athletics provides

incentives for students to graduate from high school and to get admitted to and attend college.

Research has shown that attending college provides lifelong benefits. Therefore, if intercollegiate

athletics provides incentives to finish high school and improves studentathletes' opportunities to

get admitted to and attend college programs, then this benefit would need to be considered in

evaluating the benefits to studentathletes from the current NCAA structure. In examining whether

participation in high school varsity athletics improves students' probability of finishing high school

and attending college, we also evaluate the extent to which participating in high school varsity

athletics may compensate for disadvantaged backgrounds, which otherwise may hinder college

attendance or college graduation. Along these lines, this analysis provides a basis for assessing the

extent to which athletics is a vehicle for social mobility for disadvantaged individuals.

        Consistent with the literature on the returns to schooling, we also estimate the value of

participating in intercollegiate athletics in terms of the effects on studentathletes' future wages. Part

of this analysis involves assessing whether, as some have claimed, studentathletes who participate in

intercollegiate athletics achieve inferior academic and labor market outcomes compared to

comparable nonathlete students. Specifically, we examine the questions of whether those who play

varsity intercollegiate sports at fouryear institutions, and Division I institutions in particular,



                                                     4
graduate at lower rates or earn lower wages than comparable non athletes.3

           Based on these analyses, our primary conclusions are that there are substantial benefits to

    participation in athletics in general, and in intercollegiate athletics in particular, especially for

    members of some disadvantaged groups. Further, we find little or no evidence of adverse effects of

    athletics participation on academic or labor market outcomes. Specifically, based on our analysis of

    two different extensive nationally representative datasets, the National Educational Longitudinal

    Survey ("NELS") and the Education Longitudinal Survey ("ELS"), controlling appropriately for

    cognitive and noncognitive factors and other socioeconomic and family background variables that

    may affect the outcomes, and which provide a basis for examining the comparability of various

    cohorts, our main findings are as follows:

            a. Probability of Graduating from High School
               Participation in athletics increases the probability of graduating from high school.4
               Graduating is a step in a path to further achievements, and therefore implies
               improved future outcomes for studentathletes.

            b. Probability of Attending College
               Participation in athletics significantly improves the probability of attending college.5
               This finding is consistent with what would be expected if high school students, in the
               hope of receiving a scholarship, invested more in their academic and athletic capital to
               meet the eligibility and admissions standards imposed by the NCAA and the colleges. In
               other words, just the anticipation of potentially receiving an athletic scholarship can
               motivate student human capital investments in high school that provide future rewards.

            c.   Graduation Rates (Obtaining a Bachelor's Degree)
                 We find that intercollegiate varsity athletes are as likely or more likely to earn at least
                 a Bachelor's degree relative to comparable nonathletes.6


3
  The survey data we use follows students through their mid20's, thus it provides information on early lifecycle wages.
4
  See Appendix Tables N1.1A, N1.2A, E1.1A, and E1.2A.
5
  See Appendix Tables N2.1A, N2.2A, E2.1A, and E2.2A.
6
  See Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C, E3.3C, and E3.4C.




                                                           5
            d. Returns to Intercollegiate Athletics (Earnings)
               We find positive effects of athletics on initial (mid20's) wages and no adverse effects
               on these wages due to participation in intercollegiate athletics.7
        These results demonstrate, based on the available data, substantial benefits to athletic

participation. In the rest of the paper, we explain the basis for this conclusion. Part 2 provides an

overview of the conceptual framework employed here and the academic literature underpinning

this approach. Part 3 describes the data and methodology employed to generate the analyses of the

effect of athletic participation on various outcomes. Part 4 presents and discusses the empirical

results from this analysis. Part 5 summarizes our conclusions. Appendix A provides details on the

variables from the NELS and ELS datasets that were used or derived in the specifications

presented in this report. Appendix B provides background on the noncognitive and cognitive

measures used in the report and in the academic literature on this topic. Appendices B.1 and B.2

provide further detail on the construction of the noncognitive and cognitive measures,

respectively. The full set of results is presented in Appendix A.

        II. THE ECONOMICS OF HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROVIDES A
            FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYZING THE IMPACT OF ATHLETICS ON
            VARIOUS OUTCOMES

            As we outline below, the economics literature on human capital investment finds that

returns from human capital investments reach beyond immediate financial benefits. Indeed, this

literature provides clear support for the contention that, to reliably evaluate the net benefit that

studentathletes receive from attending college and participating in intercollegiate athletics, one must

look beyond athletic scholarships and other financial benefits and activities occurring solely during

one's time at school. While in school, studentathletes likely receive benefits from various aspects of



7
    See Appendix Tables N4.1C, N4.2C, E4.1C, and E4.2C.




                                                          6
their college experiences, including access to top academic programs, sports training, team

participation experiences, and social benefits from playing for a highprofile program, such as a

Division I school.

          Furthermore, the benefits that studentathletes receive from participating in a Division I

athletics program likely extend well beyond returns realized while students are enrolled in school.

For example, the benefits of improved knowledge on exercise, eating habits, and general physical

care can last well beyond school years and provide value later in life. Leadership and teamwork skills

that were acquired or enhanced through participation on a sports team potentially provide increased

value in the job market following the student's time in college.8 Economists refer to skills and

knowledge that improve an individual's future productivity at work (or at other activities such as

personal care) as forms of human capital.

          The broad range of documented, longrun benefits in the economics literature resulting

from human capital investments means that reliable measures of welfare effects from such

investments should consider effects beyond immediate financial benefits. It supports a long

horizon perspective of returns to early human capital investments.

      A. The Economics Literature on Human Capital Investments

          Human capital investments have the characteristic that individuals forgo short term returns

in order to acquire personal skills that provide greater benefits long term. Essentially, this involves

planting seeds today for harvest in the future. Determining the optimal level and types of human

capital investments to make is a complex decision. These decisions have longlasting implications for



8
  For example, see (Shulman and Bowen 2001). Specifically, in discussing the postschooling careers of student athletes,
the authors report that athletes tend to have better teamwork skills and they attribute positive labor market outcomes to
these types of skills.




                                                           7
individuals' (postcollege or otherwise) labor market careers. Such decisions also influence

individuals' productivity in nonmarket areas, such as health maintenance and interpersonal

relationships.

           The broad range of effects resulting from human capital investments, along with the

complexity of these decisions, has been welldocumented. There has been extensive research on

human capital investment in the academic literature. Many economists have spent significant efforts

on researching optimal investments and tracking how these investments affect future outcomes in a

variety of dimensions.9 For example, Heckman, Humphries, and Veramendi (2018) have found that

educational investments made early in life positively influence many different outcomes later in life,

including labor market performance, individual health, and a variety of social outcomes.10

          Beyond the longevity and complexity of returns emanating from human capital investments,

    the economics literature has also well documented the benefits to postsecondary educations.

    From the time of Jacob Mincer's 1974 book, "Schooling, Experience, and Earnings," many

    researchers have performed extensive empirical research on the relationship between the various

    factors discussed in this report and labor market outcomes.11 Positive and significant benefits are

    widely acknowledged in this literature.

           Some examples in the economics literature, empirically linking postsecondary investments


9
  Examples of our research in this area include: Cunha and Heckman (2007b), Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010),
Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006). For additional discussion, see Ashenfelter and Heckman (1976), (Cunha and
Heckman 2007a), Cunha and Heckman (2008), Heckman (1975, 1976), Heckman, Lochner, and Cossa (2003), Heckman,
Lochner, and Taber (1998, 1999).
10
   Heckman, Humphries, and Veramendi (2018), Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa (2006).
11
   Mincer (1974) Mincer, Jacob A., "Schooling, Experience, and Earnings," National Bureau of Economic Research.
(1974).




                                                       8
to positive future outcomes, include Heckman and Vytlacil (2001), Hoekstra (2009), Andrews, Li,

and Lovenheim (2016), Molitor and Leigh (2005), Averett and Dalessandro (2001), and Monk-Turner

(1994). These studies all show considerable benefits resulting from college investments, with these

returns measured years after the investment decisions are implemented. This literature highlights the

large potential benefits likely to flow to studentathletes from participation in sports programs if

college attendance or preparation are facilitated (or incentivized) by these athletic programs.

         Given that the returns to education come from improving outcomes in many different

 areas and can occur over extended periods of time, optimally choosing human capital investments

 involves far more than merely assessing monetary costs associated with different schooling

 options. Understanding and incorporating this insight into our analysis leads to identifying the

 many benefits that can be derived from participating in intercollegiate basketball and football at

 Division I and FBS schools.

         Studentathletes participating in intercollegiate basketball and football at Division I and

 FBS schools potentially receive numerous benefits, including: coaching inputs to improve a

 student's performance in the sport, access to high quality training facilities, reputational capital

 acquired through playing the sport, admittance to an academic program that might otherwise be

 unavailable (even by paying tuition),12 human capital acquired through academic work, human

 capital that enhances productivity as leader or team member, access to employment networks

 with improved job opportunities, ability to live in desirable geographic locations, and human

 capital that enhances overall health (e.g., knowledge related to healthy diets and exercise



12
  For example, many individuals from a disadvantaged background may not have had the opportunity to attend a high
quality collegiate academic program, or even college at all, without the benefit of athletic grantsinaid programs. This
benefit has been explicitly recognized in the economics literature. See, e.g., Haskell (2012).




                                                           9
 programs).

         Indeed, in recent years, there have been a growing number of studies in the economics

 literature examining the public (social) and nonmonetary returns to education. For example,

 Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos (2004) find positive effects of education on civic participation

 and involvement.13 As discussed in Moretti (2004), increased human capital also provides positive

 externalities that others may find attractive and affect the growth of cities and employers'

 locational decisions.14

         Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011) survey several nonmonetary outcomes that are positively

 affected by education.15 For example, more educated individuals tend, on average, to have higher

 levels of job satisfaction and jobs with higher levels of prestige. Controlling for income, higher

 levels of education are associated with lower separation/divorce rates, and better self reported

 health. Schooling may also lead to improved parenting skills, which provides benefits to the next

 generation.

         This research puts into context the wellrecognized benefits of attending college, and the

 human capital literature more broadly provides the context for evaluating the benefits of athletics

 for various academic and economic outcomes. Indeed, evaluating the outcomes from

 participation in intercollegiate sports is only one aspect of the broader incentives that

 intercollegiate sports and scholarships may provide for necessary precursor accomplishments 




13 Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos (2004).
14 Moretti (2004).
15 Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011).




                                                   10
 including graduating from high school and achieving sufficient grades to be accepted into college.

 In the following empirical analyses, we evaluate some of these benefits that flow from

 participation in sports programs by student athletes.


 III.      DATA AND METHODOLOGY

               A. Overview

           The basic question we explore empirically is whether there are measurable benefits

experienced by students who participate in intercollegiate athletics relative to other individuals in

their cohorts who do not participate in intercollegiate athletics. However, the opportunity to

participate in intercollegiate sports depends on studentathletes graduating from high school and

earning sufficient grades to qualify for admission to college.16

           Thus, the possibility of playing intercollegiate athletics and receiving an athletic scholarship

to college may provide incentives for high school students to invest more intensively in their human

capital by participating in high school athletics, studying to earn better grades, and graduating from

high school. There may also be benefits in terms of learning about cooperation and teamwork and

experiencing the satisfaction of completing a goal.

           Our analysis seeks to measure the effects of participation in athletics at various stages along

the path to participation in intercollegiate athletics. The four stages are graduation from high school,

attending a postsecondary educational institution, obtaining a Bachelor's degree and earning initial

wages. The details of our data, method and findings are delineated below.

               B. Data

           For this analysis, differences in relative educational and labor market outcomes (between



16
  For example, in the NELS data, we find that 90% of all college varsity athletes participated in high school varsity
athletics.



                                                            11
studentathletes and nonathletes) are investigated with data from the National Education

Longitudinal Study of 1988 ("NELS:88") and the Education Longitudinal Survey of 2002

("ELS:2002"). We have gained access to both the publicuse data (downloaded from the public

website) and the restricteduse data obtained under contract with the U.S. Department of Education,

Institute of Education Sciences. The restricteduse data provide more detailed information on

individual survey respondents, including information on which postsecondary institutions they

attended, which is needed to identify attendance at FBS and other Division I schools.

             The NELS data are a nationally representative sample of students who were initially

surveyed as eighthgraders in 1988. A sample of these initial respondents was surveyed again in 1990,

1992, 1994 and 2000.17 Overall, 10,827 individuals responded in every survey wave, and our analysis

of the NELS data is focused on this set of survey respondents. Student questionnaires across these

survey years covered school experiences, activities, school and labor market outcomes, and family

background characteristics.18

             The base year (1988) seeks to capture the characteristics and activities of students as they

are about to leave middle or junior high school, the first followup (1990) examines these students,

many of whom are sophomores in high school, and the second followup occurs in 1992, when

many of these individuals are seniors in high school. The third followup surveys these individuals in

1994, when many sample members were enrolled at a postsecondary institution. The final NELS

survey wave occurs in 2000, at which point many of the survey respondents had completed their

postsecondary education and had already started their careers.


17
     Additional students were added in the first two followup periods to maintain the representativeness of the sample.
18
     See http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/nels88/index.asp.




                                                             12
           The ELS data are a representative sample of students surveyed in 2002, 2004, 2006, and

2012. There were 10,895 individuals who responded across every survey wave, and we focus our

analysis of the ELS data on this set of respondents. Unlike the NELS survey, the ELS survey begins

surveying individuals when many of them are sophomores in high school (2002). The first followup

occurs in 2004, when many of these respondents are in the 12th grade. The second followup (2006)

occurs at a point when many of the individuals are enrolled at a post secondary institution, and the

last survey occurs in 2012, when most students are in their mid20's. The ELS survey covers many of

the same or similar questions covered by NELS, including educational and income outcomes,

measures of cognitive and noncognitive ability, socio economic status (including parents' education

and income), personal aspirations and attitudes towards school, work, and home, educational

resources and support, and extracurricular activities.19

           For several reasons, we analyze the NELS and ELS datasets separately rather than combining

them into one dataset. While the NELS and ELS surveys ask many similar questions, there were

differences in some key questions and the construction of important variables between the two

surveys, which could introduce imprecision in the measurement of the various effects of interest if

the data were "pooled" together. For example, several of the variables which record characteristics

of the respondent's background, the respondent's activities, and various noncognitive measures,

were constructed differently in ELS and NELS.

           While the specific questions are different, the resulting measures capture comparable

characteristics and activities. Some of these differences may be due to the introduction of new

research and developments in construction of sample questions. In addition, running each of the

regressions separately for ELS and NELS data allows for the regression coefficients to vary across


19
     See https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/els2002/.


                                                     13
time, rather than assuming they have a fixed relationship across cohorts. The specific variables used

in our analyses are discussed in detail in Appendix A.

         While both the NELS and ELS surveys ask respondents about high school athletics

 participation and college athletics participation, specific sports are only identified in the data at the

 high school level. Therefore, for males we use the term "college football players and college

 basketball players" to refer to intercollegiate athletes who participated in either varsity high school

 football, varsity high school basketball, or both.20 For females, we use the term "college basketball

 players" to refer to intercollegiate athletes who participated in high school basketball.21

                C. Methodology

           As discussed in the introduction, participation in athletics may provide benefits throughout

 several stages of one's formative years during high school, college, and postcollege graduation. The

 longitudinal nature of the NELS and ELS data allows us to focus on the importance of athletics

 participation for a given life stage as well as to assess the cumulative effects of participation in

 athletics across life stages.

           For example, consider the effect of participation in high school varsity athletics. As

 discussed below, we find that participation in high school athletics increases the likelihood of high


20
   In the NELS and ELS data that we examine, a majority of male college athletes either a) only played football in high
school, b) only played basketball in high school, c) only played football and basketball in high school, or d) did not play
football or basketball in high school. For the above four groups of college athletes, there exists an unambiguous high
school sports classification for purposes of our analysis (college basketball/football athletes and non-basketball/football
college athletes). Likewise, a majority of female college athletes either a) only played high school basketball or b) did not
play high school basketball.
  21
     We also provide definitions for college football players and college basketball players in NELS and ELS in Appendix
  C.




                                                             14
 school graduation.22 High school graduation, in turn, increases the likelihood of college attendance,

 and college attendance is a necessary requirement for earning a Bachelor's degree. Furthermore, as

 discussed previously, it is well documented that college graduates earn, on average, higher wages

 than those who do not have a college degree. As such, participation in high school athletics may

 lead to higher wages in one's mid20's via the channel of post

 secondary education.

             Similarly, the option to participate in intercollegiate athletics may provide benefits

through two channels. First, as we detail below, all else equal, we observe that participation in

intercollegiate athletics increases the likelihood of obtaining at least a Bachelor's degree. Second,

the benefits of intercollegiate athletics provide an additional incentive for high school students to

both participate in high school athletics as well as graduate from high school in order to take

advantage of the opportunities afforded by intercollegiate athletics.

             Participation in intercollegiate athletics also provides benefits beyond the increased

likelihood of obtaining a Bachelor's degree. As documented below, we observe higher mid20's

earnings outcomes for wage earners who participated in intercollegiate athletics.

             We use econometric methods to examine various educational and labor market outcomes

while carefully controlling for a host of individual characteristics, including cognitive abilities, non

cognitive abilities, socioeconomic background, and family history ­ the omission of which might

lead to spurious relationships between participation in athletics and the outcomes we study.23 These

methods enable us to isolate the effect of athletic participation on these outcomes and evaluate




22
     See Appendix Tables N1.1A, N1.2A, E1.1A, and E1.2A.
23
     This is commonly referred to as omitted variable bias in the econometrics literature.




                                                               15
whether the results are statistically significant.24

          Examining outcomes individually allows us to focus on the effect of athletics participation

on a given outcome. As previously noted, we primarily focus on four types of outcomes, or what we

will refer to as stages, throughout an individual's early adulthood:25

          Graduation from high school
          Attendance at a fouryear postsecondary institution
          Obtaining a Bachelor's degree
          Wages during one's mid20's

      For each of these outcomes/stages, we econometrically control for individual and family

background characteristics that have been shown to be important in the literature, thereby

allowing us to examine and isolate the role of participating in high school and intercollegiate

athletics. Controls include cognitive ability measures (scores on achievement tests), non cognitive

ability (e.g., locus of control, general effort and persistence), race, family income, parents' education,

etc. The full set of results, including a list of controls used for each outcome, is presented in Appendix C.

          To understand the importance of properly controlling for individual and family

characteristics, consider a hypothetical example in which one is interested in comparing the college

graduation rates of athletes with the college graduation rates of nonathletes. In particular, assume

(as is actually observed in the data) that in the population students below the poverty line graduate

at lower rates than all other students, and assume that students below the poverty line are

represented at a higher rate in athletics than their rate of representation in the population. It would

then follow that failing to control for the income level of the student's family when examining the



24
  Throughout our report, we test for statistical significance at a 5% significance level.
25
  We also examine similar additional outcomes. For example, attendance at a NCAA Division I school, highest level of
educational attainment (to include some postsecondary education, twoyear college), etc.




                                                         16
effect of athletics on the likelihood of college graduation would erroneously lead one to attribute

the effects of family income on the likelihood of graduating to the effect of participation in college

athletics on graduating.

          We also control for cognitive and noncognitive factors and other demographic and family

background variables. These factors have been shown to be important in predicting transitions to

different levels of schooling and for predicting outcomes.26 This provides a means of comparing

likeforlike background for athletes versus nonathletes to better isolate the effect of participation

in athletics on the outcomes of interest. Studies such as those by Harper et al. (2013) that do not

control for student background characteristics when examining differences

 in college graduation rates between African American student athletes and other college students,

 may lead to substantially biased conclusions regarding the differences in graduation rates across

 groups of students. It is important to control for factors known to explain the outcomes of

 interest. This is standard practice in economics. To omit such factors may create omitted variable

 bias and nonscientific, unreliable inferences.

          For every outcome of interest, we econometrically control for the aforementioned factors

using regression analysis. For example, when analyzing the probability that an individual graduates

from high school,27 We estimate a model that contains the following variables plus additional right

handside variables not explicitly listed here.28


 Graduationi = b0 + b1(High School Athletic Participation)i + b2(African American)i + ... + i

26 Heckman, Humphries, and Veramendi (2018).
27
   Throughout this report, we will refer to graduation from high school on time or receipt of a GED on time as
graduation from high school.
28
   Other variables include controls for other races, family background information (such as family income), noncognitive
and cognitive measures, etc. As noted previously, a full list of variables is provided in Appendix A.




                                                          17
 where Graduation is a binary variable equal to one if an individual i graduates from high school and

 zero otherwise, High School Athletic Participation is a binary variable equal to one if individual i

 participates in high school athletics and zero otherwise, and African American is a binary variable

 equal to one if individual i is African American and zero otherwise. The coefficient b1 has the

 interpretation of the causal effect on the probability of graduating from high school due to the

 participation in high school athletics.29

         We find that participation in athletics generates benefits at various stages of life. As

 described in the previous section, these benefits are measured by isolating the effect of athletics on

 a particular academic or labormarket outcome while controlling for a variety of individual

 characteristics, including cognitive abilities, noncognitive abilities, socioeconomic background,

 and family history. Our findings are detailed below.

 IV.       EMPIRICAL RESULTS

               A. The Effects of Participation in High School Athletics  Summary

            First, we summarize our findings related to high school athletics from the NELS and

ELS datasets below:

           All else equal, on average high school athletes are statistically significantly more likely to
           graduate from high school than comparable nonathletes. Moreover, those who participate
           in football or basketball are statistically significantly more likely to graduate from high school
           than comparable nonathletes.30


29
   In this example, multiplying the coefficient b1 by 100 would yield the percentage point increase in the probability of
graduating from high school due to participation in high school athletics.
30
   See Appendix Tables N1.1A, N1.2A, E1.1A, and E1.2A.




                                                             18
            All else equal, conditional on graduating from high school, on average the likelihood of
            attending a postsecondary education institution is statistically significantly higher
            both for high school athletes relative to comparable nonathletes and for high school football
            and basketball players relative to comparable nonathletes.31,32 Further, on average, all else
            equal, even conditional on attending a postsecondary institution, high school student
            athletes continue to outperform, as both athletes in general and football
            and basketball players in particular graduate at statistically significantly higher rates than non
            athletes. we also find that high school athletes earn statistically significantly higher wages in
            their mid20's.33

            All else equal, high school athletics participation confers considerable benefits at various
            stages of one's life when analyzing various subsamples of individuals in the data.
                B. The Effects of High School Athletics: High School Graduation

             ELS

             On average, high school athletics participation increases the likelihood that both males and

     females graduate high school. Among females, all else equal, on average high school athletes are 1.8

     percentage points more likely to graduate than comparable nonathletes and basketball players are



31
   See Appendix Tables N2.1A, N2.2A, E2.1A, and E2.2A.
32
   In the NELS balanced sample, approximately 10% of high school athletes continued to participate in college
  athletics. In the ELS balanced sample, approximately 14% of high school athletes continued to participate in college
  athletics. Also, note that some football players and some basketball players also participate in other sports as well.
  These individuals are included as students who are considered to have played football or basketball.
33
   Specifically, we find that among college students, all else equal, high school athletes are, on average, as likely or
statistically significantly more likely to earn at least a Bachelor's degree than comparable nonathletes. Some of these high
school athletes also participated in intercollegiate athletics. See Appendix Tables N3.3A, N3.4A, E3.3A, and E3.4A for
further details on our estimates. Additionally, we also find that future wages are also higher for athletes. Namely,
examining individuals in their mid20's, all else equal, on average we find that those who participated in high school
athletics in general as well as those who participated in high school football or basketball in particular earn wages that are
statistically significantly higher than comparable individuals who did not participate in high school athletics. See Appendix
Tables N4.1A, N4.2A, E4.1A, and E4.2A for further details on our estimates.




                                                             19
3.0 percentage points more likely to graduate than comparable non athletes. Among males, all else

 equal, on average athletes are 4.6 percentage points more likely to graduate than comparable non

 athletes, and those who play either football or basketball are 5.0 percentage points more likely to

   graduate than comparable nonathletes (see Table 1). These results are statistically significant.

        NELS

        In NELS, all else equal, on average female high school basketball players are statistically

significantly more likely to graduate from high school than comparable females who did not

participate in high school athletics. Similarly, all else equal, on average male football and basketball

players are statistically significantly more likely to graduate high school than comparable males

who did not participate in high school athletics. Likewise, all else equal, on average male and

female athletes in general are statistically significantly more likely to graduate from high school

than comparable nonathletes (see Table 1).




                                                   20
                                       Table 1: High School Graduation
                              Dependent Variable: Received High School Diploma or
                                        GED Linear Probability Model
                                                                                         NELS                          ELS
Males

HS Sophomore Varsity Athlete (% points)                                                   7.8***                      4.6***
  Coefficient Estimate                                                                   0.078***                    0.046***
  (Standard Error)                                                                         (0.009)                     (0.009)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                             [0.060 , 0.097]             [0.028 , 0.064]


High School Sophomore BB/FB Varsity Athlete (% points)                                    8.4***                      5.0***
  Coefficient Estimate                                                                   0.084***                    0.050***
  (Standard Error)                                                                         (0.010)                     (0.010)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                             [0.064 , 0.105]             [0.030 , 0.071]


Females
HS Sophomore Varsity Athlete (% points)                                                   4.3***                       1.8**
  Coefficient Estimate                                                                   0.043***                    0.018**
  (Standard Error)                                                                         (0.007)                     (0.007)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                             [0.029 , 0.057]             [0.005 , 0.030]



High School Sophomore BB/FB Varsity Athlete (% points)                                    3.9***                      3.0***
  Coefficient Estimate                                                                   0.039***                    0.030***
  (Standard Error)                                                                         (0.011)                     (0.008)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                             [0.018 , 0.060]             [0.013 , 0.046]


Notes: Summary of results of Tables N1.1A, N1.2A, E1.1A, E1.2A. Each cell corresponds to the athletic effect of interest
from a particular regression specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 95percent confidence intervals in square
brackets. *** and ** denote statistical significance of the coefficient estimate at the 0.1 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                21
         C. The Effects of High School Athletics ­ Attending a PostSecondary Institution

        ELS

        Among high school graduates, all else equal, on average those who participated in high

school athletics are statistically significantly more likely to attend a postsecondary institution. In

particular, male athletes are 4.3 percentage points more likely to attend a postsecondary

institution than comparable males who did not participate in sports, and female athletes are

5.8 percentage points more likely to attend a postsecondary institution than comparable females

who did not participate in sports. This also holds true when examining the specific sports of

football and basketball. Among males, those who played football or basketball are 4.6 percentage

points more likely to attend a postsecondary institution than comparable non athletes.

Furthermore, female high school basketball players are 6 percentage points more likely to attend a

postsecondary institution than comparable females who did not participate in high school athletics

(see Table 2).

        NELS

        Conditional on graduating from high school, all else equal, on average female high school

basketball players are statistically significantly more likely to attend a postsecondary institution than

comparable females who did not participate in high school athletics. Likewise, among males, all else

equal, on average those who participated in either high school football or high school basketball are

statistically significantly more likely to attend a postsecondary institution than comparable non

athletes. Similarly, all else equal, on average male and female high school athletes are statistically

significantly more likely to attend a postsecondary institution than comparable nonathletes (see

Table 2).




                                                    22
                           Table 2: Attending Any PSE Institution
         Dependent Variable: Attended Any PSE Institution Within Two Years of High
           School Graduation, Conditional on Graduation from High School; Linear
                                      Probability Model
                                                                             NEL                                  ELS
Males
HS Sophomore Varsity Athlete (% points)                                      9.3***                               4.3**
  Coefficient Estimate                                                      0.093***                             0.043**
  (Standard Error)                                                             (0.015)                             (0.013)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                [0.063 , 0.123]                      [0.017 , 0.069]


High School Soph. BB/FB Varsity Athlete (% points)                          10.3***                               4.6**
  Coefficient Estimate                                                      0.103***                             0.046**
  (Standard Error)                                                             (0.017)                             (0.015)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                [0.070 , 0.137]                      [0.016, 0.076]


Females
HS Sophomore Varsity Athlete (% points)                                      8.2***                              5.8***
  Coefficient Estimate                                                      0.082***                             0.058***
  (Standard Error)                                                             (0.013)                             (0.010)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                [0.056 , 0.108]                      [0.039 , 0.078]


High School Soph. BB Varsity Athlete (% points)                              9.8***                              6.0***
  Coefficient Estimate                                                      0.098***                             0.060***
  (Standard Error)                                                             (0.019)                             (0.015)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                [0.060 , 0.136]                      [0.031 , 0.090]


Notes: Summary of results of Tables N2.1A, N2.2A, E2.1A, E2.2A. Each cell corresponds to the athletic effect of interest
from a particular regression specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 95percent confidence intervals in square
brackets. *** and ** denote statistical significance of the coefficient estimate at the 0.1 and 1 percent level, respectively.

                D. The Effects of High School Athletics ­ Specific Findings by
                   Socioeconomic Background and Race


             The beneficial effects of athletics at various stages of one's life are also found when

        examining students from backgrounds that could be considered as disadvantaged.




                                                                 23
                                                   Poverty35


          ELS
          For example, among males below the poverty line, all else equal, on average we find that
          those who participate in high school athletics are 15% more likely to graduate high school
          than comparable nonathletes. This result is statistically significant (Appendix Table
          E1.1B).

          Moreover, conditional on graduating from high school, all else equal, on average the
          effect of participation in high school athletics on the likelihood of attending a post
          secondary institution is not different for students below the poverty line relative to other
          comparable students (Appendix Tables E2.1B, E2.2B).

          NELS
          We find that males below the poverty line surveyed in NELS benefit from high school
          athletics to a similar extent to those we observe in ELS. In NELS, among males below the
          poverty line, all else equal, on average high school athletes are 11.6 percentage points more
          likely to graduate from high school than comparable nonathletes (Appendix Table N1.1B).
          Similarly, among males below the poverty line, all else equal, on average those playing high
          school football or basketball are 10.7 percentage points more likely to graduate high school
          than comparable nonathletes (Appendix Table N1.1B). These results are statistically
          significant.

          Among males below the poverty line who graduate from high school, all else equal, on
          average we find that those who play high school football or basketball are 17.2 percentage
          points more likely to attend a postsecondary institution (see Table 3). This result is
          statistically significant.

 Singleparent households

          ELS

          Among males from singleparent households, all else equal, on average high school athletes
          are 7.4 percentage points more likely to graduate from high school than comparable non
          athletes (Appendix Table E1.1B). Similarly, when examining the same subset of males from
          singleparent households, all else equal, on average those who are high school football or basketball
          players are 6.8 percentage points more likely to graduate from high school than comparable non
          athletes (Appendix Table E1.1B). These results are statistically significant.

35
  When analyzing ELS data, we use 2001 U.S. poverty thresholds (adjusted for household size and number of children).
When analyzing NELS data, we use 1987 U.S. poverty thresholds (adjusted for household size and number of children).
Poverty thresholds for both years are available at https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time series/demo/income
poverty/historicalpovertythresholds.html.




                                                          24
     Females from singleparent households also benefit from playing high school basketball.
     Among females, all else equal, on average we find that female high school basketball players
     are 5.2 percentage points more likely to graduate from high school than comparable non
     athletes (Appendix Table E1.2B). Furthermore, among females from singleparent
     households who graduate from high school, all else equal, on average high school basketball
     players are 7.9 percentage points more likely to attend a post secondary institution (see
     Table 3). These results are statistically significant.
     NELS
     Among students from singleparent homes, all else equal, on average high school football
     and basketball players are statistically significantly more likely to graduate from high school
     than comparable nonathletes (Appendix Tables N1.1B, N1.2B). Conditional on graduating
     from high school, all else equal, on average they are also statistically significantly more likely
     to attend a postsecondary institution than comparable non athletes (see Table 3).

AfricanAmerican

     Students ELS

     Among AfricanAmerican females, all else equal, on average those who participate in high
     school athletics are 6.7 percentage points more likely to graduate from high school than
     comparable nonathletes (Appendix Table E1.2B). This result is statistically significant.

     NELS

     We also find that high school athletics provides benefits to AfricanAmerican males at
     various stages. In particular, among AfricanAmerican males, all else equal, on average high
     school athletes are 11 percentage points more likely to graduate from high school
     (Appendix Table N1.1B) and 17.2 percentage points more likely to attend a post
     secondary institution (see Table 3). These results are statistically significant.




                                                 25
                                     Table 3: Attending Any PSE Institution
                                     Dependent Variable: Attended Any PSE
                                  Institution Within Two Years of High School
                                                   Graduation
                       Conditional on Graduation from High School; Linear Probability Model
                                                   Below the Poverty                       SingleParent
                Subpopulation:                           Line                               Household                     African Americans

                                                     NELS                ELS           NELS                ELS             NELS                ELS
  Males

  HS Sophomore Varsity Athlete (% points)            13.1*                7.8             7.7*               3.8            17.2**               2.4
    Coefficient Estimate                            0.131*             0.078            0.077*             0.038           0.172**             0.024
    (Standard Error)                                  (0.056)           (0.062)          (0.034)            (0.027)           (0.065)           (0.049)
    [95% Confidence Interval]                     [0.021 , 0.241]   [0.042 , 0.199]   [0.011 , 0.143]   [0.015 , 0.092]   [0.044 , 0.300]   [0.072 , 0.119]


  HS Soph. BB/FB Varsity Athlete (% points)         17.2**              11.1              8.6*               0.9            18.8**               2.1
    Coefficient Estimate                           0.172**             0.111            0.086*             0.009           0.188**             0.021
    (Standard Error)                                  (0.060)           (0.068)          (0.038)            (0.032)           (0.067)           (0.052)
    [95% Confidence Interval]                     [0.053 , 0.290]   [0.023 , 0.245]   [0.013 , 0.160]   [0.054 , 0.072]   [0.057 , 0.319]   [0.080 , 0.123]


  Females

  HS Sophomore Varsity Athlete (% points)            10.5*                5.0          10.7***            7.4***              3.3                3.5
    Coefficient Estimate                            0.105*             0.050           0.107***          0.074***            0.033             0.035
    (Standard Error)                                  (0.049)           (0.040)          (0.028)            (0.020)           (0.049)           (0.035)
    [95% Confidence Interval]                     [0.009 , 0.201]   [0.028 , 0.129]   [0.053 , 0.161]   [0.035 , 0.113]   [0.129 , 0.063]   [0.035 , 0.104]



  HS Soph. BB Varsity Athlete (% points)               7.3                4.8           11.9**              7.9*               7.3               1.4
    Coefficient Estimate                             0.073             0.048           0.119**            0.079*             0.073             0.014
    (Standard Error)                                  (0.069)           (0.074)          (0.043)            (0.032)           (0.066)           (0.053)
    [95% Confidence Interval]                    [0.063 , 0.208]    [0.096 , 0.193]   [0.036 , 0.203]   [0.017 , 0.141]   [0.057 , 0.203]   [0.090 , 0.119]


  Notes: Summary of results of Tables N2.1B, N2.2B, E2.1B, E2.2B. Each cell corresponds to the athletic effect of interest from a
    particular regression specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 95percent confidence intervals in square brackets.
  ***, **, and * denote statistical significance of the coefficient estimate at the 0.1, 1, and 5 percent level, respectively.




                       E. The Effects of Intercollegiate Athletics: Earning a Bachelor's Degree

              The findings just discussed provide strong evidence of the benefits of participation in

high school athletics in general and in high school football and high school basketball in

particular, at various stages of students' progression through high school and college. Similarly,

below we find a higher probability of obtaining at least a Bachelor's degree and higher
                                                                     26
earnings for college athletes relative to comparable college students who did not participate in

intercollegiate athletics. In particular:

           ELS
           All else equal, on average college athletes are as likely or statistically significantly more likely
           to earn at least a Bachelor's degree relative to comparable college students who did not
           participate in intercollegiate athletics (see Table 4).

           Among males in college, all else equal, on average college football and college basketball
           players are statistically significantly more likely to earn at least a Bachelor's degree than
           comparable individuals who did not participate in intercollegiate athletics (see Table 4).

           NELS
           The benefits attributable to intercollegiate athletics participation found in ELS are generally
           found in the NELS dataset as well. In particular, all else equal, college athletes are on average
           more likely to earn at least a Bachelor's degree relative to other comparable college students
           who did not participate in intercollegiate athletics.

           For example, among male college students, all else equal, we find that those who participate
           in intercollegiate athletics on average are 6.1 percentage points more likely to earn at least a
           Bachelor's degree. Among female college students, all else equal, on average those who
           participate in intercollegiate athletics are 10.9 percentage points more likely to earn at least
           a Bachelor's degree (see Table 4).36




36
   Similarly, using Multinomial Logit to examine the categorical outcome of highest level of educational attainment of those
who attended a postsecondary education institution, all else equal, on average we find that intercollegiate athletes are
statistically significantly more likely to earn a Bachelor degree than nonathletes. In particular, all else equal, on average male
intercollegiate athletes in ELS are 13.1 percentage points more likely to attain a Bachelor degree than nonathletes and
female athletes are 11.4 percentage points more likely to attain a Bachelor degree than nonathletes (based on results of
Appendix Tables E3.1D and E3.2D). In NELS, all else equal, on average male intercollegiate athletes are 15.5 percentage
points more likely to attain a Bachelor degree than nonathletes and female athletes are 22.3 percentage points more likely
to attain a Bachelor degree than nonathletes (based on results of Appendix Tables N3.1D and N3.2D).




                                                               27
                   Table 4: Earning a Bachelor's Degree or Higher
     Dependent Variable: PostSecondary Education Attained ­ Bachelor's Degree or
                           Higher; Linear Probability Model
                                                                                NEL                               ELS
Males

College Athlete (% points)                                                        6.1*                            6.7**
  Coefficient Estimate                                                          0.061*                           0.067**
  (Standard Error)                                                               (0.028)                           (0.026)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                   [0.006 , 0.115]                  [0.017 , 0.118]



College FB/BB Athlete (% points)                                                  4.9                              6.9*
  Coefficient Estimate                                                           0.049                           0.069*
  (Standard Error)                                                               (0.037)                           (0.035)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                   [0.023 , 0.121]                  [0.001 , 0.138]


Females

College Athlete (% points)                                                     10.9***                              1.9
  Coefficient Estimate                                                         0.109***                           0.019
  (Standard Error)                                                               (0.028)                           (0.027)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                   [0.053 , 0.164]                  [0.033 , 0.071]



College BB Athlete (% points)                                                  16.7***                             0.8
  Coefficient Estimate                                                         0.167***                           0.008
  (Standard Error)                                                               (0.039)                           (0.053)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                                   [0.090 , 0.244]                  [0.111 , 0.095]


Notes: Summary of results of Tables N3.3C, N3.4C, E3.3C, E3.4C. Conditional on attending a nonprofit 4year PSE
institution. Each cell corresponds to the athletic effect of interest from a particular regression specification. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. 95percent confidence intervals in square brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance of the
coefficient estimate at the 0.1, 1, and 5 percent level, respectively.




                                                                28
               F. The Effects of Intercollegiate Athletics: Wages


          ELS

          The beneficial effects of intercollegiate athletics participation continue after entering

 the workforce. In particular, all else equal, individuals who were college athletes on average

 earn statistically significantly higher wages in their mid20's than other comparable

 individuals.37

          All else equal, on average we find that males who were college athletes earn wages in

 their mid20's that are approximately 12% higher than those of other comparable males, and

 we find that females who were college athletes earn wages in their mid20's that are

 approximately 18% higher than those of other comparable females (see Table 5).38 These

 results are statistically significant.


          NELS

         Among males who earn wages in their mid20's, we find that males who were college

 athletes earn statistically significantly higher wages than all other males. In particular, among

 males, all else equal, males who were college athletes earn wages that are on average

 approximately 15% higher than all others. Among females who earn wages in their mid20's, we

 do not find a difference in wages when comparing those who were college athletes relative to all



37
   Throughout our analysis of the effects of athletics on mid20's wages, we examine survey respondents who reported
earning positive wages from employment.
38
   Note that the effect of athletics on mid20's wage is calculated by exponentiating the relevant estimate displayed
in Table 5 and subtracting one. For example, the 12.0% figure cited in Table 5 is calculated according to (e0.ll3)- 1.
Results are similar when employing an alternative transformation of the coefficient estimate to percentage effects.




                                                         29
 others (see Table 5).


           The finding that males who were college athletes earn wages in their mid20's that are on

 average statistically significantly higher relative to all other males also holds when only examining

 mid20's wages of males who played college football and college basketball relative to the mid

 20's wages of males who did not participate in intercollegiate athletics (see Table 5).

                G. The Effects of Intercollegiate Athletics  Division I and FBS Students

            We also examine the extent to which the beneficial effects of athletics extend to those

 who specifically attend FBS and other Division I institutions. Within FBS and Division I

 generally, on average we find no adverse effects of participation in intercollegiate athletics on

 various outcomes when examining both the NELS and ELS datasets. On average, we also find

 no difference in the effect of intercollegiate athletics on various outcomes when comparing

 Division I students with comparable nonDivision I students.39




39
     See Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C, E3.3C, E3.4C, N4.1C, N4.2C, E4.1C, and E4.2C.


                                                       30
                                          Table 5: Mid20's Wages
                          Dependent Variable: Logarithmic Annual Income in Mid
                             20's Conditional on Earning Employment Income

                                                                           NELS                              ELS
Males

College Athlete&                                                             15.3%                          12.0%
  Coefficient Estimate                                                     0.142***                         0.113*
  (Standard Error)                                                            (0.036)                        (0.051)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                               [0.071, 0.213]                  [0.013, 0.213]




College FB/BB Athlete&                                                       16.9%                          12.8%
  Coefficient Estimate                                                     0.156***                          0.121
  (Standard Error)                                                            (0.043)                        (0.068)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                               [0.073 , 0.240]                [0.013 , 0.255]




Females

College Athlete&                                                             8.7%                           18.5%
  Coefficient Estimate                                                       0.083                         0.170**
  (Standard Error)                                                            (0.045)                        (0.056)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                               [0.006 , 0.172]                 [0.059 , 0.280]




College BB Athlete&                                                          1.5%                           28.2%
  Coefficient Estimate                                                       0.014                         0.249**
  (Standard Error)                                                            (0.070)                        (0.096)

  [95% Confidence Interval]                                               [0.123 , 0.152]                 [0.061 , 0.436]


Notes: Summary of results of Tables N4.1C, N4.2C, E4.1C, E4.2C. Each cell corresponds to the athletic effect of interest from
a particular regression specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 95percent confidence intervals in
square brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance of the coefficient estimate at the 0.1, 1, and 5 percent level,
              &                                             (Coefficient Estimate)
respectively. denotes percent computed according to e                              1.




                                                             31
 Probability of Attending a Division I
             Institution ELS

             Among high school graduates, all else equal, we find that on average those who

participated in high school athletics are statistically significantly more likely to attend a

Division I school than comparable nonathletes. This also holds true when examining high

school football and basketball players relative to nonathletes (Appendix Tables E2.5A,

E2.6A).


             NELS

             In NELS, we also find that all else equal, high school athletes are on average

statistically significantly more likely to attend a Division I school than comparable non

athletes (Appendix Tables N2.5A, N2.6A).


 Comparisons Within Division I Cohorts

 Earning a Bachelor's Degree or
             Higher40 ELS

            Males and females
        Among comparable Division I male students, all else equal, on average the incremental
        effect of intercollegiate athletics on the likelihood that an individual will earn a
        Bachelor's degree or higher is positive and significant (Appendix Table E3.3C).
        Among comparable Division I female students, all else equal, on average there are no
        adverse effects of intercollegiate athletics on the likelihood that an individual will earn a
        Bachelor's degree or higher (Appendix Table E3.4C).
        Among comparable FBS students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse effects
        of intercollegiate athletics on the likelihood that an individual will earn a Bachelor's
        degree or higher (Appendix Tables E3.3C, E3.4C).
        Among comparable Division I students, all else equal, we find that on average college
        football players and college basketball players earn a Bachelor's degree or higher at the
        same rate as nonathletes (Appendix Tables E3.3C, E3.4C).
        Among comparable FBS students, all else equal, on average we find that college football
40
     See Table 6 for a summary of the results in this section.


                                                           32
   players and college basketball players earn a Bachelor's degree or higher at the same
   rate as nonathletes (Appendix Tables E3.3C, E3.4C).

   NELS
   Males and females
   Among comparable Division I students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse
   effects of intercollegiate athletics on the likelihood that an individual will earn a
   Bachelor's degree or higher (Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C).
   Among comparable FBS students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse effects
   of intercollegiate athletics on the likelihood that an individual will earn a Bachelor's
   degree or higher (Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C).
   Among comparable Division I students, all else equal, we find that college football players
   and college basketball players are on average more likely to earn a Bachelor's degree or
   higher than comparable nonathletes (Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C).
   Among comparable FBS students, all else equal, on average we find that college football
   players and college basketball players earn a Bachelor's degree or higher at the same
   rate as nonathletes (Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C).




                                             33
          Table 6: Earning a Bachelor's Degree or Higher
 Dependent Variable: PostSecondary Education Attained ­ Bachelor's
             Degree or Higher; Linear Probability Model
              Subpopulation:                              Division I                                FBS

                                                   NELS                ELS             NELS                ELS
Males

College Athlete (% points)                             6.1              8.5*               4.1               2.1
  Coefficient Estimate                               0.061            0.085*             0.041             0.021
  (Standard Error)                                    (0.038)           (0.036)           (0.057)           (0.052)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                       [0.014 , 0.135]   [0.015 , 0.155]   [0.071 , 0.153]   [0.081 , 0.122]


College FB/BB Athlete (% points)                      9.6*               8.5               6.3              2.5
  Coefficient Estimate                              0.096*             0.085             0.063             0.025
  (Standard Error)                                    (0.047)           (0.053)           (0.069)           (0.081)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                       [0.005 , 0.188]   [0.019 , 0.189]   [0.071 , 0.198]   [0.184 , 0.134]


Females

College Athlete (% points)                             5.5               0.6               4.8               1.2
  Coefficient Estimate                               0.055             0.006             0.048             0.012
  (Standard Error)                                    (0.041)           (0.038)           (0.058)           (0.049)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                       [0.025 , 0.136]   [0.069 , 0.081]   [0.066 , 0.162]   [0.083 , 0.107]



College BB Athlete (% points)                       14.4**              3.7               14.8              3.8
  Coefficient Estimate                              0.144**            0.037             0.148             0.038
  (Standard Error)                                    (0.048)           (0.107)           (0.083)           (0.154)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                       [0.050 , 0.238]   [0.248 , 0.173]   [0.014 , 0.310]   [0.339 , 0.263]


Notes: Summary of results of Tables N3.3C, N3.4C, E3.3C, E3.4C. Conditional on attending a non
profit 4year PSE institution. Each cell corresponds to the athletic effect of interest from a particular
regression specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 95percent confidence intervals in
square brackets. ** and * denote statistical significance of the coefficient estimate at the 1 and 5 percent
level, respectively.




                                                     34
 Wage Earners41

             ELS
             Males and females

             Among Division I students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse
             effects of intercollegiate athletics on mid20's wages (Appendix Tables E4.1C,
             E4.2C).
             Among FBS students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse
             effects of intercollegiate athletics on mid20's wages (Appendix Tables
             E4.1C, E4.2C).
             Among Division I students, all else equal, on average we find that college football
             players and college basketball players earn the same wages in their mid20's as
             nonathletes (Appendix Tables E4.1C, E4.2C).
             Among FBS students, all else equal, on average we find that college football
             players and college basketball players earn the same wages in their mid20's as
             nonathletes (Appendix Tables E4.1C, E4.2C).

             NELS

             Males
             Among Division I male students, all else equal, on average the incremental effect
             of intercollegiate athletics on mid20's wages are positive and significant.
             (Appendix Table N4.1C).
             Among FBS male students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse
             effects of intercollegiate athletics on mid20's wages (Appendix Table N4.1C).
             Among Division I male students, all else equal, on average we find that college
             football players and college basketball players earn statistically significantly higher
             wages in their mid20's than nonathletes (Appendix Table N4.1C).
             Among FBS male students, all else equal, on average we find that college football
             players and college basketball players earn statistically significantly higher wages in
             their mid 20's than nonathletes (Appendix Table N4.1C).

             Females
             Among Division I female students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse
             effects of intercollegiate athletics on mid20's wages. (Appendix Table N4.2C).
             Among FBS female students, all else equal, on average there are no adverse
             effects of intercollegiate athletics on mid20's wages (Appendix Table N4.2C).
             Among Division I female students, all else equal, on average we find that college
             basketball players earn the same wages in their mid20's as nonathletes (Appendix
             Table N4.2C).
41
     See Table 7 for a summary of the results in this section.


                                                           35
            Among FBS female students, all else equal, on average we find that college
            basketball players earn the same wages in their mid20's as nonathletes
            (Appendix Table N4.2C).

 Division I Compared to NonDivision I
        Obtaining a Bachelor's Degree or Higher

            In both NELS and ELS, all else equal, on average we find that the effect of

 participating in intercollegiate athletics on the likelihood of earning a Bachelor's degree or

 higher among Division I students is not statistically different than the effect of

 intercollegiate athletics participation on the likelihood of obtaining a Bachelor's degree or

 higher among comparable nonDivision I students.42 Likewise, all else equal, on average,

 we find no difference in the effect of intercollegiate athletics on the likelihood of earning

 a Bachelor's degree or higher when comparing students at FBS institutions with

 comparable students at nonFBS institutions.43




42
     See Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C, E3.3C, and E3.4C.
43
     See Appendix Tables N3.3C, N3.4C, E3.3C, and E3.4C.



                                                     36
                        Table 7: Mid20's Wages
        Dependent Variable: Logarithmic Annual Income in Mid20's
               Conditional on Earning Employment Income

              Subpopulation:                               Division I                              FBS

                                                    NELS               ELS            NELS                ELS
Males

College Athlete&                                    22.0%             13.3%            13.8%              7.9%
  Coefficient Estimate                             0.199**            0.125             0.129             0.076
  (Standard Error)                                   (0.065)           (0.066)          (0.090)            (0.099)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                      [0.072 , 0.325]   [0.004 , 0.254]   [0.047 , 0.305]   [0.117 , 0.269]


College FB/BB Athlete&                              27.6%             19.3%             24.0%             13.1%
  Coefficient Estimate                            0.243***            0.176           0.215**             0.123
  (Standard Error)                                   (0.069)           (0.091)          (0.079)            (0.130)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                      [0.108 , 0.379]   [0.002 , 0.354]   [0.060 , 0.370]   [0.131 , 0.377]


Females

College Athlete&                                     2.6%             11.4%             8.6%              4.5%
  Coefficient Estimate                              0.026             0.108             0.082             0.044
  (Standard Error)                                   (0.067)           (0.093)          (0.104)            (0.143)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                      [0.105 , 0.157]   [0.074 , 0.290]   [0.122 , 0.287]   [0.237 , 0.324]



College BB Athlete&                                 7.5%              22.7%            12.2%              7.1%
  Coefficient Estimate                              0.078             0.204             0.130             0.073
  (Standard Error)                                   (0.095)           (0.194)          (0.134)            (0.304)
  [95% Confidence Interval]                      [0.264 , 0.108]   [0.176 , 0.584]   [0.393 , 0.133]   [0.670 , 0.523]


Notes: Summary of results of Tables N4.1C, N4.2C, E4.1C, E4.2C. Each cell corresponds to the
athletic effect of interest from a particular regression specification. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. 95percent confidence intervals in square brackets. *** and ** denote statistical
                                                                                      &
significance of the coefficient estimate at the 0.1 and 1 percent level, respectively. denotes percent
                           (Coefficient Estimate)
computed according to e                           1.




                                                    37
        Wages

            Similarly, in both NELS and ELS, all else equal, on average we find that the effect of

 intercollegiate athletics participation at a Division I institution on mid20's wages is not statistically

 different than the effect of intercollegiate athletics participation at a nonDivision I institution.44

 Moreover, all else equal, on average we find that the effect of participating in intercollegiate athletics

 at an FBS institution on mid20's wages is not statistically different than the effect of participating in

 intercollegiate athletics at a nonFBS institution.45

            As part of these analyses, we performed numerous robustness checks, which we, and others,

 commonly use in academic research. These robustness checks include examining results on various

 demographic groups, using different functional forms, controlling for cognitive and non cognitive

 ability in various ways, using various definitions of high school athlete and college athlete, and

 including or excluding explanatory variables.


 V.         CONCLUSION

            The economics literature on human capital investment and returns to education and our

 own analysis of NELS and ELS data support the contention that participation in athletics provides

 substantial benefits to various groups, including to students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Based

 on these analyses, our primary conclusions are that there are substantial benefits to participation in

 athletics in general, and in intercollegiate athletics in particular, especially for members of some

 disadvantaged groups. Further, all else equal, on average we find no adverse effects of participation

 in intercollegiate athletics on academic or labor market outcomes for students participating in

 intercollegiate basketball and football in Division I or FBS schools. To the extent that intercollegiate



44
     See Appendix Tables N4.1C, N4.2C, E4.1C, and E4.2C.
45
     See Appendix Tables N4.1C, N4.2C, E4.1C, and E4.2C.



                                                           38
athletic scholarships provide incentives and paths to educational and athletics opportunities

otherwise limited or unavailable for such students, athletics provide a vehicle for social mobility.

Indeed, consistent with the literature on human capital development, the benefits of investments in

human capital from the various stages we studied should provide lifelong benefits. The colorful

anecdotes promoted by the media fail to capture the factual reality of the benefits of participation in

sports. The courts that act on the media anecdotes about a few athletes run the risk of

compromising or possibly destroying a proven avenue of benefit to the many.




                                                  39
                                            References Cited

Andrews, Rodney J., Jing Li, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. "Quantile Treatment Effects of College
        Quality on Earnings." Journal of Human Resources 51 (1):200-238.
Ashenfelter, Orley C., and James J. Heckman. 1976. "Measuring the Effect of an Antidiscrimination
        Program." In Evaluating the Labor-Market Effects of Social Programs, edited by Orley C.
        Ashenfelter and James Blum, 46-89. Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University Press.
Averett, Susan, and Sharon Dalessandro. 2001. "Racial and Gender Differences in the Returns to 2-Year and
        4-Year Degrees." Education Economics 9 (3):281-292.
Cunha, Flávio, and James J. Heckman. 2007a. "Identifying and Estimating the Distributions of Ex Post and
        Ex Ante Returns to Schooling." Labour Economics 14 (6):870-893.
Cunha, Flávio, and James J. Heckman. 2007b. "The Technology of Skill Formation." American Economic
        Review 97 (2):31-47.
Cunha, Flávio, and James J. Heckman. 2008. "Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of
        Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Journal of Human Resources 43 (4):738-782.
Cunha, Flávio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach. 2010. "Estimating the Technology of
        Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Econometrica 78 (3):883-931.
Haskell, Devon. 2012. "Essays on Sports Participation, Development, and Educational Outcomes." Ph. D.,
        Department of Economics, The University of Chicago.
Heckman, James J. 1975. "Estimates of a Human Capital Production Function Embedded in a Life-Cycle
        Model of a Labor Supply." In Household Production and Consumption, edited by N. E. Terleckyj,
        227-264. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Heckman, James J. 1976. "A Life-Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and Consumption." Journal of
        Political Economy 84 (4, Part 2):S11-S44.
Heckman, James J. 2017. "Expert Report of Professor James J. Heckman In Re: National Collegiate Athletic
        Association Athletic Grant-in-Aid Cap Antitrust Litigation, Case No. 14-md-2541-CW; 14-cv-
        02758-CW." Compass Lexecon. https://urldefense.com/v3/__https://www.compasslexecon.com/wp-
        content/uploads/2021/03/Professor-Heckman-Expert-Report-March-21-
        2017.pdf__;!!BpyFHLRN4TMTrA!tjsgJVzWfJRjwSAHI3_4Qxalx3d2R0WLyeS3Uo0f-
        B3FdjSgd5WzIcrZOgxHuCPdpA$. Last accessed July 28, 2021.
Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi. 2018. "Returns to Education: The
        Causal Effects of Education on Earnings, Health and Smoking." Journal of Political Economy 126
        (S1):S197-S246.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Ricardo Cossa. 2003. "Learning-by-Doing versus On-the-Job
        Training: Using Variation Induced by the EITC to Distinguish between Models of Skill Formation."
        In Designing Social Inclusion: Tools to Raise Low-End Pay and Employment in Private Enterprise,
        edited by Edmund S. Phelps. Cambridge University Press.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Christopher Taber. 1998. "Explaining Rising Wage Inequality:
        Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with Heterogeneous
        Agents." Review of Economic Dynamics 1 (1):1-58.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Christopher Taber. 1999. "Human Capital Formation and
        General Equilibrium Treatment Effects: A Study of Tax and Tuition Policy." Fiscal Studies 20
        (1):25-40.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd. 2006. "Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and
        Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond." In Handbook of the Economics of Education,
        edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Frank Welch, 307-458. Elsevier.
Heckman, James J., Colleen Loughlin, and Gregory Curtner. 2021. "Ending amateurism would be disastrous
        for student-athletes." [Online News Site]. The Hill, Last Modified March 10, 2021, accessed July
        28, 2021. https://thehill.com/opinion/education/542471-ending-amateurism-would-be-disastrous-
        for-student-athletes.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzúa. 2006. "The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
                                                     40
        Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior." Journal of Labor Economics 24
        (3):411-482.
Heckman, James J., and Edward J. Vytlacil. 2001. "Identifying the Role of Cognitive Ability in Explaining
        the Level of Change in the Return to Schooling." Review of Economics and Statistics 83 (1):1-12.
Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. "The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University of Earnings: A Discontinuity-
        Based Approach." Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4):717-724.
Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2004. "Does education improve citizenship?
        Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom." Journal of Public Economics 88
        (9):1667-1695.
Mincer, Jacob A. 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York, NY: National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Molitor, Christopher J., and Duane E. Leigh. 2005. "In-school work experience and the returns to two-year
        and four-year colleges." Economics of Education Review 24 (4):459-468.
Monk-Turner, Elizabeth. 1994. "Economic returns to community and four-year college education." The
        Journal of Socio-Economics 23 (4):441-447.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. "Human Capital Externalities in Cities." In Handbook of Regional and Urban
        Economics, edited by J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-François Thisse, 2243-2291. Amsterdam:
        Elsevier.
Oreopoulos, Philip, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2011. "Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of Schooling."
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (1):159-84.
Shulman, James L., and William G. Bowen. 2001. The Game of Life, College Sports and Educational
        Values. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                                   41
