                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EXPERIMENTALLY VALIDATING WELFARE EVALUATION
                        OF SCHOOL VOUCHERS: PART I

                                      Peter Arcidiacono
                                     Karthik Muralidharan
                                       Eun-young Shim
                                      John D. Singleton

                                      Working Paper 29077
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29077


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Joseph Altonji, Dennis Epple, Adam Kapor, Kala Krishna, Robert Miller, Christopher
Neilson, Ronni Pavan, Cristián Sánchez, Kegon Tan, Petra Todd, Christopher Walters, and
seminar participants at ASSA, ASU, the Banff Empirical Micro Workshop, Barcelona GSE,
Clemson, Cleveland FRB, Cornell, Duke, ITAM, NYU, Penn State, SOLE, SUNY Buffalo,
UCLA, UC San Diego, and Wisconsin for helpful comments and discussions. Paulo Lins
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Peter Arcidiacono, Karthik Muralidharan, Eun-young Shim, and John D. Singleton.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Experimentally Validating Welfare Evaluation of School Vouchers: Part I
Peter Arcidiacono, Karthik Muralidharan, Eun-young Shim, and John D. Singleton
NBER Working Paper No. 29077
July 2021
JEL No. D12,H42,I21,I28,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use a unique two-stage experiment that randomized access to school vouchers
across both markets and students in rural India to estimate the revealed preference value of school
choice. In the first step of the research design, we develop an empirical model of school choice
subject to liquidity and credit constraints that is estimated using data from only the control
markets. Based on this exercise, we estimate that the voucher generated welfare gains exceeding
four times the average private school's annual tuition on average to the students induced into
private schooling. The second step of the research design will validate the estimated welfare
impacts by comparing model predictions for a simulated voucher program in control markets with
the data from the treatment group. The results in this paper are based on the first step (using only
control data) and this draft serves as a pre-commitment to the model estimates and predictions
before examining the experimental data.

Peter Arcidiacono                                Eun-young Shim
Department of Economics                          Amazon
201A Social Sciences Building                    eunyoung.shim@gmail.com
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708                                 John D. Singleton
and NBER                                         University of Rochester
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu                           Department of Economics
                                                 Harkness Hall
Karthik Muralidharan                             P.O. Box 270156
Department of Economics, 0508                    Rochester, NY 14627
University of California, San Diego              john.singleton@rochester.edu
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu
1        Introduction

Governments routinely provide in-kind benefits to citizens, including publicly-provided schooling,
health care, and food assistance (Currie and Gahvari, 2008). A central question in public economics
is the relative efficiency of in-kind provision versus providing beneficiaries with a voucher to purchase
the same goods or services on the open market and there is a large and growing empirical literature
studying this question across sectors and contexts.1 These studies typically evaluate the impact of
vouchers on sector-specific outcomes, such as test scores or food consumption and nutrition. This
focus may reflect the priorities of paternalistic taxpayers and policy makers who care about the
most cost-effective way to achieve outcomes of interest.
        Yet, this default approach ignores the question of what program beneficiaries themselves may
prefer. For instance, vouchers may increase beneficiary welfare by increasing choice and improving
match quality on unobserved outcomes. This implies that policy evaluations of voucher programs
should account for both impacts on those outcomes that a paternalistic policy maker may care
about as well as on the welfare of program beneficiaries. More generally, beneficiary valuation of
publicly-provided benefits should be a key parameter for policy evaluation, but is often ignored in
the impact evaluation literature, in large part because it is not easy to estimate.2
        In this paper, we complement an existing evaluation of the test score impacts of private school
vouchers in rural India by also quantifying program effects on welfare based on revealed preference.
The data are drawn from the Andhra Pradesh School Choice project, a randomized controlled trial
conducted in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh (AP) whose test score impacts are reported in
Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015). Our research design leverages the project's two-stage
randomization across both markets and individuals: After eliciting initial interest in participation,
the experiment randomized villages (markets) into treatment and control groups. The program
then paid the tuition and fees at private schools for randomly-selected students in the treatment
villages for the duration of primary school. The data collected for households and schools that were
randomized out of the program at the village-level thus creates a control sample uncontaminated
by the voucher offers. We use this market-level randomization to pursue a research design aimed
at credibly validating the estimated welfare impacts of private school vouchers.
        In the first step of our research design, we estimate empirical models of school choice solely
using control group data from the trial (i.e. from villages randomized-out in the first stage). We
consider two classes of discrete choice demand models. The first are random coefficient-style logit
    1
    Illustrative examples include Hastings and Shapiro (2018) and Banerjee et al. (2021) on food stamps or vouchers.
    2
    For instance, in their work on distributional national accounts, Piketty et al. (2018) value public goods at the
cost of providing them because there is no easy way of estimating their value.




                                                         1
models that are standard for welfare analysis in the industrial organization literature (Berry et al.,
1995; Nevo, 2001; Petrin, 2002). These models have been applied to several other contexts of
school choice (e.g. Neilson 2013; Carneiro et al. 2016; Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2017a). Second, we
develop an empirical model that incorporates a constraint on households' ability-to-pay for private
schooling absent a voucher. The constraint reflects the reality that liquidity and access to credit are
often limited in low-income settings, such as rural India.3 Neglecting the influence of ability-to-pay
on choice can have serious consequences for assessing welfare gains and for successfully predicting
voucher take-up, especially among poor or lower wealth households.
    In the research design's planned second step, we will use the treatment arm of the voucher trial
to experimentally validate the empirical models. Specifically, we simulate a voucher trial in the
models that mimics the AP School Choice project's offer to treated households. The simulation
generates predictions for take-up of the voucher that we will compare with analogous moments to
be computed directly from the treatment village data. We will also estimate treated households'
revealed preferences in a hypothesis testing framework to understand the sources of model mis-
specification. These comparisons and tests to come will allow us to validate the choice models
in terms of how well they reproduce experimentally-generated choice patterns. We will use the
validated model to evaluate the voucher program implemented by the AP School Choice project
and a counterfactual universal voucher in welfare terms.4
    In this paper, we present results from the first step of the research design and predictions for
the experimental validation. Estimates of the model that allows for credit constraints suggest
that households, particularly those targeted by the AP project's voucher eligibility rules, lack the
ability to pay for private schooling. We estimate that around 25% of households who attend a
government school in the control markets are unable to pay for (and hence choose) any private
school in their village. This constraint in turn has significant implications for demand and for
estimates of willingness-to-pay. For instance, while the two classes of models estimate similar pref-
erences for school quality and English instruction among wealthier and better educated households,
the choice models that neglect differences in ability-to-pay assign less willingness-to-pay for these
characteristics among asset-poor households. Our baseline constrained choice model estimates
willingness-to-pay for school value-added among this group that is around 50% greater on average.
    Simulations of the models show aggregate welfare gains from the AP project voucher from both
   3
     For instance, Tarozzi et al. (2014), present experimental evidence that micro consumer-loans substantially raised
ownership and use of insecticide-treated bednets in rural India, while demand was instead highly elastic when house-
holds had to pay upfront. Other evidence for the salience of credit constraints from similar contexts includes Rosen-
zweig and Wolpin (1993); Townsend (1994); Banerjee and Duflo (2014). In our data, 41% of households whose child
attends a government school cite "economic reasons" as the explanation for their choice.
   4
     The experimentally-validated demand model will also allow us to study the incidence and fiscal impacts of
alternative targeting rules.


                                                          2
classes of models.5 However, the models differ significantly in the estimated magnitude of the wel-
fare gains from the program. The difference stems from compliers: In the standard unconstrained
demand models, those induced into private schooling by the offer value the voucher at a little more
than half of its expected cost (and less than always takers). This contrasts sharply with the ability-
to-pay models, wherein those constrained may value the voucher by more than its consumption
equivalent. And this is what we find: in the baseline constrained model, those induced into private
schooling realize higher consumer surplus gains on average than the inframarginal students. We
estimate that the AP project voucher generated average welfare value to compliers over four times
the average private school's annual tuition (or about 33% of median annual expenditure per capita).
       Consistent with marginal households' greater willingness-to-pay, however, the ability-to-pay
constrained models also predict that more households will comply with the experimental voucher
offer. We find that the baseline ability-to-pay constrained model predicts that 63% of treated
students will use the voucher to attend a private school. The unconstrained demand models,
in contrast, predict take-up of around 10 percentage points less. This moment is a key point
for comparison in the research design's second step. With respect to aggregate welfare, these
differences regarding both compliance and compliers' valuations mean that the baseline model with
ability-to-pay constraints estimates around an 80% larger improvement in aggregate welfare.
       Our application contributes to a growing literature that uses experimental data to test and
validate structural econometric models (e.g. Wise 1985; Todd and Wolpin 2006).6 A longstanding
criticism of structural models in policy analysis is lack of credible identification of parameters of
interest. LaLonde (1986), for example, showed that model-based estimates of training program im-
pacts derived from observational data could not reliably reproduce experimental treatment effects.
Schorfheide and Wolpin (2012, 2016) propose that holdout samples, wherein researchers reserve
a portion of the available data (or use forthcoming data) for external validation of a model, can
potentially provide corrective incentives that guard against "structural data-mining." Nonetheless,
this approach, which trades off efficiency against credibility, has rarely been taken by structural
researchers.7
   5
      These aggregate welfare gains are driven primarily by the much lower cost per student in private schools, which
is on average 20-25% of the cost per student in government schools. Because the expected cost of each voucher is
much lower than average per student expenditures on government schools, inducing more households to switch to
private schools generates greater reductions in the social cost of education. The large fiscal externality more than
offsets the deadweight loss of raising tax revenue to finance vouchers for inframarginal always takers even under a
universal non-targeted voucher program.
    6
      There is also a related body of work using experimental data to fit structural models, e.g. Attanasio et al. (2012);
Lagakos et al. (2017); Salz and Vespa (2017). See Galiani and Pantano (2021) for a valuable recent summary and
discussion of combining random (or quasi-random) variation with structural modeling.
    7
      An important example is Misra and Nair (2011), who use a structural model of salesperson effort to provide
recommendations for designing compensation contracts. The firm then implemented these suggestions, permitting
validation of the model against the observed responses.


                                                            3
       Our research design, which combines the validation step with data from a randomized control
trial, makes two design choices: First, we hold out all of the treatment data from the estimation.
While alternative choices might combine validation with using some experimentally-induced varia-
tion (by holding out just a portion of the treatment data or instead holding out the control data),
our approach aims to test the performance of model-based approaches to welfare analysis with
the kind of observational data environment frequently confronted in applied policy analysis.8 The
second design choice is pre-commitment to the model estimates and the predictions generated in
the first step (i.e. using only control data) and presented in this paper. This pre-commitment is to
prevent model re-fitting ex post to the experimental validation to come.9
       The control data environment of the first research step presents two main challenges to esti-
mating willingness-to-pay for a private school voucher. These data include household-level survey
information on each sampled child's primary school, household and student socio-demographic
characteristics, as well as data characterizing the available school alternatives ­ private and govern-
mental ­ in each village. The data also include geocoded school and household locations. The first
challenge is ubiquitous to identifying demand in observational settings: the simultaneity of supply
and demand. In discrete choice frameworks, this is frequently represented by choice alternative-
specific characteristics that remain unobserved to the econometrician but which are known to firms
when making pricing and other decisions. Failing to properly account for the role of these unob-
served characteristics is liable to lead to own-price elasticities that are too inelastic. As this bias
would also translate into underpredictions for take-up of the voucher offer, this challenge represents
a significant threat to our research design. Recent advances in other school choice contexts leverage
quasi-experimental variation or policy changes to help overcome this endogeneity (Neilson, 2013;
Allende S.C., 2019). In contrast, we rely on instrumental variable strategies that aim to isolate
exogenous variation in private schools' mark-ups (e.g. Berry et al. 1995; Hausman 1996). While we
show that the instruments are important for producing plausible demand elasticities, the validity
of these instruments rests on strong assumptions. One contribution of this paper is thus testing
the ability of these instruments to reproduce experimentally-generated elasticities.
       The second challenge is that households in this setting may likely face unobserved credit and
liquidity constraints on their choice of school. Although government schools are tuition-free (and
   8
      For example, Duflo et al. (2012), who study incentives to reduce teacher absence in India, use the treatment data
from a randomized control trial for estimation and use the control data for model validation. Galiani et al. (2015)
take advantage of multiple treatment arms to use randomized variation for both estimation and validation of a model
of neighborhood choice. Our choice is similar to Keane and Wolpin (2007), who hold out a sample "that faces a policy
regime well outside the support of the data" from the estimation of a female life-cycle model to provide confidence
in its forecasts for policy changes.
    9
      In this respect, our approach is similar to Pathak and Shi (2017), who validate school choice models fit prior to
a policy change in Boston.



                                                          4
provide free mid-day meals), private schools are fee-charging, with average annual tuition and
fees corresponding to over 7% of median per capita consumption. Such constraints may imply
that some households effectively do not have the option to choose private schooling. While the
first class of models assume that all private schools are available to households, the constrained
model we develop instead models ability-to-pay as a latent stochastic variable that depends on
observed asset information. This structure generates expressions for the probability that each
private school belongs to a given household's choice set, which is decreasing in its tuition. To
support identification, we apply the exclusion restriction that household assets are unrelated to
differences in indirect utilities between schools. Though preferences are allowed to depend on
correlated characteristics (e.g. parental education), this assumption may be overly strong and the
experimental validation is a key research step in assessing the model's fitness and validity. The
constrained model is in the spirit of other applications where choice sets are not observed in the
data (e.g. Ben-Akiva and Boccara 1995; Barseghyan et al. 2021) and connects with prior work that
similarly quantifies the salience of credit constraints using choice models (Cameron and Heckman,
2001; Keane and Wolpin, 2001; Gregory, 2017).
       Previous work on voucher programs, including the AP School Choice project, has focused mainly
on impacts on student outcomes (Epple et al., 2017).10 Our focus on complementing the test-score
impacts reported in Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) by also evaluating program's welfare
impacts connects with the design of efficient school choice mechanisms (e.g. Abdulkadiroglu and
S¨
 onmez 2003; Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2015) and relates with prior work that studies school preferences
(e.g. Hastings et al. 2005; Rothstein 2006; Bayer et al. 2007; Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2017a).11 How
and why households choose schools is key to understanding incentives in education markets at scale
(MacLeod and Urquiola, 2013, 2015). In this regard, our focus on the role of liquidity and credit
constraints complements prior empirical work on the equilibrium effects of lower income students'
responsiveness to value-added (Bau, 2017) and to information (Andrabi et al., 2017a; Allende S.C.
et al., 2019) when choosing schools.
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the back-
ground and data, collected from AP School Choice project. In Section 3, we describe our empirical
model of constrained primary school choice in detail. Identification and the set of specifications
  10
     Evidence from international settings tends to show positive effects, including in the longer run (e.g. Angrist
et al. 2006), while recent U.S.-based evidence reveals strikingly negative impacts on students recieving a voucher to
attend private school (e.g. Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2017b and Mills and Wolf 2017). Milwaukee's voucher program has
produced evidence of positive effects in the past (Rouse, 1998). Epple et al. (2017) summarize also the international
and U.S. evidence regarding spillover effects, including via competition, on non-recipients.
  11
     A related connection is to work that uses housing prices to estimate willingness-to-pay for local public goods, in-
cluding schools. Cellini et al. (2010), for example, find evidence from narrowly-decided bond referendums in California
that such investments raise local housing prices. This unmet willingness-to-pay is indicative of underinvestment.



                                                           5
we estimate are discussed in Section 4. In Section 5, we present the results, which include model
estimates, fit, and welfare calculations. We discuss the experimental validation and present model
predictions for treated students' take-up of the voucher in Section 6. We conclude in Section 7.


2         The Andhra Pradesh School Choice Project

Our data are drawn from a randomized controlled trial conducted in 180 villages in the Indian
state of Andhra Pradesh (AP) beginning in 2008. The AP School Choice project was designed to
study the impact of school vouchers on student learning outcomes at both the student and market
level. Students randomized into treatment were offered a voucher covering the costs of tuition
and associated fees or expenses (e.g. books and uniforms) at private schools in their village for
the duration of primary schooling (grades one through five). Expenses for transportation were not
covered by the voucher. Villages selected for the project had to have at least one private school that
agreed to participate in the project. Participation was voluntary at the school level, but schools
were not allowed to screen or selectively admit voucher students.12 The voucher value was set at
around the 90th percentile of the fee distribution of private schools in the study sample, and was
paid directly to schools' bank accounts.
         Our research design uses the AP School Choice project's two-stage randomization. At baseline,
parents of eligible students were invited to apply for the program with the knowledge that the
voucher would be allocated by lottery and that applying would not guarantee receipt. The program
was targeted to students likely to otherwise attend government schools. After eliciting interest,
the project then randomized villages into treatment and control markets. Applicant households
in treatment villages were then randomized into or out of the voucher treatment group. This
double randomization design was important for estimating spillover effects on non-participants
in the program (Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2015). For this paper, the data collection for
households and schools that were randomized out at the village-level provides a control group free of
contamination from the experimental treatment. We use the data from the 90 control markets to fit
empirical models of school choice, while we use the exogenous variation induced by the experiment
to validate those models (and the estimated welfare impacts).
         The project covered two cohorts: a cohort of first graders who had already chosen their primary
school at baseline and a younger cohort, whom we term kindergartners, that chose their school
after the baseline survey. We use both cohorts' choices in estimation, but focus on the kindergarten
cohort for the validation of the empirical models because this is the cohort where, in the treatment
    12
    The design stipulated that, similar to charter schools in the US, lotteries would be held to allocate places in
oversubscribed schools. In practice, all applicants were accepted.


                                                        6
condition, students make their initial primary school choices with the AP project voucher.13 The
project attempted to track all students who applied for a voucher, but only representative samples
of those who did not or who were not eligible for the voucher at the start of the project.14 We also
do not always observe a choice of primary school for kindergarten students in the control sample
due to attrition. We therefore re-weight households to account for these elements of the project's
sampling design. We discuss the sample and weighting in expanded detail in Appendix A.


2.1      Sample and Data Summaries

Our estimation sample, drawn solely from the control data, contains detailed information for 4,251
households and 645 primary schools.15 Households were surveyed at baseline, while schools were
surveyed beginning the first year of the program. The surveys elicited rich information important
for modeling school choice, including the demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of students
and households as well as data regarding each school's amenities, tuition and fees, characteristics
of teachers, curriculum, and finances.16 Geographic GPS locations were also collected, facilitating
the mapping of travel distances between households and schools in their village. Students were
assessed at baseline and during the third and fourth years of the program.
       Private schooling has an aggregate market share of 57% across the project villages.17 This
high penetration largely reflects the fact that the AP School Choice project was conducted only in
villages that had at least one private school. The unconditional private school market share among
primary school-going students in AP in 2008 was around 33% (ASER, 2018).
       Students attending private schools come from higher socioeconomic status (SES) households on
average than those attending government schools (Table 1). They are more likely to have parents
who have both completed primary school (37% vs 9%), and have at least one parent who has
completed secondary school (31% vs 5%). They are also less likely to have parents who both
work as laborers (16% vs 42%). Their households are also wealthier on average as measured by
asset ownership. Private schools students are more likely to live in a pucca (brick or stone) house,
  13
      The treated first graders, on the other hand, chose whether or not to use the voucher to switch from their baseline
primary school for the next grade.
   14
      Kindergartners were eligible for the AP voucher if they were attending an Anganwadi (government daycare).
First graders were eligible if they were attending a government primary school. One limitation of the data is that
whether a first grader attended an Anganwadi (i.e. would've been eligible for the voucher at the time of their primary
school choice ) is not known. Because our models of primary school choice control for AP voucher eligibility, we treat
it as a latent type for first grader observations in the estimation.
   15
      We restrict the sample to kindergarten students at least four and at most seven years of age at baseline and to
first grade students at least five and at most eight.
   16
      When tuition and fees are not observed in the initial survey, we use subsequent survey years to impute them
based on the school's percentile in the overall distribution.
   17
      This figure is obtained from 2008 survey data based on those households with children in the sample age range
living in villages with at least one private school in the AP project districts (ASER, 2018).



                                                           7
have a water facility in the home, and to have a household toilet. These differences in wealth are
suggestive of differences in ability-to-pay for private schooling. Students attending private schools
also outperform students attending government schools on baseline exams. Students attending
private schools score three fifths of a standard deviation above the government school student
average scores in math.

                                       Table 1: Characteristics of Households
                                                                      Attend                            Average
                                                               Government Private
               Female                                                             0.52         0.46          0.48
               Lower caste                                                        0.32         0.13          0.21
               Muslim                                                             0.06         0.11          0.08
               # siblings                                                         2.35         2.25          2.29
               Older sibling in gov't school                                      0.50         0.13          0.29
               Both parents completed primary school                              0.09         0.37          0.25
                1 parent completed secondary                                      0.05         0.31          0.20
               Both parents laborers                                              0.42         0.16          0.27
               Owns home                                                          0.74         0.72          0.73
               Pucca house                                                        0.72         0.92          0.84
               Water facility in home                                             0.41         0.62          0.53
               Household toilet                                                   0.26         0.61          0.46
               Asset level < 3                                                    0.39         0.12          0.23
               Asset level = 3                                                    0.28         0.21          0.24
               Asset level = 4                                                    0.19         0.30          0.26
               Asset level > 4                                                    0.13         0.36          0.26
               Math score                                                        -0.01         0.61          0.35
               N                                                                 3,056        1,195         4,251
               Notes : Table reports population average characteristics of households stratified by sector of
               school choice. Asset level refers to total of six possible asset indicators (owns home, pucca house,
               2 covered rooms in home, water facility in home, household toilet, owns land)



      Table 2 presents comparisons of key characteristics of government and private schools in our
sample. The total tuition and fees for attending government schools is essentially zero, but av-
erages 1,800 Rs. per year for private schools. For comparison, median household expenditure in
comparable rural villages (with a private school) of Andhra Pradesh is around 86,000 Rs. (24,000
per capita) per the 2011-12 India Human Development survey. Thus, the average private school's
tuition would account for over 7% of per-capita consumption for the median household, and an
even higher share for poorer households. There is also considerable variation across private schools
in tuition (the sample standard deviation is about 1,000 Rs.). English medium private schools are
around 1,000 Rs. more expensive on average.18
 18
      Appendix Table A20 provides additional information about the distribution of characteristics among private



                                                                8
    Government and private schools also differ in terms of amenities and teacher characteristics. A
larger share of government schools are pucca structures and nearly all include a library, whereas a
greater share of private schools have a functioning toilet and a staffroom for teachers. Government
schools also provide mid-day meals for students, which private schools do not. A much greater
share of teachers in government schools have a bachelor's degree or a formal teacher training
credential. Private school teachers, on the other hand, are more likely to be female, from the
village, and present in the classroom during enumerator visits. Private schools also have less multi-
class teaching. Government school teacher salaries are also much higher (over 5 times greater)
than those of private schools. Overall, government schools have better qualified and paid teachers;
whereas private schools hire more teachers and have greater teacher effort.
    Government and private schools likewise differ in instructional medium and subjects taught.
While nearly all government schools teach in the local language (Telugu), about 61% of private
schools feature instruction in English. Moreover, many private schools teach Hindi and computer
skills (whereas few government schools do). Though not shown in the table, private schools also
have a longer school year (2 weeks additional instructional time) and a longer school day (45
minutes more per day). Further, there are significant differences in allocation of instruction time
with private schools spending less time on math and Telugu and using the extra time to teach
additional subjects (see Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) for details).
    In addition to the school characteristics gathered by project enumerators, Table 2 compares
government and private schools in terms of school value-added ­ a proxy for schools' human cap-
ital return. We estimate school value-added using baseline and two follow-up scores in math.19
Appendix B provides full details regarding the estimation of value-added. The table shows that
government schools on average are around 0.05 standard deviations (on the student test score
distribution) below average, while average private school value-added is 0.06 standard deviations
above average. Notably, the differences in value-added between private and government schools on
average in Table 2 are considerably narrower than the average differences in students' test scores
(shown in Table 1). In addition, Appendix Table A20 shows that, while English instruction, facili-
ties, and teacher qualifications tend to be positively related to tuition, value-added is very weakly
correlated with tuition among private schools.
schools.
  19
     We use math scores so as not to confound school quality with differences across schools in language of instruction.




                                                           9
         Table 2: Characteristics of Primary Schools
                                        Government     Private
Tuition and fees (Rs.)                         1.52     1,814
English medium                                 0.02      0.61
Mid-day meals                                  0.99      0.04
Full pucca building                            0.90      0.48
Library                                        0.94      0.77
Functioning toilet                             0.64      0.82
Separate toilet for girls                      0.31      0.59
Staffroom for teachers                         0.20      0.70
Has secondary school                              0      0.25
Average teacher salary (Rs. / month)         13,051     1,612
Multi-class teaching                           0.65      0.27
Pupil-teacher ratio                           26.05     16.07
Share teachers absent                          0.23      0.10
Share teachers with BA                         0.78      0.57
Share teachers with formal credential          0.89      0.16
Share teachers female                          0.53      0.71
Share teachers from village                    0.23      0.47
Offers Hindi                                      0      0.42
Teaches computer skills                        0.01      0.13
School value-added                            -0.05      0.06
N                                               352       293




                             10
3         Empirical Models

We describe our empirical models of household school choice in this section. In our choice models,
we treat households, which consist of at least one primary school aged child, as unitary decision
makers. As private schools charge tuition and fees, households must weigh the expected benefits of
private school attendance against foregone consumption. Such benefits potentially include a more
attractive combination of school amenities as well as human capital gains.
         We compare the estimates and predictions for two classes of choice models. In the first, we ex-
plicitly model the the influence of an ability-to-pay constraint on choice. In relaxing this constraint,
a private school voucher thereby potentially generates welfare benefits by expanding households'
choice sets. We compare this model class, which for identification places structure on how observed
measures of household wealth influence choices, with flexible logit demand models that are similar
to models of school choice that have been applied in other contexts (e.g. Neilson 2013; Carneiro
et al. 2016; Pathak and Shi 2017; Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2017a).


3.1        Ability-to-Pay Constrained Choice

In selecting a primary school, households weigh the utility of the school alternatives that belong to
their village.20 This set is denoted by Vi for household i. However, the tuition and fees may exceed
the household's ability-to-pay, captured in the model through a constraint on their choice problem:


                                 max Uij  Uij       j  Vi where pj , pj  Yi                                    (1)
                                 j Vi


For any school, j , the household's consumption and tuition and fees, denoted pj , must not exceed
the household's ability-to-pay, which we denote by Yi . For government schools, pj is zero (or nearly
so). The ability-to-pay constraint represents the combination of a household's income and any
liquid wealth, such as accumulated savings, with their ability to borrow against future income to
finance private schooling.21
         Households rank the available schooling alternatives according to an indirect utility function.
Letting  represent household i's marginal utility of consumption, the indirect utility to household
i of school choice j can be written as:


                                Uij = (yi - pj ) + Xj i + i ln Dij + j +         ij                            (2)
    20
     Primary schooling is compulsory in this setting, so we do not model the choice of whether to send the child to
school or not.
  21
     This "reduced-form" constraint also captures the possibility of subsistence constraints or that households may
be unable to commit to the schedule of private school tuition and fees due to uncertain income streams.



                                                        11
Dij is the distance between school j and household i's home, while Xj represents school char-
acteristics, such as whether a school is government or private, is English medium, the facilities,
characteristics or the quality of teachers, and other school amenities observed in the data. Among
these is school j 's value-added.22 j is regarded as an index of commonly-valued amenities of school
j that remain unobserved to the econometrician.                 ij   represents idiosyncratic preferences that drive
school choice and is assumed to follow a Type 1 extreme value distribution.
       We subscript the parameters in equation (2) by i to denote their dependence on observed
household characteristics, Wi :
                                                                              
                                           i             1                2
                                               =             +                 Wi
                                           i             1                2

Wi includes demographics, such as gender, caste, religion, as well as parental education. These
characteristics mediate the valuation households place on school amenities, capturing systematic
heterogeneity across households in willingness-to-pay. This allows, for instance, that better edu-
cated households may place greater value on English instruction or on test score value-added.23
       A fundamental empirical challenge for estimating the choice problem described by equation
(1) is that households' ability-to-pay, Yi , is inherently not contained in the data. This introduces
unobserved heterogeneity across households in choice sets. Mis-specifying households' choice of
school as unconstrained is liable to bias estimates of willingness-to-pay and underestimate the
gains of a voucher. As a result, we specify latent ability-to-pay as a function of observed household
wealth factors, given by:
                                                   ln Yi = Ii  + i                                                   (3)

In this equation, the household's log ability-to-pay at the time of choosing a primary school depends
on the wealth factors, Ii , and unobservable household-specific i . We maintain the assumption that
 is distributed normally and independent of the choice shocks. We discuss the identification of this
model, which relies in part on placing structure on the way that observed household characteristics
influence choice patterns, in the next section.
  22
     The estimation of school value-added assumes that it is common across all students. Note, however, that this does
not imply that the choice models assume that households believe that value-added is homogeneous. The parameters
of the choice models will capture systematic differences in both preferences over school attributes as well as in beliefs
or information about those attributes.
  23
     We do not include measures of students' abilities in the models. This is due mainly to data limitations (the
baseline test scores collected for first graders are endogeneous to their choice), but we expect any bias from this
to be limited given the characteristics that are included (e.g. parental education). There is also limited evidence
that parents have good information about the abilities of their children (e.g. Dizon-Ross 2019). In any case, the
experimental validation will allow us to test for ability sorting as a source of mis-specification, as discussed further
in Section 5.



                                                           12
3.2      Logit Demand

We compare the latent ability-to-pay model with more familiar logit demand models of school
choice. In this class of models, the underlying choice problem is unconstrained ­ households are
able to choose from any primary school in their village:


                                                   max Uij  Uij                                           (4)
                                                    j Vi


where Uij again represents i's indirect utility from attending school j :


                                    Uij = -i pj + Xj i + i ln Dij + j +            ij



While similar, this indirect utility differs from the ability-to-pay constrained model in two ways.
First, the function allows for heterogeneity across households in their sensitivity to higher tuition
and fees. In the specifications we estimate, for example, we allow this coefficient to depend on
observed indicators of household wealth. Second, the logit demand models accommodate greater
flexibility in how households value school characteristics. We compare two alternative specifications
for preference heterogeneity, described below.


3.2.1      Clustered Logit

The first logit demand model that we estimate, which we term the clustered logit, takes a semi-
parametric approach to modeling preference heterogeneity. The model is similar to the approach
taken in Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017a) to estimating household preferences over New York high
schools.
      We bin the households in the dataset into M groups of observably similar households based on
their characteristics (e.g. demographics, assets, and parental variables). The clustered multinomial
logit model then allows the preferences for school characteristics to differ for each group:


                               Uij = -(Ii )pj + Xj m(i) + m(i) ln Dij + j +             ij                (5)


where Uij is the indirect utility of school j for household i, a member of group m. The model
flexibly captures heterogeneity in preferences across households by allowing each group m to have
its own  and  vector.24 Under the assumption that observably similar households also have
correlated unobserved characteristics, this approach to modeling demand also absorbs unobserved
heterogeneity that influences choice patterns.
 24
      We make the restriction that the variance scale of the choice shocks is the same across clusters.


                                                           13
    To limit the computational demands of estimating this model and to guard against overfitting,
we use k-means to group the households into a finite number of clusters, chosen using the AIC
criterion which adjusts the maximized likelihood for degrees of freedom.


3.2.2   Random Coefficient Logit

We also estimate random coefficient models similar to classic demand estimation applications (e.g.
Berry et al. 1995; Nevo 2001; Petrin 2002) and the models of school choice in Neilson (2013) and
Carneiro et al. (2016).
    Like the ability-to-pay constrained model, the random coefficient model specifies a parametric
relationship between observed household characteristics and preferences over non-tuition school
amenities:                                                     
                                    i           1          2
                                        =           +           Wi
                                    i           1          2

where Wi includes observed household characteristics. However, the random coefficient model we
estimate includes an additional stochastic component on household preferences for private schooling.
        P indicate the marginal utility to household i of attending private school, this parameter
Letting i
can be expressed as:
                                        P   P   P
                                        i = 1 + 2 Wi + i                                          (6)

i is an unobserved, continuous type that follows a mean-zero normal distribution. This addi-
tional stochastic term captures unobserved heterogeneity in preferences for private schooling across
households


4    Identification and Estimation

This section discusses identification and estimation of the empirical models. For identifying house-
holds' willingesses-to-pay, we face a challenge commonplace to differentiated demand applications
using observational data: unobserved school quality, j . We describe the approach we take, which
includes instruments for tuition, in the first subsection. In the second subsection, we discuss em-
pirically separating the effect of ability-to-pay on choice from willingness-to-pay in the constrained
model. We outline the details of the empirical specifications and estimation in the third subsection.




                                                 14
4.1    Instrumenting for Private School Tuition and Fees

As there may remain qualities that differentiate schools that remain unobserved, we instrument for
private school tuition and fees as part of a control function approach (Petrin and Train, 2010).25
This strategy regresses tuition and fees on school characteristics and a set of instruments in a "first
stage." The residuals plus a random effect term, which jointly represent the unobserved school
characteristic, j , are then included in the indirect utility function. This is described in expanded
detail in the Appendix.
    To implement this, we assume that the tuition and fees, pj , at private school j at time t are
given by:
                                            pj = Xj  + f (Zj ) + µj                                            (7)

where Xj are observed school characteristics (including the estimated value-added) and Zj are
instruments for tuition and fees. µj represents the unobserved school characteristics that influence
school tuition-setting, where E [j µj ] > 0. This approach maintains that µj is uncorrelated with pj
conditional on Xj and Zj . Identification also requires that Zj only influences school choice through
the impact on private schools' setting of tuition and fees.
    We use two instruments. First, assuming Bertrand-Nash competition and that non-tuition
school characteristics are fixed, each private school's location in "product space" provides an ex-
ogenous source of variation in mark-ups (Berry et al., 1995). We thus total the characteristics
of other schools in the village for each private school, e.g. the number of other English-medium
schools. For efficiency, however, we use factor analysis to construct a summary measure from these
totals as the first instrumental variable.26 The second instrument we use in our baseline speci-
fications uses the spatial environment to isolate exogenous cost differences across private schools
(Hausman, 1996; Nevo, 2001). We construct the predicted tuition for each private school based on
the average tuition chosen by similar private schools that are located in other villages. In imple-
mentation, we match private schools within medium of instruction and focus on other schools not
in nearby villages.27 The "first stage" F statistic with these instrumental variables, reported in
Appendix Table A19, is 12.51.
  25
     We take a control function approach as the sampling design prevents us from computing market shares for all
schools.
  26
     Specifically, we use the first underlying factor constructed from the standard "BLP" instruments. This is to
address the well-known weakness of these instruments when used simultaneously (e.g. Gandhi and Houde 2016).
  27
     This is to minimize the confounding influence of spatially-correlated demand shocks. As an alternative to the
"Hausman" predicted tuition instrument, we also estimate models that include the product space IV and a cost index
instrument that we construct from private schools' reported costs. The disadvantage of the cost index IV is that it
does not vary across private schools in the same village. Appendix Table A23 compares key estimates and predictions
obtained with the different sets of instruments.




                                                        15
4.2   Identification of Ability-to-Pay

The constrained choice model that we estimate models primary school choice as subject to house-
holds' ability-to-pay. In this subsection, we discuss restrictions placed on how observed character-
istics of households influence choice patterns that help identify the effect of this constraint.
   It is helpful to consider the probability that a household can afford to attend private school j 
in their village but not j  + 1, whose tuition exceeds their ability-to-pay (where j  indexes schools
in the village in ascending order of tuition and fees). Under the maintained assumptions, this
probability can be expressed as:


                             ij  = P (pj   Yi < pj  +1 )
                                         ln pj  +1 - Ii        ln pj  - Ii 
                                   = (                   ) - (              )
                                                                     

This expression highlights that two data elements shift these state probabilities across households:
First, some variation arises from differences in the tuition and fees distribution across villages.
Second, Ii , the wealth factors in equation (3), will influence the likelihood a household is unable-to-
pay for a given private school. As a result, it is important that Ii and Wi do not overlap completely
to empirically separate the effect of ability-to-pay on choice behavior from that of willingness-to-pay.
   For this reason, we apply the following exclusion restriction: we assume that assets (such
as home ownership) are ability-to-pay factors that, all else equal, do not shift preferences across
schools. These variables thus only enter Ii , being used exclusively to proxy for household wealth and
ability to borrow (Filmer and Pritchett, 2001). In practice, we use the first principal factor obtained
from the six household assets in our data. Intuitively, this restriction ascribes differences in choice
patterns between households that are similar in their non-asset characteristics (e.g. demographics
and parental education) but who differ in assets to differences in ability-to-pay. In our baseline
specification, demographics and parental education only shift preferences; however, we estimate
several alternative specifications, outlined in the next subsection, for sensitivity checks. Our baseline
specification allows both preferences and ability-to-pay to depend on AP voucher eligibility and the
student's number of siblings, a measure of household size.


4.3   Estimation and Specifications

This subsection describes the estimation of the models, including specification details. For all of
the models, Xj includes whether a school is private or not, the tuition and fees, whether English




                                                    16
medium, school value-added, whether Hindi is offered, and facility and teacher characteristics.28
For the latter two, we use first principal factors, one for the facility variables and one each for
teaching quality (e.g. multi-class) and teacher characteristics (e.g. share female) to keep the
models parsimonious. In addition to travel distance, we include an indicator for whether a school
is the closest government school to the household in all of the models.
       On the household side, we model heterogeneity in preferences according to whether the student
is female, lower caste, Muslim, parental education attainment, whether an older sibling attends
government school, and their number of siblings. We also allow for preference heterogeneity based
on whether the student was eligible for the AP program voucher in all models. Kindergartners
were eligible if attending a government daycare facility (Anganwadi) at baseline, but this variable
is unknown for students in the first grade cohort. To address this, we treat their eligibility as a latent
variable. We allow the probability of eligibility to depend on observed household characteristics and
use the EM algorithm for estimation. Appendix D presents the likelihood functions and describes
the estimation in greater detail, while Appendix Table A22 summarizes the school characteristics
and heterogeneity in the baseline model specifications.
       We focus on comparing the estimates and predictions for three baseline choice models: the
clustered logit, a random coefficient demand model, and the ability-to-pay constrained choice model.
The clustered logit model bases groupings of households on principal factor similarity using k-
means, allowing preference parameters to be group-specific. This algorithm for grouping households
treats all of the observed household information (i.e. demographics, parental education, as well as
household assets) symmetrically. The number of groups that minimizes the AIC criterion is 51. For
the clustered and random coefficient models, we specify (Ii ) as a function of discrete household
asset levels (e.g. household owns three assets, etc.), total siblings in the household, and voucher
eligibility.29
       As noted earlier, the baseline constrained model specifies ability-to-pay as a function of the first
principal component of household assets as well as total siblings. We also include an indicator for
eligibility for the AP voucher in the function, allowing ability-to-pay to be correlated with whether
a student attended a government daycare. In addition to this specification, whose results we present
and discuss in the text, we also estimate several alternatives. These are summarized in Appendix
Table A23 and focus on robustness to the assumptions regarding how household characteristics
influence preferences as opposed to ability-to-pay. For example, we estimate a specification that
  28
      We also include an indicator variable for whether a private school is officially recognized by the government and
indicators flagging when distance and value-added are missing.
   29
      Note that the baseline random coefficient specification, similarly to the constrained model, restricts asset infor-
mation to interact only with tuition in the utility function. In contrast, the clustered model uses all information
(including assets) to define household groupings.


                                                           17
includes whether a household is lower caste in Ii (as well as in Wi ). We also examine sensitivity of
the results and predictions to the instruments and to the weighting for attrition.


5     Results

We present the results from estimating the empirical models on the control market data in this
section. We begin with estimates of the price elasticity of demand for private schooling, willingness-
to-pay estimates, and goodness-of-fit comparisons. We then present estimates of welfare impacts
for the Andhra Pradesh project voucher and for a universal voucher.


5.1   Parameter Estimates and Elasticity of Demand

Estimates of the parameters, elasticity of demand, and households' ability-to-pay for private school-
ing are presented in this subsection. Table 3 reports estimates and standard errors for the coefficient
on tuition and fees in the utility function. The columns report estimates for baseline specifications
of the clustered logit ("CMNL"), random coefficient ("RC"), and the ability-to-pay constrained
("CC") models. The coefficient on tuition and fees depends on the household's asset level (and
household size) in the non-constrained logit demand models, but is constant across all households
in the constrained model (in which assets influence ability-to-pay).
    The estimates in Table 3 show that the parameter on tuition and fees is negative for all house-
holds across each of the baseline model specifications. For the clustered multinomial logit and
random coefficient models, sensitivity to fees tends to decrease with the household's asset level;
households with fewer assets are more sensitive to the tuition and fees at private schools in their
choice. The estimates also indicate that, all else held equal, students who were eligible for the AP
voucher are also less sensitive to tuition and fees. The results in Table 3 also underscore the role
of instrumenting for endogenous tuition: unobserved school quality (j ) is controlled for by the
combination of the first stage residual and private school-specific random effect. The estimate on
the residual is significant and positive across all models, indicative of positive correlation between
unobserved school quality and tuition and fees.
    We present estimates of the average elasticity of demand for private schooling by subgroup in
Table 4. Elasticities of demand are computed by calculating the percent change in private school
attendance due to a simulated 1% reduction in private school tuition. Overall, demand for private
schooling is inelastic (i.e. the elasticity is less than 1) according to all three sets of estimates. The
estimates reveal an elasticity of 0.65 for the clustered multinomial logit model, indicated by the
CMNL column. The random coefficient model and ability-to-pay constrained models estimate a


                                                   18
   Table 3: Estimates: Coefficient on Tuition and fees
                                 CMNL       RC      CC
Tuition and fees (1000s of Rs.)                -2.00       -2.35      -1.28
                                              (0.24)      (0.28)     (0.58)
                 × Asset level = 2              0.22        0.45
                                              (0.14)      (0.20)
                 × Asset level = 3              0.45        0.74
                                              (0.15)      (0.20)
                 × Asset level = 4              0.68        1.12
                                              (0.16)      (0.20)
                 × Asset level > 4              0.39        0.81
                                              (0.17)      (0.21)
      × Eligible for AP voucher                 0.37        0.07
                                              (0.10)      (0.12)

First stage residual                            1.48        1.60       1.77
                                              (0.18)      (0.20)     (0.63)
Random effect                                   1.73        2.23       2.66
                                              (0.22)      (0.22)     (0.27)
Notes : Table presents select parameter estimates as estimated by the clus-
tered multinomial logit (CMNL), random coefficient (RC), and ability-to-
pay contrained models (CC). Estimates correspond to baseline specifica-
tions described in the text. CMNL and RC models also include interac-
tions of total siblings in the household with tuition and fees, estimates for
which are not reported in the table.




                                     19
lower elasticity at 0.47.

                  Table 4: Estimates: Price Elasticity of Demand for Private Schooling
                                                                            CMNL         RC       CC
                       Overall                                                  0.65    0.47     0.47
                       Female                                                   0.73    0.52     0.52
                       Muslim                                                   0.40    0.27     0.25
                       Lower caste                                              1.03    0.75     0.74
                       Older sibling in gov't school                            1.15    0.84     0.92
                       Both parents completed primary school                    0.22    0.17     0.15
                        1 parent completed secondary                            0.18    0.13     0.11
                       Both parents laborers                                    1.04    0.72     0.69
                       Asset level < 3                                          1.40    1.04     0.79
                       Asset level = 3                                          0.69    0.49     0.54
                       Asset level = 4                                          0.33    0.24     0.36
                       Asset level > 4                                          0.25    0.15     0.21
                       Notes : Table presents average elasticity of demand for private schooling (% in-
                       crease in private school attendance for a 1% reduction in tuition and fees) by
                       subgroup as estimated by the clustered multinomial logit (CMNL), random co-
                       efficient (RC), and ability-to-pay contrained models (CC). Estimates correspond
                       to baseline specifications described in the text.



      The elasticity estimate reported in Table 4 exhibit several notable subgroup patterns as well.
For one, demand for private schooling by households in which both parents completed primary
school or at least one parent completed secondary is highly inelastic per all three models. For
female students, the elasticity is somewhat higher than average. The model estimates are also in
agreement that elasticity of demand decreases with household wealth (as indicated by assets). In
fact, the clustered and random coefficient models estimate that the elasticity of demand exceeds
1 for households with fewer than three assets on average. At the same time, the table reveals
that the elasticities estimated by the ability-to-pay constrained model tend to be smaller. This
finding is consistent with a marginal tuition reduction (such as embedded in the demand elasticity
calculations) doing little to relax constraints on choices.
      Table 5 sheds more direct light on the role of constraints on ability-to-pay by presenting esti-
mated probabilities that households are unable to pay for private schooling.30 The ability-to-pay
constrained model estimates that about 10% of all households are unable to pay for any private
school in their village and that about 14% cannot pay for the private school nearest to their resi-
dence. The third column reports that around 83% of households cannot pay for the highest-tuition
private school, suggestive that, although most households have the option of choosing private
schooling, ability-to-pay still constrains choice to some degree. Table 5 also reports notable dif-
 30
      Appendix Table A24 reports the parameter estimates for the ability-to-pay function in the baseline specification.



                                                             20
ferences according to household demographics (e.g. lower caste households are more likely to be
ability-to-pay constrained). The sharpest contrasts across households appear for different levels of
assets: just 1% of households with at least five assets are estimated to be unable to pay for private
schooling, for example. On the other hand, around 25% of asset-poor households (those with fewer
than three assets) are estimated to lack the ability-to-pay for private school.

                      Table 5: Estimates: Share with No Ability-to-Pay for...
                                                              Any      Closest  Highest-
                                                                                tuition
                                                                     Private School
                   Overall                                    0.10        0.14          0.83
                   Female                                     0.10        0.14          0.83
                   Muslim                                     0.08        0.10          0.79
                   Lower caste                                0.14        0.20          0.90
                   Older sibling in gov't school              0.12        0.17          0.87
                   Both parents completed primary             0.04        0.07          0.77
                    1 parent completed secondary              0.04        0.05          0.70
                   Both parents laborers                      0.14        0.20          0.88
                   Asset level < 3                            0.23        0.31          0.88
                   Asset level = 3                            0.10        0.14          0.80
                   Asset level = 4                            0.04        0.06          0.80
                   Asset level > 4                            0.01        0.02          0.84
                   Choose gov't school                        0.24        0.25          0.92
                   Notes : Table presents posterior estimated share of households by subgroup
                   unable to pay for any, the closest, and the highest-tuition private school
                   in their village, per the ability-to-pay constrained model (CC). Estimates
                   correspond to baseline specification described in the text.


   The bottom row of Table 5 summarizes (in)ability-to-pay among those specifically targeted by
the AP voucher's design: those who (ex post ) chose to attend a government school in the control
markets (i.e. in the absence of a voucher offer). As the table shows, 24% of households among
this group are estimated to be unable to choose any private school, with 25% lacking the ability-
to-pay for their closest private school according to the constrained choice model. Nearly all of
these households are estimated to be unable to choose the most expensive private school in their
village. One useful point of comparison for these estimates are households' stated reasons for the
school choice: As noted earlier, 41% of government school students in the data indicate "economic
reasons" ­ which would include credit and liquidity constraints ­ for their choice of school.


5.2   Willingness-to-Pay Estimates

The model estimates allow us to compute willingness-to-pay (in terms of 1000s of Rs.) for charac-
teristics of primary schools. In addition to revealing household preferences over schooling charac-

                                                      21
teristics, differences across households in willingness-to-pay will translate into different predictions
regarding take-up of a voucher offer (and where students will use a voucher, if they do indeed take
it up).31
       Table 6 reports willingness-to-pay estimates by subgroup for English medium instruction, school
value-added, and private schooling.32 Overall, the ability-to-pay constrained model estimates house-
holds' average willingness-to-pay for English instruction for the duration of primary school (all else
held equal) at around 3,350 Rs. The estimated willingness-to-pay is lower for female students and
considerably greater among highly educated households. Willingness-to-pay for English medium
schooling also increases with household assets. Though the subgroup patterns are qualitatively
similar, the random coefficient model yields generally smaller estimates of willingness-to-pay for
English instruction than the constrained choice model. The random coefficient model estimates
indicate an average willingness-to-pay of just under 3,000 Rs. The clustered multinomial logit
estimates differ from the other models in several ways. In particular, the average overall is lower
still (around 2000 Rs.) and willingness-to-pay is actually negative on average among students with
siblings in government schools, those whose parents are laborers, and lower asset households.

       Table 6: Estimates: Willingness-to-Pay (1000s of Rs.) for Primary School Characteristics
                                               English Medium              School Value-Added             Private Schooling
                                              CMNL RC CC                   CMNL RC CC                    CMNL     RC     CC
 Overall                                          2.02    2.92     3.35        1.24     1.29    1.49       10.47     14.36     15.96
 Female                                           0.48    1.54     1.74        1.08     1.39    1.57        8.69     11.33     14.11
 Muslim                                           6.28    6.72     7.69        0.58     1.01    1.14       17.48     24.42     24.05
 Lower caste                                      1.40    2.05     2.73        0.53     1.37    1.48        2.00      1.57      5.22
 Older sibling in gov't school                   -0.77    2.29     2.64        1.65     1.30    1.50       -2.06     -0.61      1.11
 Both parents completed primary                   6.23    6.17     6.96        0.66     1.38    1.60       23.09     31.40     31.71
  1 parent completed secondary                    6.65    7.03     8.00        0.35     0.50    0.71       25.27     35.40     35.07
 Both parents laborers                           -1.55    1.61     1.99        0.99     1.36    1.57        0.01      3.41      5.86
 Asset level < 3                                 -0.91    1.47     2.29        0.98     1.04    1.55        1.33      1.40      4.94
 Asset level = 3                                  0.36    2.43     2.99        1.16     1.30    1.53        7.11      9.83     12.97
 Asset level = 4                                  3.96    4.02     3.72        1.67     1.62    1.48       14.43     20.52     19.35
 Asset level > 4                                  4.32    3.61     4.28        1.14     1.19    1.41       17.93     24.22     25.35
 Notes : Table presents average willingness-to-pay (1000s of Rs.) by subgroup for English medium instruction, one standard deviation
 increase in school value-added, and private schooling as estimated by the clustered multinomial logit (CMNL), random coefficient
 (RC), and ability-to-pay constrained models (CC). Willingness-to-pay for private schooling calculated as change from average
 government to average private school. Estimates correspond to baseline specifications described in the text.



       The middle three columns of Table 6 report households' estimated marginal willingness-to-pay
  31
    Appendix E provides additional detail regarding calculating willingness-to-pay.
  32
    Appendix Table A21 reports willingnesses-to-pay for a 1 mile reduction in travel distance to school by model and
subgroup. Note that these disutilities of travel will implicitly "price" schooling options under the simulated voucher
treatment, wherein tuition and fees of private schools are effectively set to zero.



                                                             22
for school value-added (above and beyond other school characteristics). Willingness-to-pay for a 1
standard deviation increase (on the student test score distribution) in value-added during primary
school is around 1,300 Rs. on average according to the clustered and random coefficient models.
This compares with 1,500 Rs per the ability-to-pay constrained model. The constrained model
estimates also indicate important differences from the other models for particular subgroups. The
clustered logit model, for example, estimates that lower caste household are only willing to pay 530
Rs. In comparison, the ability-to-pay constrained model estimates this subgroup's willingness-to-
pay as nearly three times larger (1,480 Rs.). Similarly, the clustered and random coefficient models
estimate that asset-poor households generally have lower willingness-to-pay than do higher wealth
households on average. In contrast, the ability-to-pay constrained model estimates that low asset
households have more or less an equivalent (if not higher) preference for school quality as higher
asset households. These results suggest that unobserved ability-to-pay constraints may confound
estimates of how lower income households value school quality.
   Estimates of the willingness-to-pay for private schooling are presented in the last three columns
of Table 6. We calculate willingness-to-pay for private schooling as the value of switching from the
average government school in terms of (non-travel) amenities, X , to the average private school. In
this way, the estimates reflect the differences on average between private and government schools
summarized in Table 2. The clustered multinomial logit model estimates an average willingness-
to-pay for private schooling of around 10,500 Rs. at the population level. The random coeffi-
cient model estimates average willingness-to-pay for private schooling of more than 14,000 Rs.
Willingness-to-pay per the ability-to-pay constrained model, however, is largest at about 16,000
Rs. These estimates are economically large (representing up to 10 times annual private school tu-
ition), corresponding to the average for a population most of which does (and can) choose to attend
private school. The subgroup level estimates in Table 6 (and their differences across models) are
therefore of interest for understanding willingness-to-pay for private schooling by those households
targeted by the AP voucher. For example, the clustered logit model estimates zero willingness-to-
pay among households in which both parents are laborers, whereas the ability-to-pay constrained
model estimates a positive 6,000 Rs. for this group. Similarly, the clustered and random coeffi-
cient models estimate little willingness-to-pay for private schooling among asset-poor households.
The ability-to-constrained model, in contrast, indicates a willingness-to-pay for private schooling
of about 5,000 Rs. for this group. These differences across models have important implications for
predicted take-up of the voucher offer (as well as for estimated welfare impacts).




                                                23
5.3   Goodness-of-Fit

Before turning to welfare impacts and the experimental validation, this subsection assesses and
compares the models in terms of goodness-of-fit to the control markets data. The maximum log-
likelihood and AIC for each of the models are presented in Table 7. The statistics show that the
clustered multinomial logit model achieves a much higher likelihood value and even the AIC (which
adjusts for the many extra parameters) is substantially smaller than the goodness-of-fit statistics
for the other models. In addition, the random coefficient model achieves a better fit to the control
data than does the ability-to-pay constrained model according to these statistics.

                                Table 7: Goodness-of-Fit Statistics
                                        CMNL      RC       CC
                                  ln L     -5,332       -5,806      -5,821
                                  AIC      11,640       11,741      11,767
                                  Notes : Table presents value of log like-
                                  lihood and AIC for the clustered multi-
                                  nomial logit (CMNL), random coef-
                                  ficient (RC), and ability-to-pay con-
                                  strained models (CC). Statistics cor-
                                  respond to baseline specifications de-
                                  scribed in the text.



   We also assess goodness-of-fit by presenting predictions from the models side-by-side with corre-
sponding moments from the control data. To focus these comparisons on moments not specifically
"targeted" by the first order conditions of the maximum likelihood estimation, we examine pre-
dicted private school attendance of kindergarten students eligible for the AP project voucher. The
empirical models will be validated against the choices of those among this group who applied for
the AP voucher at baseline. Table 8 reports that 32% of eligible kindergartners choose to attend
a private school in the control data. The models and specifications match this moment reasonably
closely, though the clustered model underpredicts by four percentage points. Looking at household
demographics, all of the models underpredict private school attendance by Muslim students (58%
in the data). The models also tend to underpredict private attendance by laborer households (24%
in the data) and asset-poor eligible households (23%) and, with the exception of the clustered logit
model, overpredict private attendance by the highest asset households. As compared with the 39%
observed in the data, the random coefficient and ability-to-pay constrained models estimate that,
respectively, 42% and 45% of high asset eligible students attend private schools.




                                                      24
            Table 8: Goodness-of-Fit: Private Schooling of AP Voucher Eligible Students
                                                                       Data     CMNL         RC      CC
                 Overall                                                0.32        0.28    0.31     0.30
                 Female                                                 0.28        0.27    0.28     0.28
                 Muslim                                                 0.58        0.46    0.54     0.53
                 Lower caste                                            0.20        0.17    0.20     0.20
                 Older sibling in gov't school                          0.16        0.16    0.14     0.14
                 Both parents completed primary school                  0.49        0.47    0.50     0.48
                  1 parent completed secondary                          0.56        0.51    0.56     0.55
                 Both parents laborers                                  0.24        0.20    0.24     0.23
                 Asset level < 3                                        0.23        0.19    0.22     0.20
                 Asset level = 3                                        0.33        0.24    0.28     0.28
                 Asset level = 4                                        0.39        0.38    0.40     0.38
                 Asset level > 4                                        0.39        0.39    0.42     0.45
                 Notes : Table presents private school attendance for AP Project voucher-eligible kinder-
                 garten students by subgroup in the data and as predicted by the clustered multinomial
                 logit (CMNL), random coefficient (RC), and ability-to-pay constrained models (CC).
                 Estimates correspond to baseline specifications described in the text.



5.4     Welfare Impacts

We present estimates of the aggregate welfare impacts of private school vouchers and their sources
in this subsection. We focus on two voucher programs: 1) the voucher actually offered to applicants
in treatment markets by the AP School Choice project; and 2) a universal voucher that would pay
primary school tuition and fees for all households.


5.4.1    The AP Project Voucher

The total social welfare generated by a voucher program is the sum of three component parts: 1)
the gain in consumer surplus to recipients of vouchers; 2) less the expected cost of financing the
program; 3) plus any fiscal gain that arises from re-allocating students out of government schooling.
Note that this latter part accrues only for voucher recipients who would have otherwise attended
a government school, whereas the program cost must account also for students who would have
attended a private school regardless. To calculate the fiscal externality, we assume that two thirds
of per pupil spending in government schools in Andhra Pradesh (8,390 Rs.) ­ the share of spending
allocated to teachers (Dongre, 2012) ­ could be cut. Consumer surplus change is given by the
added inverse of the estimated compensating variation.33
  33
     Compensating variation is the amount of income that each household would need to be compensated to keep their
utility level under the voucher the same. Mechanically, this is obtained by the Rs.-valued difference between expected
utility with the voucher (when tuition and fees at private schools are set to zero) and without the voucher (as in
the data). Appendix D provides additional detail. This exercise thus abstracts from any equilibrium adjustments by
schools, consistent with the scale of the actual trial.



                                                            25
         Table 9: Estimates: Welfare Impacts (1000s of Rs.) per AP Voucher Applicant
                                                        CMNL      RC     CC
                       Gain in consumer surplus (A)        3.45   3.37   4.88
                                 Cost of voucher (B)       4.83   4.63   5.53
                               Fiscal externality (C)      5.46   4.60   6.75
                       Net welfare change (A-B+C)          4.07   3.34   6.10


   Table 9 reports estimated welfare impacts from the AP Project voucher, a program that was
targeted to students likely to otherwise attend a government school. The first row reports the
average gain in consumer surplus (in 1000s of Rs.) per applicant according to the three empirical
models. The second row reports the expected voucher cost. The last row adds the fiscal externality
to the difference between the first two lines to arrive at the average social welfare generated by
the program. The total welfare per applicant generated by the AP voucher according to the logit
demand models is 3,300 (the random coefficient model) to 4,000 Rs. (the clustered model). The
ability-to-pay model instead estimates the gain in social welfare at over 6,000 Rs. Thus, while all
three empirical models indicate that the AP voucher improves social welfare in the aggregate, the
ability-to-pay model indicates that the magnitude of the gain is up to 80% larger in magnitude.
Table 9 also suggests one important source of this difference in aggregate welfare impacts: consumer
surplus generated per applicant is around 40% larger according to the constrained model estimates.
   While Table 9 reports impacts per applicant to quantity the total welfare change, not all appli-
cants use the voucher and, moreover, the models differ in what fraction of households they predict
will use it (a prediction that we will return to for the experimental validation). Table 10 instead
reports estimates of average consumer surplus generated by the AP Project voucher per recipient.
The recipients represent households "treated" by the offer in that they use the voucher to attend
a private school. On average, the ability-to-pay constrained model estimates that each voucher
recipient gains almost 8,000 Rs. in consumer surplus. The logit demand models estimate that
each recipient gains a little less than 6,500 Rs. on average. In addition to differences in magni-
tude, Table 10 also reveals an important difference between models in the slope with respect to
assets: the logit demand models generally show that the surplus gain increases with assets, whereas
this pattern is exactly reversed when unobserved differences in ability-to-pay across households are
accounted for.
   In Table 11, we further decompose the aggregate welfare impacts per recipient into two sub-
groups of particular interest: a) for those who would have attended private school regardless of the
voucher offer ("always takers"); and b) for those recipients who would have attended government



                                                26
        Table 10: Estimates: Consumer Surplus (1000s of Rs.) per AP Voucher Recipient
                                                               CMNL       RC     CC
                  Overall                                         6.39    6.37   7.81
                  Female                                          6.45    6.34   7.63
                  Muslim                                          8.05    8.18   9.77
                  Lower caste                                     6.02    6.01   7.48
                  Older sibling in gov't school                   5.65    5.48   6.46
                  Both parents completed primary school           7.41    7.32   8.73
                   1 parent completed secondary                   7.70    7.66   9.09
                  Both parents laborers                           5.99    5.99   7.66
                  Asset level < 3                                 5.44    5.61   8.36
                  Asset level = 3                                 6.13    6.16   7.49
                  Asset level = 4                                 7.21    7.23   7.71
                  Asset level > 4                                 7.14    6.78   7.48


school otherwise ("compliers"). Intuitively, the voucher offer is valued similarly to its cash value
by always takers. This is reflected in Table 11 by the fact that the gain in consumer surplus less
the voucher cost is essentially zero. These values are not identically zero, however, because in some
cases always takers attend a more expensive private school than they otherwise would have and, in
the case of the ability-to-pay constrained model, there is some surplus generated from an expanded
choice set. Each always taker also generates no fiscal externality. For compliers ­ those induced
into private schooling by the voucher offer ­ the contrast between models in their normative im-
plications is especially sharp: the logit demand models estimate that the average surplus to each
complier is less than 5,000 Rs. This value is much less than the surplus that accrues to the average
always taker. On the other hand, the ability-to-pay constrained model estimates the surplus gain
to the average complier to be 8,000 Rs. (60% larger in magnitude). The average value to compliers
is estimated to be larger than the average gain to the always takers by the ability-to-pay model,
highlighting the impact of the constraint on their choice in the absence of the voucher.

               Table 11: Welfare Impacts (1000s of Rs.) per AP Voucher Recipient
                                             Always Takers               Compliers
                                           CMNL RC       CC           CMNL  RC     CC
                     Share of applicants      0.30    0.32    0.32        0.24    0.21    0.30
          Gain in consumer surplus (A)        7.75    7.54    7.81        4.78    4.66    7.99
                    Cost of voucher (B)       8.17    8.04    8.03        9.98   10.04    9.82
                  Fiscal externality (C)         0       0       0       22.42   22.44   22.35
         Net welfare change (A-B+C)          -0.42    -0.50   -0.22      17.22   17.06   20.52




                                                 27
5.4.2      A Universal Voucher

In this subsection, we consider the aggregate welfare impacts of a voucher offered universally to
all households. As with the AP voucher in practice, this counterfactual assumes that private
schools would be unable to screen or otherwise select voucher students and abstracts from general
equilibrium adjustments, in particular supply responses by schools.34
       Table 12 reports welfare impacts per person from a universal voucher. The pattern of findings
across models mirrors findings regarding the AP voucher: the total surplus change from a universal
voucher is estimated to be positive according to all three empirical models, but the quantitative
magnitude of the gain is roughly twice as large according to the ability-to-pay constrained model
(4,000 Rs. vs. 2,000 Rs. per person).


   Table 12: Estimates: Welfare Impacts (1000s of Rs.) per Household from Universal Voucher
                                                                 CMNL        RC      CC
                           Gain in consumer surplus (A)              5.24    5.04   6.30
                                     Cost of voucher (B)             6.31    6.08   6.66
                                   Fiscal externality (C)            5.46    4.60   6.75
                           Net welfare change (A-B+C)                2.16    1.98   4.01


       To understand the sources of aggregate gains, we decompose the welfare impacts from a universal
voucher between always takers and compliers in Table 13. Around three fifths of households attend
private schools regardless, but the voucher offer may induce some always takers to attend more
expensive private schools than otherwise. On net, the result is about negative 600 Rs. for the
average always taker according to the logit demand models. In the constrained model, the effect
of re-allocating some always takers' choice among private schools is mitigated by the value of
expanding the choice sets of others. Turning to the complier households, the logit demand models
estimate their value from the voucher as far less than the expected cost and less than the average
value to the always takers. The ability-to-pay constrained model finds the opposite relationship:
it is the compliers who place relatively more value on the voucher offer. The constrained model
estimates an average willingness-to-pay for the voucher by compliers that is around 80% greater
than the unconstrained demand models' estimates.
  34
    Such responses to a universal voucher at scale are likely to include adjustments to tuition, school quality, peer
composition, program participation, and entry/exit. Several papers focused on diverse settings have examined these
and other dimensions of school competition (e.g. Bau 2017; Andrabi et al. 2017b; Singleton 2017; S´     anchez 2018;
Allende S.C. 2019).




                                                         28
         Table 13: Estimates: Welfare Impacts (1000s of Rs.) per Universal Voucher Recipient
                                                     Always Takers                 Compliers
                                                   CMNL RC       CC             CMNL  RC     CC
                        Share of population           0.59     0.58     0.58       0.14      0.13     0.20
             Gain in consumer surplus (A)             7.40     7.22     7.61       5.36     5.39      9.28
                       Cost of voucher (B)            7.99     7.82     7.90      10.26    10.40     10.23
                     Fiscal externality (C)              0        0        0      22.42    22.44     22.35
             Net welfare change (A-B+C)              -0.59     -0.60   -0.28      17.51    17.43     21.40


5.5      Sensitivity

Beyond the baseline set of estimates discussed above, we estimate model specifications that instead
use a cost index instrument (in place of the cost proxy). We also specifically estimate several
ability-to-pay constrained specifications. The full suite of models we estimate are described in
Appendix Table A23, including comparisons along key dimensions with the baseline specifications.
       The alternative instrument set generates very similar estimates of the overall price elasticity of
demand to the baseline specifications. For example, the elasticity is 0.65 in the baseline clustered
logit model, but 0.70 using the cost index instrument instead. At the same time, accounting for
tuition endogeneity is important for producing sensible results. As Appendix Table A23 shows, the
ability-to-pay constrained model otherwise generates an opposite-signed elasticity of demand, sug-
gesting the private enrollment declines when prices decrease (this is reflected also in the parameter
estimates shown in column (3) of Table A24). Table A23 also shows that controlling for AP voucher
eligibility in the estimation is important for achieving a good fit to the control data; the constrained
model specification that ignores this heterogeneity overpredicts private school enrollment of eligible
students by 10 percentage points.35
       The ability-to-pay constrained model estimates are not very sensitive to alternative assumptions
to the baseline specification regarding how household characteristics influence choice patterns. For
example, models that allow the constraint to depend also on lower caste status or allow preferences
and the ability-to-pay constraint to depend on whether the parents are laborers produce nearly
identical values for the share of students fully constrained in their school choice. Correspondingly,
the estimates for welfare and fit are likewise essentially the same as for the baseline specification.
One modeling choice that does affect the salience of the ability-to-pay constraint is whether the
model includes cohort-level heterogeneity, but the elasticity and surplus estimates from this model
  35
    Though we do not report estimates from the corresponding specifications, these points regarding the roles of
the control function in producing plausible elasticites and of controlling for eligibility for fit apply equally to the
unconstrained logit demand models.



                                                          29
are nonetheless largely unchanged.


6         Experimental Validation

In this section, we present predictions used to validate the empirical models against the experi-
mental outcomes of the AP School Choice project. To do so, we simulate a private school voucher
that mimics the eligibility and conditions of the program in the control markets using the models.
The predictions are generated by setting tuition and fees at private schools for applicants to zero
in the models and simulating their choice of school in that counterfactual. In this simulated treat-
ment condition, travel costs (relative to school quality) "price" the alternative schooling options.
This allows us to generate model-based "treatment" moments to compare directly with analogous
moments calculated from the treatment group.
         In addition to the aggregated predictions, we present plans to validate the models against the
specific choices made by those households randomly assigned the voucher in the treatment villages.
We plan to test for model mis-specification in a hypothesis testing framework. This framework will
allow us to understand how and why the models may fail to reproduce the experimentally-generated
choice patterns. For instance, we develop tests to examine whether mis-specification may be due
to voucher recipients gathering additional information about schools before choosing or to treated
households' excitement at being randomly selected.
         As an initial step to the experimental validation, the treatment village sample is likely to
require re-weighting for attrition. Analogous to the adjustment for attrition of kindergartners
from the control sample, we will estimate the probability that each treatment village household
attrits as a function of their observed characteristics.36 We will then ensure that the re-weighted
treatment and control samples are balanced on observed characteristics, consistent with the village-
level randomization.


6.1         Predictions

We focus on model predictions for take-up of the voucher offer overall and across subgroups of
households. The models facilitate generating predictions in one of two ways: First, simulating the
voucher trial in the models directly generates predictions for the share of households who take-up
the offer to attend a private school. These predictions are reported in Table 14. The table includes
a column labeled "RCT" that will report the corresponding moments obtained from the treated
data. Second, voucher use can alternatively be forecast based on the models' implied voucher
    36
         Including whether or not they randomly received the voucher offer.



                                                            30
elasticities. This method corrects for the fact that the models' fit to the control sample is not
perfect and differs. We report voucher elasticities of private schooling by subgroup in Table 15
   As Table 14 reports, the simulations for voucher take-up predict that 54% and 53% of applicant
households overall will choose to use the voucher according to the clustered and random coefficient
logit models predict, respectively. In contrast, the ability-to-pay constrained model predicts that
63% will take-up the offer. Differences in predicted take-up between models tend to be smaller
among higher educated and higher wealth households and somewhat more pronounced for low
asset households. The ability-to-pay constrained model predicts that 60% of asset-poor households
will use the voucher, a share that is 9 to 11 percentage points higher than the other predictions
made by the logit demand models. The corresponding treatment moments will allow for comparing
the mean squared errors of the models across the subgroups reported in Table 14.

                     Table 14: Validation: Predicted Take-Up of Voucher Offer
                                                                  RCT       CMNL        RC       CC
              Overall                                                          0.54     0.53    0.63
              Female                                                           0.53     0.51    0.60
              Muslim                                                           0.69     0.76    0.81
              Lower caste                                                      0.43     0.42    0.52
              Older sibling in gov't school                                    0.38     0.31    0.41
              Both parents completed primary school                            0.71     0.70    0.76
               1 parent completed secondary                                    0.71     0.74    0.80
              Both parents laborers                                            0.46     0.46    0.57
              Asset level < 3                                                  0.51     0.49    0.60
              Asset level = 3                                                  0.50     0.52    0.62
              Asset level = 4                                                  0.57     0.54    0.62
              Asset level > 4                                                  0.63     0.61    0.69
              Notes : Table presents average voucher take-up by eligible households by subgroup in the
              treatment data (RCT), and as predicted by the clustered multinomial logit (CMNL), ran-
              dom coefficient (RC), and ability-to-pay constrained models (CC). Predictions correspond
              to baseline specification described in the text.



   Table 15 reports voucher elasticities of private schooling. The overall voucher elasticity is
highest in the ability-to-pay constrained model, which predicts that private schooling will increase
by 93% under the voucher. Mirroring the pattern for use, the overall elasticity is lower for the
other models, but is relatively higher according to the clustered multinomial logit model. This
reflects differences in the models' fit: though the clustered and random coefficient models predict
the same overall use, that level reflects a bigger increase per the clustered model because that model
underpredicts private schooling in the control markets. The elasticities in Table 15 also reveal a
pattern not immediately apparent from the take-up predictions: the voucher elasticity decreases
with household assets in all of the empirical models, but the slope is the steepest in the ability-

                                                        31
to-pay constrained model. For instance, the models predict relatively similar elasticities for high
asset households, but the ability-to-pay constrained elasticity for asset-poor households is 20-50%
larger in comparison. The ability-to-pay model estimates that asset-poor households will increase
their private schooling over 170% under the voucher. We will use these elaticity estimates to also
calculate mean squared errors for predicted voucher take-up.37

                      Table 15: Validation: Voucher Elasticity of Private Schooling
                                                                       RCT      CMNL        RC       CC
                 Overall                                                              82     63        93
                 Female                                                               83     67        98
                 Muslim                                                               44     28        38
                 Lower caste                                                         125     93       138
                 Older sibling in gov't school                                       140    128       196
                 Both parents completed primary school                                45     38        55
                  1 parent completed secondary                                        41     31        43
                 Both parents laborers                                               111     82       125
                 Asset level < 3                                                     141    114       173
                 Asset level = 3                                                      92     67       101
                 Asset level = 4                                                      57     40        69
                 Asset level > 4                                                      48     38        42
                 Notes : Table presents average voucher elasticity (percent change in private schooling due
                 to the voucher offer) of eligible households by subgroup in the treatment data (RCT), and
                 as predicted by the clustered multinomial logit (CMNL), random coefficient (RC), and
                 ability-to-pay constrained models (CC). Predictions correspond to baseline specification
                 described in the text.



       The empirical models also make predictions for the characteristics or the qualities of schools
that households will choose under the voucher. Table 16 reports intent-to-treat effects of the
voucher offer on four characteristics of households' chosen school: the tuition and fees charged,
whether the school teaches in English, the travel distance to school, and school value-added. The
table reveals that the average tuition and fees otherwise charged at chosen schools will increase by
590 Rs. under the voucher on average according to the random coefficient model. The clustered
model predicts a 660 Rs. increase, while the ability-to-pay model predicts 810 Rs. The table
also reports the predictions in term of elasticities, which deflate the intent-to-treat effects by the
baseline level to adjust for differences in fit to the control data. The ability-to-pay constrained
model predicts that the share of students attending an English medium schools will more than
double (112%) due to the voucher and that travel distance to school will increase by 20%. Similar
to the pattern for the elasticity of private schooling, these elasticities are largest per the ability-
  37                                                                           m
    Elasticity-based predictions for use can be generated from the equation PT   (X ) = PC (X ) × [1 + ^m (X )], where
^ (X ) is the percent change in private schooling due to the voucher according to model m and P C (X ) are the (true)
m

control data moments.



                                                            32
to-pay constrained model and generally smallest according to the random coefficient model. The
clustered and random coefficient models predict that the value-added of chosen schools will increase
by 0.03 and 0.02 standard deviations, respectively, whereas the ability-to-pay constrained model
predicts an increase of 0.04.

Table 16: Validation: Voucher Intent-to-Treat Effects and Elasticities on Characteristics of Chosen
School
                                               RCT         CML            RC           CC
                                              ITT        ITT           ITT        ITT
        Mean    tuition and fees (1000s of Rs.)                             0.66     122     0.59     104     0.81    145
        Share   choosing English medium school                              0.18      92     0.16      79     0.22    112
        Mean    distance to school (mi.)                                    0.14      13     0.14      14     0.20     20
        Mean    school value-added                                          0.03             0.02             0.04
        Notes : Table presents voucher intent-to-treat effects (ITT) and elasticities ( ) ­ the percent change in the
        average value of the choice characteristic due to the voucher offer ­ for eligible households in the treatment data
        (RCT), and as predicted by the clustered multinomial logit (CMNL), random coefficient (RC), and ability-to-pay
        constrained models (CC). Predictions correspond to baseline specifications described in the text.




6.1.1     Sensitivity

The predictions for the experimental validation are generally robust across model specifications.
For example, the alternative IV set yields a predicted take-up of 63% (as compared to 61% for
the baseline specification) for the ability-to-pay constrained model. The overall voucher take-up
and elasticity predictions of the random coefficient model is likewise similar across the two sets of
instruments. However, the alternative IV set generates a voucher take-up of 56% ­ 2 points higher
than the baseline IV set ­ for the clustered multinomial logit model. This translates to a voucher
elasticity of 88, which is somewhat higher than the predicted voucher elasticity of the ability-to-pay
constrained model with these instruments.
   The alternative constrained model specifications also produce similar predictions to the baseline
regarding take-up of the experimental offer and voucher elasticity; predictions for take-up range
from 0.62 to 0.64 across those specifications that control for AP voucher eligibility. The predictions
of the ability-to-pay constrained model are thus not very sensitive to the alternative modeling
choices examined. The constrained model specification that ignores voucher eligibility heterogeneity
produces a much larger predicted take-up (78%), but this is an artifact of this specification's poor
fit to the data; the predicted voucher elasticity from this specification is only 76.




                                                                33
6.2      Model Fit and Hypothesis Tests

The estimated models not only can be used to generate aggregated moments, they make specific
predictions for each treated household's indirect utility from each choice alternative in their village.
These predictions provide a way to empirically validate the models using the voucher recipient's ac-
tual choices as well as to understand the sources of model mis-specification via a series of hypothesis
tests.
       For those kindergartners who were offered the voucher in the treatment villages (i.e. were
treated), we plan to estimate the following choice model:

                                            m
                                           Uij  ^ m +  m P rivatej
                                               =U                                                                (8)
                                                 ij


                                                            ^ m is treated household i's predicted
for each empirical model m estimated on the control sample. Uij
indirect utility from choice j , according to the estimates from model m based on the control data:

                                     ^ij
                                     U m
                                         = Xj ^m +  m
                                                   ^i ln Dij + ^m +          ij
                                               i                j


Note that tuition and fees (pj ) do not appear in the indirect utility because they are zero at all
schools for the treated students. ^m is formed for the treatment village private schools using the
                                   j
parameters of the control function estimated on the control sample.38
       The null hypothesis to test for model validation is that:


                                                   H0 :  m = 0


In words, this tests says that model m accurately captures treated students' take-up of the voucher
offer (i.e. their preferences over private schooling). Using the treated students' choices, we plan
to test this hypothesis for each of the models estimated on the control data. Note that this test
assumes that the distributions of unobservables are the same between control and treatment villages,
consistent with the village-level randomization.
       This hypothesis testing framework further allows for understanding the sources of model mis-
specification through the inclusion of additional terms in equation (8). For example, it may be
that the models fail because of the instruments for tuition. To test this, we can insert pj into the
equation ­ if treated households, who in reality face no tuition by virtue of receiving the voucher,
nonetheless appear to be sorting on private schools' tuition, that indicates that the model fails to
  38
   Likewise, school value-added for treatment village schools is formed using the parameters estimated on the control
sample.



                                                         34
adequately control for unobserved private school characteristics. Alternatively, it may be that the
voucher recipients search out or seek better information about schooling alternatives before making
their choice. If so, this would show up as a change in their "preferences" over private schools' non-
tuition characteristics, such as value-added. These variables can similarly be included in equation
(8) to test for this source of mis-specification. We can also examine whether the models fail for
specific subgroups via interactions with household characteristics. Table 17 details specific sources
of mis-specification we will examine using this framework. By including applicants who did not
receive the voucher in the estimation sample, we can test whether winning the voucher induced
apparent "excitement" on the part of recipients (i.e. that the voucher offer itself has a treatment
effect on recipients' preferences for private schooling).39

                           Table 17: Experimental Validation: Hypothesis Tests
         Source of Mis-specification                              Add to Indirect Utility
 Private school unobservables              pj
 Voucher-induced info acquisition          P rivatej interactions with non-tuition school characteristics
 Subgroup heterogeneity                    P rivatej interactions with household characteristics
 Omitted match quality                     Interaction of school quality and baseline test score
 "Excitement" for voucher                  P rivatej for voucher recipients
                                              (include non-recipient applicants in estimation)
 Selection into application                P rivatej for voucher applicants
                                              (include eligible non-applicants in estimation)




7         Conclusion

Alongside treatment effects on outcomes targeted by policymakers, effects on economic well-being
are especially of interest for interventions that expand the choices available to beneficiaries. In
this paper, we pursue a unique research design to estimate the welfare impacts of private school
vouchers in rural India. Vouchers may create significant welfare gains by facilitating better matches
between students and schools. Vouchers may also reduce the social costs of universal education
when government provision is inefficient.
         Using control group data drawn from a randomized controlled trial of private school vouchers
in rural India, we first develop and estimate empirical models of how households choose among
    39
    Given that we assume that school value-added is homogeneous across students, systematic differences in returns
ex post can be a source of mis-specification. However, because households choose schools based on (potentially
mistaken) beliefs about match quality, the quantitative importance of this mis-specification will depend in practice
on how correlated the school characteristics-student characteristics interactions included in the models are with
expected match quality. In this regard, our models do not allow households to value schools differently according
to their baseline measured abilities. If parents' beliefs depend on their child's ability, hypothesis tests using this
information ­ e.g. interacting baseline test score with school value-added ­ can help assess this source of bias.


                                                         35
government and private primary schools in their village. We model households' choice of school in
this setting as potentially ability-to-pay constrained and place structure on how observed household
assets influence choice patterns to empirically separate ability-to-pay from willingness-to-pay. We
compare this model with estimates and predictions from flexible logit models of demand, including
a random coefficient model.
   In this paper, we present results from the first step of the research design, including predictions
for the experimental validation. The model estimates provide evidence that households, particularly
those targeted by the AP project voucher, lack ability-to-pay for private schooling. The constrained
model estimates that about a quarter of households that choose a government school are unable
to choose any private school in their village. This constraint in turn has significant implications
for the estimates of willingness-to-pay, including for English medium instruction and school value-
added. For instance, while non-constrained models estimate lower relative preferences for school
quality for asset-poor households, the ability-to-pay constrained model estimates that willingness-
to-pay for value-added is similar across households of varying socioeconomic status. Moreover,
the ability-to-pay constrained model estimates a substantially larger consumer surplus from the
voucher, particularly among those marginal students that are induced into private schooling because
of the offer.
   We generate and report predictions from the estimated models to be compared with the ex-
perimental outcomes in treatment villages in the research design's second step yet to come. In
particular, we simulate a voucher trial mimicking the experimental treatment offer and compare
take-up and voucher elasticities. We find that the baseline ability-to-pay constrained model pre-
dicts that around 63% of households will use the voucher to attend a private school. The models
that do not accommodate ability-to-pay differences instead estimate take-up to be around 10 per-
centage points lower. The sharpest differences between models in predictions appear for lower
socioeconomic households, though. The ability-to-pay constrained model predicts a voucher elas-
ticity among asset-poor households that is up to 50% larger than the predictions generated by
unconstrained demand models.




                                                 36
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., Pathak, P. A., Schellenberg, J., and Walters, C. R. (2017a). Do Parents Value
 School Effectiveness? Working Paper 23912, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Pathak, P. A., and Walters, C. R. (2017b). Free to Choose: Can School Choice
 Reduce Student Achievement? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Agarwal, N., and Pathak, P. A. (2015). The Welfare Effects of Coordinated
 Assignment: Evidence from the NYC HS Match. Working Paper 21046, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Abdulkadiroglu, A. and S¨
                        onmez, T. (2003). School Choice: A Mechanism Design Approach. The
 American Economic Review, 93(3):729­747.

Allende S.C., C. (2019). Competition Under Social Interactions and the Design of Education
  Policies.

Allende S.C., C., Gallego, F., and Neilson, C. (2019). Approximating the Equilibrium Effects of
  Informed School Choice.

Andrabi, T., Das, J., and Khwaja, A. I. (2017a). Report Cards: The Impact of Providing School and
 Child Test Scores on Educational Markets. The American Economic Review, 107(6):1535­1563.
 Publisher: American Economic Association.

Andrabi, T., Das, J., Khwaja, A. I., Ozyurt, S., and Singh, N. (2017b). Upping the Ante: The
 Equilibrium Effects of Unconditional Grants to Private Schools.

Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., and Kremer, M. (2006). Long-Term Educational Consequences of Sec-
 ondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Colombia. The American
 Economic Review, 96(3):847­862.

ASER (2018). Annual Status of Education Report. Aser Centre.

Attanasio, O. P., Meghir, C., and Santiago, A. (2012). Education Choices in Mexico: Using
  a Structural Model and a Randomized Experiment to Evaluate PROGRESA. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 79(1):37­66.

Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Olken, B. A., Satriawan, E., and Sumarto, S. (2021). Food vs. Food
  Stamps: Evidence from an At-Scale Experiment in Indonesia. Working Paper 28641, National
  Bureau of Economic Research. Series: Working Paper Series.

Banerjee, A. V. and Duflo, E. (2014). Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Constraints
  Using a Directed Lending Program. The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2):572­607.

Barseghyan, L., Coughlin, M., Molinari, F., and Teitelbaum, J. C. (2021). Heterogenous Choice
  Sets and Preferences.

Bau, N. (2017). School Competition and Product Differentiation.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., and McMillan, R. (2007). A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences
  for Schools and Neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy, 115(4):588­638.



                                               37
Ben-Akiva, M. and Boccara, B. (1995). Discrete choice models with latent choice sets. International
  Journal of Research in Marketing, 12(1):9­24.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium. Econo-
  metrica, 63(4):841­890.

Cameron, S. V. and Heckman, J. J. (2001). The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black,
  Hispanic, and White Males. Journal of Political Economy, 109(3):455­499. Publisher: The
  University of Chicago Press.

Carneiro, P., Das, J., and Reis, H. (2016). The Value of Private Schools: Evidence from Pakistan.

Cellini, S. R., Ferreira, F., and Rothstein, J. (2010). The Value of School Facility Investments: Ev-
  idence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  125(1):215­261.

Currie, J. and Gahvari, F. (2008). Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets the Data. Journal
 of Economic Literature, 46(2):333­383.

Deming, D. J. (2014). Using School Choice Lotteries to Test Measures of School Effectiveness.
  American Economic Review, 104(5):406­411.

Dizon-Ross, R. (2019). Parents' Beliefs about Their Children's Academic Ability: Implications for
  Educational Investments. American Economic Review, 109(8):2728­2765.

Dongre, A. (2012). What is the Per Child Expenditure in Government Schools? In Accountability
 Initiative. New Delhi.

Duflo, E., Hanna, R., and Ryan, S. P. (2012). Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to Come to
 School. The American Economic Review, 102(4):1241­1278.

Epple, D., Romano, R. E., and Urquiola, M. (2017). School Vouchers: A Survey of the Economics
  Literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 55(2):441­492.

Filmer, D. and Pritchett, L. H. (2001). Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure Data--Or
  Tears: An Application To Educational Enrollments In States Of India. Demography, 38(1):115­
  132.

Galiani, S., Murphy, A., and Pantano, J. (2015). Estimating Neighborhood Choice Models: Lessons
 from a Housing Assistance Experiment. The American Economic Review, 105(11):3385­3415.

Galiani, S. and Pantano, J. (2021). Structural Models: Inception and Frontier. Working Paper
 28698, National Bureau of Economic Research. Series: Working Paper Series.

Gandhi, A. and Houde, J.-F. (2016). Measuring Substitution Patterns in Differentiated Products
 Industries.

Gregory, J. (2017). The Impact of Post-Katrina Rebuilding Grants on the Resettlement Choices of
  New Orleans Homeowners.

Hastings, J. and Shapiro, J. M. (2018). How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evidence from a Retail
 Panel. American Economic Review, 108(12):3493­3540.



                                                 38
Hastings, J. S., Kane, T. J., and Staiger, D. O. (2005). Parental Preferences and School Competi-
 tion: Evidence from a Public School Choice Program. Working Paper 11805, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.
Hausman, J. A. (1996). Valuation of New Goods under Perfect and Imperfect Competition. In
 Bresnahan, T. F. and Gordon, R. J., editors, The Economics of New Goods, pages 207­248.
 University of Chicago Press.
Kane, T. J. and Staiger, D. O. (2008). Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement: An
 Experimental Evaluation. Working Paper 14607, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Keane, M. P. and Wolpin, K. I. (2001). The Effect of Parental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints
 on Educational Attainment. International Economic Review, 42(4):1051­1103. Publisher: [Eco-
 nomics Department of the University of Pennsylvania, Wiley, Institute of Social and Economic
 Research, Osaka University].
Keane, M. P. and Wolpin, K. I. (2007). Exploring the Usefulness of a Nonrandom Holdout Sample
 for Model Validation: Welfare Effects on Female Behavior. International Economic Review,
 48(4):1351­1378.
Koedel, C., Mihaly, K., and Rockoff, J. E. (2015). Value-added modeling: A review. Economics of
 Education Review, 47:180­195.
Lagakos, D., Mobarak, M., and Waugh, M. E. (2017). The Welfare Effects of Encouraging Rural-
  Urban Migration.
LaLonde, R. J. (1986). Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with Exper-
  imental Data. The American Economic Review, 76(4):604­620. Publisher: American Economic
  Association.
MacLeod, W. B. and Urquiola, M. (2013). Competition and Education Productivity: Incentives
 Writ Large. In Education Policy in Developing Countries, pages 243­284.
MacLeod, W. B. and Urquiola, M. (2015). Reputation and School Competition. American Economic
 Review, 105(11):3471­3488.
Manski, C. F. and Lerman, S. R. (1977). The Estimation of Choice Probabilities from Choice Based
 Samples. Econometrica, 45(8):1977­1988. Publisher: [Wiley, Econometric Society].
Mills, J. N. and Wolf, P. J. (2017). Vouchers in the Bayou: The Effects of the Louisiana Scholarship
 Program on Student Achievement After 2 Years. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
 39(3):464­484.
Misra, S. and Nair, H. S. (2011). A structural model of sales-force compensation dynamics: Esti-
 mation and field implementation. Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 9(3):211­257.
Muralidharan, K. and Sundararaman, V. (2015). The Aggregate Effect of School Choice: Evidence
 from a Two-Stage Experiment in India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3):1011­1066.
Neilson, C. (2013). Targeted Vouchers, Competition Among Schools, and the Academic Achieve-
  ment of Poor Students.
Nevo, A. (2001). Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry. Econometrica,
  69(2):307­342.

                                                39
Pathak, P. A. and Shi, P. (2017). How Well Do Structural Demand Models Work? Counterfactual
  Predictions in School Choice. Working Paper 24017, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Petrin, A. (2002). Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan. Journal
  of Political Economy, 110(4):705­729.

Petrin, A. and Train, K. (2010). A Control Function Approach to Endogeneity in Consumer Choice
  Models. Journal of Marketing Research, 47(1):3­13.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., and Zucman, G. (2018). Distributional National Accounts: Methods and
  Estimates for the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2):553­609.

Rosenzweig, M. R. and Wolpin, K. I. (1993). Credit Market Constraints, Consumption Smoothing,
  and the Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income Countries: Investments in
  Bullocks in India. Journal of Political Economy, 101(2):223­244.

Rothstein, J. M. (2006). Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuation of School Character-
  istics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition among Jurisdictions. The
  American Economic Review, 96(4):1333­1350.

Rouse, C. E. (1998). Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
  Milwaukee Parental Choice Program. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2):553­602.

Salz, T. and Vespa, E. (2017). Estimating Dynamic Games of Oligopolistic Competition: An
  Experimental Investigation.

Schorfheide, F. and Wolpin, K. I. (2012). On the Use of Holdout Samples for Model Selection.
  American Economic Review, 102(3):477­481.

Schorfheide, F. and Wolpin, K. I. (2016). To hold out or not to hold out. Research in Economics,
  70(2):332­345.

Singleton, J. D. (2017). Incentives and the Supply of Effective Charter Schools.

S´
 anchez, C. (2018). Understanding School Competition Under Voucher Regimes.

Tarozzi, A., Mahajan, A., Blackburn, B., Kopf, D., Krishnan, L., and Yoong, J. (2014). Micro-
  loans, Insecticide-Treated Bednets, and Malaria: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial
  in Orissa, India. American Economic Review, 104(7):1909­1941.

Todd, P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2006). Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in
  Mexico: Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling
  and Fertility. The American Economic Review, 96(5):1384­1417.

Townsend, R. M. (1994). Risk and Insurance in Village India. Econometrica, 62(3):539­591.

Wise, D. A. (1985). A behavioral model versus experimentation: The effects of housing subsidies
 on rent. Methods of Operations Research, 50:441­89.




                                                40
Appendix

A    Sample and Weights

We weight students in the estimation sample to account for three features of the AP School Choice
project sampling design. First, students who did not apply for the AP project voucher (kindergart-
ners and first graders, the latter asked regarding a voucher for second grade) are underrepresented
in the sample. We adjust for this using the student counts reported in Table II of Muralidharan
and Sundararaman (2015) to estimate sampling probabilities.
    Second, first graders (whose primary school choices were collected at baseline) were sampled
conditional on their choice of primary school. For consistency, we therefore re-weight to match the
population market shares of students attending public and private schools (Manski and Lerman,
1977). To do so, we consult India's Annual Status of Education Report (ASER) survey in 2008
(the same calendar year at the project baseline). We calculate population shares of private school
attendance at the district level, restricting the ASER sample to households in Andhra Pradesh
villages with at least one private school and students in the age range of our estimation sample
(and excluding children not enrolled in school).
    Finally, there is attrition of kindergartners (whose primary school choices are made in subsequent
years) from the baseline sample. As summarized in Table A18, we observe primary school choices
in the first wave (Y1) followup of 1,002 of the 1,783 kindergarten students surveyed at baseline.
Most of the remaining students remained in daycare during the first wave. We therefore use the
next wave of household data collection (Y3) to collect primary school choices for 483 of these
students. This yields an estimation sample of 1,485 kindergarten students as well as 298 from the
baseline sample who attrit (i.e. we do not observe choice information by Y3). We adjust for this
for by estimating the probability that each household attrits. The estimated attrition probability
depends on student and household sociodemographic characteristics, baseline Telugu score, district
of residence, as well as whether they are eligible and/or applied for the AP project voucher.

                                Table A18: Kindergarten Subsample
                                                             N
                                     Baseline sample       1,783
                                     Y1 choice observed    1,002
                                     Y3 choice observed      483
                                     Estimation sample     1,485




                                                   41
B    School Value-Added

We estimate and control for each schools' value-added to student learning in the choice estimation
using baseline and follow-up exam scores in math. We assume that the achievement of student i in
subject k at year t is a linear function of household i's characteristics, Hi , the quality of the school
they attend j (i,t) , and their prior exam performance:


                                 Aijt = (Ait-1 ) + Hi  + j (i,t) + ijt                               (9)


Aijt is the student's exam performance in year t, which is normalized across students within year.
School j 's unobserved value-added to the learning process, j , is assumed to be fixed within our
panel. We include a cubic of prior exam performance, Aijt-1 , and control for student demographics,
parental education, and household socioeconomic status in Hi .
    We observe up to three math scores for each student with the first two coming in non-consecutive
school years (the baseline year and year three) in the data. We therefore estimate school value-
added by first estimating equation (9) separately by year. For each school, this step yields up to two
fixed effects. We then shrink the fixed effect estimates using empirical Bayes techniques (Kane and
Staiger, 2008; Deming, 2014; Koedel et al., 2015). We finally recover estimates of the value-added
for each school from the shrunken fixed effects by imposing the assumption that value-added net
of a depreciation parameter is the same in both years (i.e. we solve for  such that ^j4 = ^ j 3 ).


C    Control Function and Instruments

We use a control function approach in estimating the models to instrument for endogenous private
school tuition and fees (Petrin and Train, 2010). We take a control function approach because the
sampling design does not allow us to compute population market shares for each school. The "first
stage" is given by:
                                        pj = Xj  + f (Zj ) + µj

where Xj are observed characteristics (including value-added) and Zj consists of instruments for
tuition and fees at private school j . j and µj are assumed jointly normal. µ
                                                                            ^j and j (a normally
distributed random effect) then replace j in the indirect utility function.
    Our baseline models use as instruments a summary measure of each private school's location
in product space as well as proxy for its costs. We also estimate models with a cost index (and
its square) replacing the cost proxy for robustness. We construct the product space instrument by




                                                   42
first calculating:
                                                   k
                                                  Zj =          Xlk - Xj
                                                                       k

                                                          lVj

                                                                                     k variables
for each non-tuition school characteristic k . We then take the first factor of the Zj
as the instrument. To construct the cost proxy instrument, we separate private schools by their
language of instruction and then use k-means clustering to group private schools within medium
of instruction according to similarity in their characteristics.40 The cost proxy instrument is then
the average tuition and fees of those private schools that belong to the same cluster, but which are
located in other districts of Andhra Pradesh. The village cost index is estimated using village fixed
effects in a regression of private schools' log per pupil expenditures on fixed school characteristics.41
Table A19 below presents first-stage estimates and diagnostics for both sets of instruments.

                         Table A19: First Stage: Private School Tuition and Fees
                                                             (1)                      (2)
                                                         Baseline IVs             Alternative

                       Product space location              238.1***                 288.9***
                                                            (56.42)                  (59.60)
                       Cost proxy                          0.376***
                                                            (0.135)
                       Cost index                                                  0.246***
                                                                                    (0.0947)
                       Cost index2                                               -0.000599***
                                                                                  (0.000132)

                       First-stage F                          12.51                   17.63
                       Cragg-Donald stat                      11.20                   13.13

                       R-squared                              0.309                   0.341
                       Notes : Table presents first stage estimates that regress private school tuition
                       and fees on school characteristics and the instrumental variables. Baseline
                       IVs refers to instruments summarizing product space location (first factor of
                       fixed characteristics of other private schools in same village) and proxying for
                       school-level costs (predicted tuition and fees based on similar private schools
                       in other villages), while Alternative replaces the cost proxy with a village-
                       level cost index (and its square). Though not reported, regressions control
                       for the school characteristics included in the choice models. N = 293 private
                       schools. Standard errors reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
                       p<0.1


  40
     We form groups based on similarity in terms of facilities, teaching quality, and a factor summarizing horizontal
differentiation (e.g. whether offers Hindi and/or teaches computer skills). We group English medium private schools
into 10 clusters and Telugu schools into 8 clusters.
  41
     We then use the average fixed effects of other villages in the same district as each village's cost index. We take
this additional step to ensure that the index is not confounded by unobserved differences in j between villages.



                                                             43
D     Likelihood Functions

We detail the likelihood functions for each model in this section. The log-likelihoods we estimate
can be expressed by:
                               Lm =          wi ln[ei Lm                  m
                                                       1i ( ) + (1 - ei )L0i ( )]                   (10)
                                        i

where m indexes the models and specifications (e.g. m  {CMNL,RC,CC}). wi are household-
specific weights, described in Appendix A. ei is a variable taking the value of 1 if household i is
eligible for the AP voucher and Lm
                                 1i ( ) is the sub-likelihood of choices given the household is eligible.
We detail these model-specific likelihoods below.  (for a given m) represents the parameter vector
we aim to estimate. For kindergarten households in our dataset, we observe AP voucher eligibility,
ei . However, ei is unknown for first graders. We thus specify for these households that

                                               P r(ei = 1)
                                        ln                   = b Ci
                                             1 - P r(ei = 1)

where Ci includes observed household characteristics (demographics, parental education, discrete
household asset levels).
    We estimate equation (10) using the EM algorithm. At the -maximization step, we maximize:

                            ~m =            em     m
                                                                 ~m        m
                            L           wi [~i ln L1i ( ) + (1 - e i ) ln L0i ( )]
                                    i


where e
      ~i is the conditional or posterior probability that i is eligible for the AP voucher (if i is a
first grader) given model m. This is given by:

                                                        ei Lm
                                                            1i ( )
                                    ~m
                                    e i =         m
                                              ei L1i () + (1 - ei )Lm
                                                                    0i ( )

The algorithm iterates on the expectation and maximization steps until the parameter vector 
converges.


D.1    Clustered and Random Coefficient Model Likelihoods

The likelihoods for these models are pretty standard expressions, so we do not write them out here.
Both numerically integrate over the private school-specific random effects. We use 100 Halton
draws for this integration. For the random coefficient model, we use Gauss-Hermite quadrature to
integrate the random coefficient.




                                                       44
D.2    Ability-to-Pay Constrained Likelihood

The constrained choice model requires integration over households' unobserved ability-to-pay. This
integration is simplified by the fact that there are a finite number of possible choice sets (or states)
                          index schools in i's village in terms of ascending tuition and fees (such
for each household. Let ji
that Ji is the most expensive). Then, state ji
                                              corresponds to the choice set in which the household

             , but not j  + 1: p   Y  p  .
can choose ji           i       ji  i  ji +1

   Given the assumption on the choice shocks, the probability that i chooses private school j in
                                can be written as:
their village in choice state ji

                                      
                                                 1{pj  pji
                                                          } exp Uij
                                Pij (ji )=                                                         (11)
                                               j Vi 1{pj  pji } exp Uij
                                                             



Note that this choice probability is 0 if j is not in the choice set and the summation in the
denominator is only over those village alternatives for which i is able to pay.
   If ability-to-pay were observed, these choice probabilities would be simply plugged into the
log likelihood for estimation. With unobserved ability-to-pay, however, we integrate out the finite
possible choice sets for each i. Let ij  denote the probability that household i is in choice state
  . Given the distributional assumption for  , we can write this as:
ji                                          i


                                          Yi < pj  +1 )
                             ij  = P (pji        i

                                              ln Yi < ln pj  +1 )
                                  = P (ln pji              i

                                              +1 - I 
                                        ln pji                    - I 
                                                            ln pji
                                                    i                i
                                  = (                 ) - (            )
                                                                   

For the most expensive choice alternative, the expression is modified accordingly as:


                                     iJi = P (ln pJi  ln Yi )
                                                       ln pJi - Ii 
                                             = 1 - (                )
                                                             

Combining the expressions for the choice probabilities with these state probabilities, the likelihood
function takes the form:
                                                                        dij
                                   LCC
                                    i ( ) =         ij           Pij (ji )                         (12)
                                                
                                               ji         j Vi

Though not represented in the above expression, the ability-to-pay constrained choice model also
includes private school-specific error components. As with the clustered and random coefficient
models, we numerically integrate these normal random effects using 100 Halton draws.


                                                    45
E    Willingness-to-Pay and Compensating Variation Calculations

Calculating willingness-to-pay and the compensating variation of a voucher in money terms requires
scaling the changes by marginal (flow) utility of consumption. To obtain an estimate of marginal
utility of consumption for each model, we calculate:

                                                   m
                                                  ^i
                                    m
                                    i =
                                           1 +  + 2 + 3 + 4

where m indexes the models (e.g. m  {CMNL,RC,CC}),  m corresponds to estimated coefficients
                                                   ^i
on tuition and fees (presented in Table 3), and  is the effective annual discount factor. For  , we
use the product of 0.95 (a 5% annual discount rate) and 0.94 (the annual probability that a voucher
recipient remains in private school, calculated from Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015)). Note
that we also use  for calculating expected costs and fiscal externalities of vouchers.
    This calculation of marginal utility of consumption can be viewed as following from the assump-
tions that primary schooling is five periods (during which tuition remains constant) with future
periods discounted by  and that the post-primary schooling value of the primary school choice
does not depend on primary school tuition and fees. This latter assumption may be violated if,
for example, a voucher during primary school allows some households to finance private secondary
schooling. In such a case, however, note that our estimates of compensating variation will be lower
bounds.


F    Additional Tables




                                                 46
          Table A20: Characteristics of Private Schools by Quartile of Tuition and fees
                                                            1st    2nd       3rd       4th
                    Tuition and fees (Rs.)                   720   1,327    1,957      3,295
                    English medium                          0.34    0.43     0.76       0.92
                    Full pucca building                     0.45    0.40     0.44       0.64
                    Library                                 0.76    0.74     0.74       0.85
                    Functioning toilet                      0.75    0.78     0.82       0.92
                    Separate toilet for girls               0.53    0.55     0.57       0.71
                    Staffroom for teachers                  0.55    0.68     0.76       0.84
                    Has secondary school                    0.22    0.32     0.24       0.22
                    Multi-class teaching                    0.36    0.23     0.30       0.18
                    Share teachers absent                   0.09    0.12     0.08       0.10
                    Share teachers with BA                  0.47    0.46     0.63       0.73
                    Share teachers female                   0.73    0.69     0.71       0.72
                    Share teachers from village             0.55    0.52     0.38       0.42
                    Offers Hindi                            0.36    0.33     0.41       0.59
                    Teaches computer skills                 0.01    0.09     0.13       0.29
                    School value-added                      0.03    0.12     0.03       0.08
                    N                                        74       76          70      73




Table A21: Estimates: Willingness-to-Pay (1000s of Rs.) for 1 Mile Reduction in Travel Distance
to School
                                                          CMNL RC CC
                 Overall                                                   6.77    6.11    7.54
                 Female                                                    6.86    6.31    7.90
                 Muslim                                                    3.94    4.47    5.41
                 Lower caste                                               6.90    5.43    6.56
                 Older sibling in gov't school                             6.58    6.04    7.03
                 Both parents completed primary school                     6.63    5.74    7.65
                  1 parent completed secondary                             6.20    5.35    7.17
                 Both parents laborers                                     6.87    5.88    7.10
                 Asset level < 3                                           6.16    4.87    7.38
                 Asset level = 3                                           7.72    6.42    7.95
                 Asset level = 4                                           8.17    7.58    7.52
                 Asset level > 4                                           5.10    5.53    7.33
                 Notes : Table presents average willingness-to-pay (1000s of Rs.) by subgroup
                 for 1 mile reduction in travel distance to school. Estimates correspond to
                 baseline specifications described in the text.




                                                       47
                                              Table A22: Preference Heterogeneity in Baseline Model Specifications
     CMNL        RC     CC      School characteristic         Interactions
        X         X             Tution and fees               Eligibility, total siblings, discrete asset levels (e.g. asset level = 3, etc.)
        X         X      X      Distance                      Eligibility, female, Muslim, lower caste
        X                       Closest Public
        X         X      X      Private                       Eligibility, female, Muslim, lower caste, parental education, older sibling gov't, total siblings
        X         X      X      English medium                Female, Muslim, lower caste, parental education
        X         X      X      Value-added                   Female, Muslim, lower caste, parental education
        X         X      X      Offers Hindi                  Female, Muslim, lower caste, parental education




48
        X                       Facilities
        X                       Teaching Quality
        X                       Teacher Char.
        X                       Secondary
     Notes : Table details preference heterogeneity in baseline model specifications. For CMNL model, heterogeneity for each non-tuition attribute is captured by 51 group-specific
     coefficients (not interactions); tuition is interacted with listed household characteristics. Like other models, CMNL model also includes private school and distance interactions
     with AP voucher eligibility. Parental education variables are whether both parents completed primary and whether at least one completed secondary school. Facilities (e.g.
     pucca), teaching quality (e.g. multiclass teaching, share teachers absent), and teacher characteristics (e.g. share female, from village) attributes are first principal factors.
     Secondary is an indicator for whether school offers secondary grades. Variables included in the models but not listed in the table are indicators for imputed tuition and fees and
     for missing value-added, effects of which are not heterogeneous across households.
                                          Table A23: Estimates and Predictions for Alternative Model Specifications
                                            Specification                                             Demand          Constraint       Surplus       Fit     Take-up       Voucher
                           A. Ability-to-pay Constrained (CC)
     (1)   Baseline                                                                                           0.47             0.24        7.99     -0.02         0.63                93
     (2)   Instead uses cost index IV                                                                         0.45             0.22        7.89     -0.01         0.61                86
     (3)   No control function                                                                               -0.09             0.25      -76.68     -0.02         0.35                10
     (4)   Includes whether lower caste in preferences and ability-to-pay                                     0.47             0.23        7.96     -0.02         0.62                93
     (5)   Includes whether parents are laborers in preferences and ability-to-pay                            0.46             0.25        8.13     -0.01         0.63                94
     (6)   Allows preferences for private schooling to be cohort-specific                                     0.45             0.14        7.29      0.00         0.64                86
     (7)   Does not include eligibility for AP voucher in the model                                           0.67             0.37        8.44      0.10         0.78                76




49
     (8)   Does not re-weight for sample attrition in estimation                                              0.48             0.27        7.98     -0.02         0.63                99
                      B. Clustered Multinomial Logit (CMNL)
     (1) Baseline                                                                                             0.65                0         4.78    -0.04         0.54                82
     (2) Instead uses cost index IV                                                                           0.70                0         4.87    -0.04         0.56                88
                                  C. Random Coefficient (RC)
     (1) Baseline                                                                                             0.47                0         4.66    -0.01         0.53                63
     (2) Instead uses cost index IV                                                                           0.48                0         4.70    -0.01         0.53                64
     Notes : Table reports select estimates and predictions for baseline and alternative model specifications. See Tables A24 and A25 for corresponding point estimates. Constraint
     column refers to probability that government-attending students cannot choose any private school; surplus column reports welfare gain to compliers. Surplus reported in 1,000s
     of Rs. Fit column is difference between model predicted private school attendance of eligible kindergartners and share observed in the data.
Table A24: Ability-to-pay Constrained Model Estimates: Baseline and Alternative Specifications
                                                 (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)         (8)


     Tuition and fees                           -1.28    -1.19      0.25      -1.29     -1.28    -1.25    -1.52    -1.29
     First stage residual (baseline IVs)         1.77                          1.77      1.78     1.67     1.94     1.73
     First stage residual (alternative)                   1.59
     Random effect                               2.66     2.64      2.48       2.66      2.63     2.33     2.30     2.53
     Log distance                               -1.41    -1.38     -1.33      -1.42     -1.41    -1.00    -1.10    -1.38
               x Eligible for AP voucher         0.29     0.28      0.23       0.30      0.28     0.04              0.22
                                x Age > 5        0.15     0.14      0.15       0.15      0.15     0.11     0.31     0.17
                                 x Female       -0.14    -0.14     -0.15      -0.14     -0.14    -0.15    -0.13    -0.12
                                 x Muslim        0.13     0.13      0.16       0.13      0.14     0.13    -0.01     0.17
                            x Lower caste       -0.05    -0.05     -0.06      -0.05     -0.06    -0.08    -0.10    -0.02
                       x Parents laborers                                                0.03
                            x First grader                                                      -0.31
     Closest public school                       0.78     0.80      0.74      0.78      0.79     0.76     0.77     0.78
     Private                                    11.35    10.80      9.76     11.40     11.52    10.06     3.50    11.14
               x Eligible for AP voucher       -10.13    -9.66    -10.43    -10.18    -10.15    -8.70             -9.77
                                 x Female       -0.60    -0.70     -0.58     -0.59     -0.60    -0.58     -0.59   -0.74
                                 x Muslim        0.16     0.01      0.04      0.16      0.11     0.23     -0.33    0.00
                            x Lower caste       -1.50    -1.61     -1.54     -1.57     -1.37    -1.69     -2.19   -1.39
     x Both parents completed primary            0.17     0.21      0.07      0.17      0.08     0.03      0.50    0.17
     x  1 parent completed secondary             0.58     0.37      0.76      0.57      0.57     0.73      1.91    0.53
                  x Older sibling in gov't      -2.59    -2.52     -2.45     -2.59     -2.59    -2.12     -3.06   -2.53
                       x Total siblings - 2     -0.07    -0.09     -0.03     -0.07     -0.06    -0.34      0.38    0.08
                       x Parents laborers                                              -0.26
                            x First grader                                                       -1.59
     English medium                              0.90     0.83     -0.12       0.90      0.90     0.89     0.87     0.79
                                 x Female       -0.92    -0.93     -0.93      -0.92     -0.92    -0.91    -0.74    -0.85
                                 x Muslim        1.42     1.46      1.41       1.42      1.42     1.33     1.76     1.56
                            x Lower caste        0.05     0.07      0.26       0.04      0.06     0.11     0.04    -0.02
     x Both parents completed primary            0.85     0.83      0.90       0.85      0.85     0.81     0.79     1.07
     x  1 parent completed secondary             1.35     1.33      1.06       1.36      1.34     1.19     1.18     1.24
     Value-added                                 0.51     0.52      0.47       0.51      0.51     0.49     0.34     0.54
                                 x Female        0.03     0.03      0.04       0.03      0.03     0.07    -0.02    -0.05
                                 x Muslim       -0.16    -0.16     -0.20      -0.16     -0.17    -0.20    -0.19    -0.24
                            x Lower caste       -0.04    -0.04     -0.01      -0.05     -0.05    -0.07     0.07    -0.03
     x Both parents completed primary            0.31     0.27      0.16       0.31      0.31     0.26     0.42     0.37
     x  1 parent completed secondary            -0.51    -0.56     -0.57      -0.51     -0.51    -0.49    -0.45    -0.54
     Offers Hindi                                0.03    -0.03     -0.21       0.03      0.02     0.07    -0.03    -0.03
                                 x Female        0.55     0.55      0.53       0.55      0.54     0.44     0.47     0.51
                                 x Muslim        1.15     1.04      1.03       1.15      1.16     1.17     0.70     1.09
                            x Lower caste        1.15     1.13      1.09       1.15      1.16     1.08     1.07     1.28
     x Both parents completed primary            0.39     0.36      0.25       0.39      0.40     0.31     0.47     0.31
     x  1 parent completed secondary             0.18     0.11      0.11       0.18      0.18     0.18     0.14     0.36
     Unrecognized private                       -0.61    -0.67     -0.64      -0.62     -0.62    -0.51    -0.45    -0.49
     Facilities factor                           0.46     0.45      0.32       0.46      0.46     0.44     0.45     0.44
     Teaching quality factor                    -0.34    -0.33     -0.43      -0.34     -0.34    -0.30    -0.27    -0.32
     Teacher characteristics factor             -0.06    -0.08     -0.02      -0.06     -0.06    -0.07    -0.01    -0.07
            Ability-to-pay function
     Constant                                    2.96     3.27      3.08       2.93      2.96     2.60    2.44      3.29
     Asset factor                                1.09     1.21      1.08       1.09      1.01     0.93    2.23      1.17
     Eligible for AP voucher                    -1.29    -1.34     -1.42      -1.28     -1.23    -0.75             -1.61
     Total siblings - 2                          0.37     0.42      0.31       0.37      0.34     0.53    -0.12     0.21
     Lower caste                                                               0.11
     Parents laborers                                                                   -0.34
                                                 1.34     1.50      1.42      1.33       1.34     1.16    2.10         1.50

     Share first graders eligible               0.60      0.60     0.59      0.60      0.60      0.49              0.59
     Attrition weights                           Y         Y        Y         Y         Y         Y        Y        N
                                                             50
     Notes : Table reports point estimates for baseline and alternative specifications of ability-to-pay constrained
     model. Estimates on indicator for whether school serves secondary grades, whether value-added is missing,
     whether tuition is imputed, and whether distance is missing not reported.
                 Table A25: Logit Demand Model Estimates
                                                RC                     CMNL
                                          (1)        (2)         (1)          (2)
                                                             Coef    SD  Coef     SD


Tuition and fees                          -2.35      -2.43   -2.00          -2.23
          x Eligible for AP voucher        0.07       0.16    0.37           0.50
                    x Asset level = 2      0.45       0.46    0.22           0.24
                    x Asset level = 3      0.74       0.73    0.45           0.46
                    x Asset level = 4      1.12       1.11    0.68           0.69
                    x Asset level > 4      0.81       0.80    0.39           0.38
                  x Total siblings - 2     0.05       0.04    0.05           0.03
First stage residual (baseline IVs)        1.60               1.48
First stage residual (alternative)                  1.62                     1.64
Random effect                              2.23     2.26      1.73           1.79
Log distance                              -1.15    -1.12     -0.94   0.55   -0.95          0.55
          x Eligible for AP voucher       -0.06    -0.07     -0.30          -0.28
                           x Age > 5       0.15     0.14
                            x Female      -0.11    -0.11
                            x Muslim       0.10     0.10
                       x Lower caste      -0.05    -0.05
Closest public school                      0.75     0.76      0.78   1.01    0.81          1.01
Private                                   11.75    11.60      6.84   5.67    6.64          5.65
          x Eligible for AP voucher      -10.86   -10.63     -8.78          -8.51
                            x Female      -0.72    -0.81
                            x Muslim       0.96     0.79
                       x Lower caste      -1.81    -1.94
x Both parents completed primary           0.94     0.98
x  1 parent completed secondary            0.97     0.68
             x Older sibling in gov't     -3.52    -3.42
                  x Total siblings - 2     0.14     0.10
Random coeff.                              3.32     3.23
English medium                             0.91     0.95     -0.35   6.36   -0.23          6.37
                            x Female      -0.89    -0.89
                            x Muslim       1.31     1.38
                       x Lower caste      -0.07    -0.09
x Both parents completed primary           0.88     0.86
x  1 parent completed secondary            1.29     1.32
Value-added                                0.50     0.52     0.36    0.74    0.38          0.75
                            x Female       0.05     0.04
                            x Muslim      -0.16    -0.12
                       x Lower caste       0.00    -0.01
x Both parents completed primary           0.32     0.30
x  1 parent completed secondary           -0.57    -0.62
Offers Hindi                              -0.05    -0.06     1.13    8.92    1.11          8.89
                            x Female       0.53     0.51
                            x Muslim       1.09     1.00
                       x Lower caste       1.19     1.20
x Both parents completed primary           0.21     0.18
x  1 parent completed secondary            0.21     0.14
Unrecognized private                      -0.52    -0.61     -0.34          -0.42
Facilities factor                          0.45     0.45      0.52   0.44    0.53          0.44
Teaching quality factor                   -0.32    -0.31     -0.20   0.70   -0.17          0.71
Teacher characteristics factor            -0.07    -0.10     -0.01   0.38   -0.05          0.38

Share first graders eligible               0.60      0.60        0.57               0.57
Notes : Table reports point estimates for random coefficient and clustered multinomial logit
models using (1) baseline instruments and (2) alternative cost index instrument. Estimates
on indicator for whether school serves secondary grades, whether value-added is missing,
whether tuition is imputed, and whether distance is missing not reported. Coef columns
report across-cluster averages of estimates 51
                                             for CMNL model; SD columns report across-
cluster standard deviations. CMNL models include 51 clusters.
                                                                      Table A26: Factor variables
              Asset factor                     Facilities factor                   Teaching quality factor              Teacher characteristics factor         Product space location IV
            Variables          Coef           Variables            Coef              Variables                Coef           Variables              Coef           Variables           Coef
                                                                                                                                                            Other, same-village...
     Pucca house               0.65    Full pucca building         -0.04   Multi-class teaching                0.31   Average age of teachers        0.00   Private schools              0.25
     Water facility in home    0.41    Library                      0.21   Share teachers with BA             0.32    Share teachers female         -0.22   English medium schools       0.16
     Household toilet          0.55    Full compound walls          0.25   Share teachers with ed. training    0.74   Share teachers lower caste     0.08   Unrecognized schools        -0.02
     Owns home                  0.11   Staffroom for teachers       0.67   Share teachers absent               1.15   Share teachers from village   -0.24   Schools' value-added         0.01




52
     2 covered rooms in home    0.63   Functional water tap         0.28   Share teachers actively teaching   -0.90   Share teachers Hindu           2.46   Schools offering Hindi      -0.01
     Owns land                  0.28   Separate toilet for girls    0.35   Share teachers maintaining disc.   -0.52   Share teachers Muslim         -0.33   Schools' facilities          0.02
     Constant                  -1.40   Playground                   0.33   Constant                           -0.38   Share teachers Christian      -0.28   Schools' teaching quality   -0.01
                                       Firstaid                     0.42                                              Constant                      -1.86   Schools' teacher char.      -0.01
                                       Kitchen facility             0.00                                                                                    Schools                     -0.03
                                       Has electricity              0.40                                                                                    Constant                    -1.07
                                       Constant                    -1.52

     N                         5,255                               645                                        645                                    645                                293
