                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE POLITICAL-ECONOMIC CAUSES OF THE SOVIET GREAT FAMINE, 1932­33

                                      Andrei Markevich
                                      Natalya Naumenko
                                         Nancy Qian

                                      Working Paper 29089
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29089


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We are extremely grateful to Ekaterina Zhuravskaya for her generous support; and thank Daron
Acemoglu, Maxim Ananyev, Paul Cata eda Dower, Michael Ellman, Ruben Enikolopov, Jeff
Frieden, Scott Gehlbach, Mikhail Golosov, Sergei Guriev, Mark Harrison, Oleg Khlevniuk,
Alexey Makarin, Victor Malein, Joel Mokyr, Gerard Padro-i-Miquel, Steven Nafziger, Marco
Tabellini, Chris Udry and Yuri Zhukov for their insights; the participants of the Trinity College
Applied Economics Workshop, CERGE-EI Applied Economics Workshop, EIEF workshop,
HECER (Helsinki Center of Economic Research) Labor and Public Economics seminar, 2020
Summer Workshop in the Economic History and Historical Political Economy of Russia,
Northwestern Economic History Lunch, Northwestern Development Lunch, George Mason
Economic History Lunch, the NBER Political Economy Workshop, the Ridge Conference, the
ASSA/AEA On the Role of and Culture and Community 2020 session. For excellent research
assistance, we thank Pavel Bacherikov, Nikita Karpov, Ivan Korolev, Kaman Lyu and Carlo
Medici. All mistakes are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andrei Markevich, Natalya Naumenko, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political-Economic Causes of the Soviet Great Famine, 1932­33
Andrei Markevich, Natalya Naumenko, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 29089
July 2021
JEL No. N14,O1,O13,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

This study constructs a large new dataset to investigate whether state policy led to ethnic
Ukrainians experiencing higher mortality during the 1932­33 Soviet Great Famine. All else
equal, famine (excess) mortality rates were positively associated with ethnic Ukrainian
population share across provinces, as well as across districts within provinces. Ukrainian
ethnicity, rather than the administrative boundaries of the Ukrainian republic, mattered for famine
mortality. These and many additional results provide strong evidence that higher Ukrainian
famine mortality was an outcome of policy, and suggestive evidence on the political-economic
drivers of repression. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that bias against Ukrainians
explains up to 77% of famine deaths in the three republics of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus and up
to 92% in Ukraine.

Andrei Markevich                                 Nancy Qian
New Economics School                             Kellogg School of Management
45 Skolkovskoe shosse                            Northwestern University
Moscow                                           2001 Sheridan Road
Russia                                           Evanston, Il 60208
ammarkevich@gmail.com                            and NBER
                                                 nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Natalya Naumenko
Department of Economics
George Mason University
Carow Hall, Office 10
4500 Roberts Rd
Faifax, VA 22032
nata.naumenko@gmail.com
    The Political-Economic Causes of the Soviet Great Famine,
                                                   1932­33
                      Andrei Markevich, Natalya Naumenkoand Nancy Qian§

                                                   July 20, 2021


    This study constructs a large new dataset to investigate whether state policy led to ethnic Ukraini-
ans experiencing higher mortality during the 1932­33 Soviet Great Famine. All else equal, famine
(excess) mortality rates were positively associated with ethnic Ukrainian population share across
provinces, as well as across districts within provinces. Ukrainian ethnicity, rather than the ad-
ministrative boundaries of the Ukrainian republic, mattered for famine mortality. These and many
additional results provide strong evidence that higher Ukrainian famine mortality was an outcome
of policy, and suggestive evidence on the political-economic drivers of repression. A back-of-the-
envelope calculation suggests that bias against Ukrainians explains up to 77% of famine deaths in
the three republics of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus and up to 92% in Ukraine.
       JEL: N4, P2 Keywords: Repression, Mass Killings, Ethnic Conflict


1      Introduction
In just two years, 1932 and 1933, up to 10.8 million individuals died in the Soviet Great Famine. In
terms of total deaths, this was the second worst famine in the 20th century. At least 30% to 45% of
the victims were ethnic Ukrainians, who constituted 21% of the pre-famine Soviet population.1
    
     We are extremely grateful to Ekaterina Zhuravskaya for her generous support; and thank Daron Acemoglu, Maxim
Ananyev, Paul Catañeda Dower, Michael Ellman, Ruben Enikolopov, Jeff Frieden, Scott Gehlbach, Mikhail Golosov,
Sergei Guriev, Mark Harrison, Oleg Khlevniuk, Alexey Makarin, Victor Malein, Joel Mokyr, Gerard Padro-i-Miquel,
Steven Nafziger, Marco Tabellini, Chris Udry and Yuri Zhukov for their insights; the participants of the Trinity College
Applied Economics Workshop, CERGE-EI Applied Economics Workshop, EIEF workshop, HECER (Helsinki Center
of Economic Research) Labor and Public Economics seminar, 2020 Summer Workshop in the Economic History and
Historical Political Economy of Russia, Northwestern Economic History Lunch, Northwestern Development Lunch,
George Mason Economic History Lunch, the NBER Political Economy Workshop, the Ridge Conference, the ASSA/AEA
On the Role of and Culture and Community 2020 session. For excellent research assistance, we thank Pavel Bacherikov,
Nikita Karpov, Ivan Korolev, Kaman Lyu and Carlo Medici. All mistakes are our own.
   
     New Economic School (Moscow, Russia), amarkevich@nes.ru, CEPR
   
     George Mason University, nnaumenk@gmu.edu
   §
     Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University, nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu, NBER,
BREAD, CEPR
   1
     The Soviet Great Famine incurred an approximately similar mortality rate as the Chinese Great Famine (1959­61),
which had a higher number of total deaths. The Background Section discusses the estimated range in mortality rates.



                                                           1
       The causes of the famine and the high Ukrainian mortality have been a subject of much contro-
versy. One side claims that the famine was a "terror" intentionally waged by the Soviet government
on the Ukrainian peasantry (e.g., Conquest, 1986). Ukrainians were the largest ethnic group in
grain-producing regions, they had a strong group identity, a history of confrontation with the Bol-
sheviks during the Civil War and resisted Soviet efforts to control agriculture, which constituted
nearly half of GDP. Thus, the regime targeted Ukrainians in its efforts to control rural production
(e.g., Graziosi, 2015). Some have gone further to argue that the famine was intended to annihilate
the ethnic Ukrainian population.2 The other side claims the opposite: that there was no systematic
bias against Ukrainians. Historians note that areas outside of Ukraine also experienced famine (e.g.,
Kondrashin, 2008). Some acknowledge that Ukrainians experienced higher famine mortality, but do
not believe that it was due to state repression. Instead, they argue that bad weather and pre-famine
policies led to larger harvest declines and higher mortality in areas populated by Ukrainians (Davies
and Wheatcroft, 2004; Kotkin, 2017). This heated debate is at an impasse because of the lack of
disaggregated data to evaluate competing hypotheses.
       The primary contribution of our study is to address the data limitation by constructing the largest
and most comprehensive dataset for interwar Soviet Union, 1922­40. Drawing mainly from archival
sources, we construct panel data at the province and district levels, which contain information about
economic, political, historical, geographical and climatic factors. The data include the three largest
and most populous Soviet republics: Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. The large sample size, long time
horizon, disaggregated units of observation and rich set of variables allow us to distinguish between
competing hypotheses and provide rigorous empirical evidence on the extent of Ukrainian bias in
the famine.3
       Our analysis aims to answer two questions: i) did ethnic Ukrainians experience higher famine
mortality; and ii) was this due to systematic bias in Soviet economic policy or factors outside the
control of the government in 1932? In addition, we provide a large body of descriptive evidence to
shed light on the potential drivers of Ukrainian bias.
       We begin by documenting the patterns of Ukrainian famine mortality rates. First, we examine
whether ethnic Ukrainians experienced higher famine mortality when controlling for the important
confounding factors that have emerged in the literature: weather, food production and urbaniza-
tion. We use the province-level panel and regress mortality rates on the interaction of pre-famine
Ukrainian population share and the famine year dummy variable and find that the interaction effect
is positive. We infer Ukrainian mortality rates from this correlation because there are no ethnic-
specific mortality data. Conceptually, the interaction coefficient captures mortality in Ukrainian-
   2
     In Ukrainian, the famine is called the "Holodomor," which means "to kill by starvation." The Ukrainian Parliament
(2006) and Applebaum (2017) refer to it as a genocide. The European Parliament (2008) condemned it as a "crime against
humanity". See Background Section for a detailed discussion.
   3
     The district-level panel includes Russia and Ukraine because of the lack of pre-famine mortality data for Belarus.
See Appendix Section G for the list of data sources used to construct the sample used in this study.



                                                          2
populated regions during the famine relative to other years. This accounts for the fact that mortality
can differ across regions for reasons unrelated to the famine. We use the terms excess and famine
mortality interchangeably in the paper.
    The baseline specification controls for lagged grain production (predicted by weather and ge-
ography), urban population share, each of their interactions with the famine year indicator, and
province and year fixed effects. Thus, our finding of higher famine mortality in ethnic Ukrainian
areas cannot be due to differences in agricultural production, weather or urbanization rates.4
    We show that the results are robust to controlling for the intensity of dekulakization, which
aimed to eliminate wealthy peasants who had resisted Soviet agricultural reforms, and the drop in
livestock, which occurred a few years prior to the famine and could have affected grain production
and the ability to survive harvest shortfalls. We also check that the estimates are robust to a large
number of additional geo-climatic (e.g., latitude and longitude), demographic (e.g., age and gender
ratios), pre-famine institutional (e.g., religion, share of serfs, share of peasants in repartition com-
munes) and political controls (e.g., Bolshevik vote share in 1917). Since these additional controls
are time-invariant, we control for their interactions with the famine dummy variables. To address
potential measurement error in the historical data, we show that the results are robust to alternative
measures of Ukrainian population share and mortality, as well as to examining natality rates as an
alternative measure of famine severity.
    We find that mortality is positively associated with Ukrainian population share only during the
famine. In non-famine years, the association is negative. In addition, using a similar specifica-
tion, we find that Ukrainian population share is uncorrelated with famine mortality during the 1892
famine, the last large famine under the Tsars. These results suggest that higher Ukrainian mortality
is specific to the Soviet famine and unlikely to be driven by time-invariant correlates of Ukrainian
population share (e.g., social capital, informal institutions, or cultural norms).
    Second, given that existing studies focus on the comparison of the famine in Ukraine versus
Russia, we examine the relative importance of ethnic versus administrative boundaries. We find
that the positive relationship between ethnic Ukrainian population share and famine mortality in
the province-level panel is present even if we omit Ukraine. Furthermore, we can use the more
granular district-level panel to examine the presence of a Russia-Ukraine border effect. The data
show a discrete decline in mortality rates when crossing the border from Ukraine to Russia. But
this decline disappears when we control for the ethnic Ukrainian population share of each district.
Thus, ethnic boundaries matter for the famine, while administrative boundaries do not matter.
    Third, we investigate whether the positive mortality-Ukrainian gradient observed across provinces
is also present within provinces. Soviet economic policies were centrally planned and implemented
top-down through the bureaucracy. If the systematic pattern we observe between ethnic Ukrainian
   4
     We also show that our results are robust to directly controlling for weather instead of weather-predicted grain pro-
duction.



                                                           3
population share and famine mortality was an outcome of state policy, we would expect to see sim-
ilar patterns at all levels of government administration. This is indeed the case. The district-level
data show that famine mortality is also positively associated with Ukrainian population share within
provinces (i.e., when we control for province-year fixed effects).
    The results in the first part of the paper support the belief that there was systematic repression
against Ukrainians during the famine. The finding that Ukrainian ethnicity matters while Ukrainian
administrative boundaries do not reconciles the view that Ukrainians were systematically repressed
with the observation that the famine was not isolated to Ukraine. A back-of-the-envelope calculation
using the province-level estimates implies that ethnic bias against Ukrainians explains up to 92%
of total famine mortality in Ukraine and up to 77% in the three republics in our sample. These
estimates should not be interpreted literally, but as illustrative of the importance of ethnic bias
towards Ukrainians in explaining famine mortality. We provide a large body of evidence against
alternative explanations for our findings that do not require Ukrainian bias (e.g., weather, rigidity in
centrally planned procurement) in the paper.
    The second part of the paper presents additional findings that provide further support for the
presence of systematic bias against Ukrainians, and shed light on the drivers of repression. We
leverage the richness of our data to connect famine mortality to the economic and political moti-
vations of the regime and policy. Most of this analysis uses the province-level panel for which we
have a larger set of variables.
    The main economic motivation for the repression of Ukrainians arises from the regime's objec-
tive to control agriculture combined with the conventional wisdom that Ukrainians were historically
more resistant to the Bolsheviks than other groups. We investigate the extent to which the data
support this view by first documenting that Ukrainians resisted agricultural collectivization more
than other ethnic groups in the years before the famine. Then, we proxy for a region's importance
to Soviet grain production with official 1928 grain production, which was used to design agricul-
tural policy in the First Five Year Plan (1928­32). We estimate the triple interaction effect of the
Ukrainian population share, the famine year indicator and reported 1928 grain production on mor-
tality. The coefficient is positive, which means that famine mortality was increasing in Ukrainian
population share in provinces that were important for Soviet agriculture, as perceived by policy-
makers. This result is robust to controlling for the triple interaction effect of Ukrainian population
share, the famine year indicator and political loyalty to the regime and state capacity.
    Interestingly, the latter triple interaction coefficient is statistically zero in this regression, which
is effectively a horse race between the triple interaction with 1928 grain production and the triple
interaction with political loyalty and state capacity. Thus, political factors unrelated to grain pro-
ductivity do not explain Ukrainian famine mortality. The triple interaction estimates also show that
the central planner's perception of regional grain productivity was positively associated with famine
mortality only in regions where ethnic Ukrainians resided, and famine mortality was positively as-


                                                     4
sociated with Ukrainian population share only for productive regions. These results are consistent
with the view that the repression of Ukrainians was focused on controlling grain production.
       Finally, to link famine mortality and policy, we examine the centrally planned agricultural poli-
cies that most directly affected food availability ­ agricultural collectivization and grain procure-
ment. Consistent with the conventional wisdom that these policies contributed to famine, we docu-
ment that famine mortality was positively associated with the intensity of both collectivization and
grain procurement. Next, we examine these policy variables as outcomes in our baseline and in the
specification with the triple interaction of Ukrainian population share, famine dummy variable and
1928 grain production. Consistent with collectivization and procurement contributing to Ukrainian
famine mortality, all of the estimates have similar signs as when we examined mortality as the
outcome.5
       Since collectivization and procurement are planned centrally, the results support the interpre-
tation that higher Ukrainian mortality was an outcome of policy. We also examine the allocation
of tractors, which were highly valued and also decided centrally. The estimated effects for tractors
have the opposite signs as for mortality, collectivization and procurement. The fact that central
planners withheld tractors from Ukrainian-populated areas supports the presence of Ukrainian bias
in government policy and a non-cooperative relationship between Ukrainians and the regime at the
time of the famine.
       The findings from the second part of the paper show that centrally planned policies known
to have contributed to famine mortality were more intensively enforced in regions with larger
Ukrainian population shares. Moreover, the mortality-Ukrainian gradient and the policy intensity-
Ukrainian gradient both increase in the importance of a region for agricultural production. Together,
these findings support the interpretation that ethnic Ukrainians were systematically repressed during
the famine. The nuanced patterns of repression are consistent with the view that the regime's desire
to control grain production together with its fear of Ukrainian nationalist resistance resulted in the
famine being especially harsh in ethnic Ukrainian areas (e.g., Graziosi, 2015).
       It is beyond the scope of our empirical analysis to be conclusive about the motivation for repres-
sion. The empirical and historical evidence together suggest that it was likely the combination of
Ukrainians' importance to agricultural production together with their opposition to the Bolsheviks
that made them a target. We provide a speculative discussion in the Conclusion.
       Our study contributes to several literatures. First, we add to a small but rapidly growing litera-
ture on the Russian and Soviet political economy in the 19th and 20th centuries. We are the first to
provide rigorous empirical evidence that Ukrainians across the USSR suffered higher famine mor-
   5
     To illustrate the effect of Ukrainian bias on famine through collectivization or procurement, we estimate a two-stage
specification, where we instrument for the interaction of collectivization (procurement) and the famine dummy variable
with the interaction of Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy variable. The coefficients are positive and
statistically significant. These results should be interpreted as illustrative since there are other ways for Ukrainian bias to
increase mortality rates.



                                                              5
tality rates or experienced differential exposure to collectivization policies, that ethnic delineations
matter over administrative ones, or show the heterogeneity in Ukrainian famine mortality. In pro-
viding evidence on the political-economic determinants of ethnic-specific persecution, we are most
similar to Grosfeld, Sakalli, and Zhuravskaya (2020), which finds that anti-Jewish pogroms during
1800­1927 were triggered by a break of borrower-lender relationships in times of political turmoil.
Our study is related to Gregory, Schröder, and Sonin (2011) and Castañeda Dower, Markevich, and
Weber (forthcoming), which explain why dictators, such as Stalin, would kill citizens who are not
real enemies; and Egorov and Sonin (2011), which considers the tradeoffs for dictators like Stalin,
in maximizing the loyalty of followers.6 We also complement macro calibrations of Soviet indus-
trialization policies by Cheremukhin, Golosov, Guriev, and Tsyvinski (2017), which intentionally
excludes the cost of famine because of data limitations.
       Our study sheds light on the root causes of ethnic tensions between Ukrainian and Russians,
which has been found to affect the behavior of firms (Korovkin and Makarin, 2019) and political
outcomes in the Ukraine today (Rozenas and Zhukov, 2019).7 In this sense, we are related to
studies on the persistence of historical features in this context, such as in the case of the abolition of
serfdom (Markevich and Zhuravskaya, 2018; Buggle and Nafziger, 2019), forced migration (Bauer,
Braun, and Kvasnicka, 2013; Becker, Grosfeld, Grosjean, Voigtlander, and Zhuravskaya, 2020),
peasant rebellions (Castañeda Dower, Finkel, Gehlbach, and Nafziger, 2018; Finkel and Gehlbach,
2020), mass repressions (Talibova and Zhukov, 2018), and anti-Semitism (Grosfeld, Rodnyansky,
and Zhuravskaya, 2013; Acemoglu, Hassan, and Robinson, 2019).8 Korovkin and Makarin (2019)
documents the effect of modern ethnic tensions between Ukrainians and Russians on firms, and
Rozenas and Zhukov (2019) documents the impact of famine-induced ethnic tensions on political
outcomes today. Also related is Egorov, Enikolopov, Makarin, and Petrova (2020), which studies
the cost of ethnic diversity, a legacy of historical ethnic tensions in Russia. Gorodnichenko and
Roland (2017) and Roland (2010) document the long-run effects of Communism more generally.
       The findings add to recent studies on the causes of ethnicity-delineated mass killings in East-
ern and Central European contexts such as Croatia-Serbia (DellaVigna, Enikolopov, Mironova,
Petrova, and Zhuravskaya, 2014) and Nazi Germany (Adena, Enikolopov, Petrova, Santarosa, and
Zhuravskaya, 2015).9
       Our study contributes to the large literature on the causes of famine. Recent empirical analyses
have examined contexts such as China (e.g., Li and Yang, 2005; Meng, Qian, and Yared, 2015),
   6
     For a comprehensive overview of the political economy problems faced by autocrats, see Gehlbach, Sonin, and
Svolik (2016) and Egorov and Sonin (2020).
   7
     The emergence of repression when Bolshevik ideology proclaims equality across all ethnicities complements the
theoretical insights from Mitra and Ray (2014) on the origins of conflict between Hindus and Muslims.
   8
     Also, see Finkel, Gehlbach, and Kofanov (2017) for a study of the causes of peasant rebellions in 1917.
   9
     Our results are consistent with the theoretical predictions from Caselli and Coleman II (2013) and Esteban, Morelli,
and Rohner (2015) that ethnic conflict and strategic mass killings are more likely with high levels of natural resources
(agriculture in the Soviet famine context).



                                                           6
India (e.g., Sen, 1981; Burgess and Donaldson, 2017), and Ireland (e.g., Ó Gráda, 1999).10 Existing
studies have not rigorously examined the Soviet famine, which had very different political and eco-
nomic conditions compared to other contexts. For example, we show that the mechanisms Meng,
Qian, and Yared (2015) found to have contributed to famine in China, another centrally planned
economy, are not binding in the Soviet context. Our study adds to Naumenko (2021), which doc-
uments a positive association between collectivization and famine mortality in a cross-section of
districts in Ukraine.
         This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the historical background. Section
3 presents descriptive statistics. Section 4 presents the main results on famine mortality in ethnic
Ukrainian areas. Section 5 presents additional results. Section 6 concludes.


2         Background
2.1        Basic Facts
Approximately half of Soviet GDP in 1928 comprised of agriculture, most of which was grain pro-
duction (Wheatcroft and Davies, 1994). Grain was also one of the main exports. Boosting grain
production was critical for the economic prosperity and political survival of the Bolshevik regime
(1917­91). The main agricultural economic policy was collectivization of individual farms. Forced
collectivization began in late 1929. Agriculturally productive regions, amongst which Ukraine was
a focal point, were collectivized earlier and more intensively. By the summer of 1932, the collec-
tivization rate exceeded 60% in the USSR and was almost 70% in Ukraine (Davies and Wheatcroft,
2004).
         Collectivization aimed to remove private property and to organize peasants into large collective
farms which were believed to be more productive than small individual farms and which the govern-
ment could control directly. The government banned the trading of food and instead procured grain
directly from collective farms (and the remaining individual peasants). In theory, peasants were
meant to be left with enough for subsistence. Procured food was distributed to the urban industrial
population or exported.
         These policies were unpopular in rural areas. Peasants did not want to give up their property for
free and resisted collectivization. They slaughtered, ate or simply neglected collectivized livestock.
Between 1929 and 1932, the number of horses declined by 42%, cattle by 40% (Viola, 1996, p. 70).
    10
     Li and Yang (2005) estimates the dynamic effects of China's Great Leap Forward policies on the Chinese Great
Famine, 1959­61. Meng, Qian, and Yared (2015) documents that there was no aggregate food shortage during the Chi-
nese Great Famine, mortality was positively associated with food production, and attribute part of the famine mortality
to centralized food procurement policies. Sen (1981) argues that the Bengal famine was due to unequal food distribu-
tion between surplus producers, the failure of credit and insurance markets, and food hoarding by the British Colonial
government. Burgess and Donaldson (2017) finds that access to railroads reduced famine severity in Colonial India. Ó
Gráda (1999) provides a comprehensive study of the economic and political causes of Irish Famine of 1847. See Ó Gráda
(2009) for a discussion of major famines in history.


                                                          7
De-classified secret police reports reveal much active resistance, mostly in the form of arson, killing
communist officials in the rural areas, demonstrations, or the dissemination of anti-Soviet leaflets.
Wealthier, more productive peasants, or those actively resisting collectivization, were persecuted as
kulaks. In the dekulakization campaign, approximately two million peasants were exiled to Siberia
and other remote areas, amongst whom approximately 500,000 perished (Viola, 2007).
      The first news of possible famine began to circulate during the harvest of 1931. According to
the official estimates, production was 17% lower than the previous year.11 News of starvation and
possible famine traveled to Moscow, but instead of relaxing the policies that, as peasants believed,
had caused starvation, the government intensified them: it increased grain procurement targets by
20%, from 22.1 million tons in 1930 to 26.6 million in 1931 (Wheatcroft, 2001). Starving peasants
often consumed seed stock. The lack of seed stock and a weakened labor force contributed to lower
production in 1932. The procurement quotas for 1932 remained high, and the central government
insisted on their fulfillment (Davies, Harrison, and Wheatcroft, 1994).
      Deaths from starvation began to increase quickly towards the end of 1932 and peaked in the
winter and spring of 1933. National mortality rates returned to trend in 1934, although some places
took longer to recover. In total, approximately 5 to 10.8 million died, and mortality was concentrated
in rural areas though there were some accounts of famine mortality in urban areas.12
      Collectivization and the famine were accompanied by rapid migration out of the countryside
to the cities where living standards were higher. More than 23 million peasants migrated to urban
areas in the 1930s (Kessler, 2002). Together with shocks of Stalin's mass repressions and WWII,
these large-scale population changes make it difficult to explore the long-run consequences of the
famine. The Soviet government denied the existence of the 1932­33 famine until the late 1980s.


2.2     Soviet National [Ethnic] Policy
Bolshevik ideology did not discriminate against ethnic minorities, i.e., ethnic-delineated nationali-
ties within the Soviet Union.13 However, the regime was wary of nationalistic sentiments. The Civil
War (1918­20) revealed the strength of separatist nationalist movements, many of which viewed
the Soviet state as a Russian state. To secure their rule, the Bolsheviks gave equal rights to eth-
nic minorities. In 1923, the year following the establishment of the Soviet Union, the government
   11
      Davies and Wheatcroft (2004) Table 1 reports the official 1930 harvest estimate to be 83.5 million tons, and the
official 1931 harvest estimate to be 69.5 million tons.
   12
      Conquest (1986) estimates total famine deaths to be 7 million. Davies and Wheatcroft (2004) estimates 5.5 to 6.5
million deaths. Ellman (2005) cites "'about eight and a half million' victims of famine and repression in 1930­33."
Kondrashin (2008) gives a range between 5 and 7 million victims. Russian historical demographers estimate 7.2 to 10.8
million famine victims (Polyakov and Zhiromskaya, 2000). In 2008, the Russian State Duma postulated that within the
territories of the Volga Region, the Central Black Earth Region, Caucasus, Ural, Crimea, Western Siberia, Kazakhstan,
Ukraine and Belarus, the estimated famine death toll was 7 million people (State Duma, 2008).
   13
      Martin (2001) goes further and argues that ethnic minorities had preferential treatment until the end of the indige-
nization policies and refers to the early Soviet Union as "the affirmative action empire."



                                                            8
launched a policy of indigenization (korenizatsiya). The policy aimed to neutralize nationalist sep-
aratist movements by providing legal forms of "nationhood". In regions where minorities consti-
tuted the local majority, it encouraged schooling and the publication of books in native languages,
promoted native culture (national literature, theaters, museums, etc.), required running local gov-
ernment affairs in the native language, and promoted natives into leadership positions in the party,
government and industry.
      One of the byproducts of Soviet indigenization policy was to emphasize ethnicity. The regime
established a hierarchy of national autonomous administrative units: republics -- provinces -- dis-
tricts -- village soviets. The system of smaller and smaller national administrative units together
with the high local ethnic concentration (e.g., villages usually contained a dominant majority ethnic
group) deepened ethnic delineations. For example, in Ukraine, ethnic Germans had preferential
rights in "German" villages. Thus, access to land in the early Soviet era de facto depended on eth-
nicity. This further incentivized the already ethnically segregated population to live with co-ethnics,
and forced individuals to explicitly and officially define their ethnicity (Martin, 2001, Chapter 2).
      From the beginning of its realization, Bolshevik leaders worried that indigenization policy and
the increasing salience of ethnicity might become problematic for the regime. They recalled their
political difficulties during the Civil war in areas populated by non-Russian ethnicities, such as
ethnic Ukrainians, where peasants supported national movements. As early as 1925, Stalin said
"the national [ethnic nationalities] question [is], in essence, a peasant question" (Stalin, 15 April
1925 as quoted in Graziosi, 2015). This concern intensified when peasants, particularly Ukrainian
peasants, strongly resisted collectivization. Common ethnic identity and residential concentration
facilitated collective action among ethnic groups and made nationalism one of the key threats to
collectivization. Concerns about nationalist opposition to the regime were so strong by the autumn
of 1932, that the indigenization policy was de facto terminated (Graziosi, 2015; Martin, 2001).


2.3     Ukrainians
According to the 1926 Population Census, Ukrainians were the largest ethnic minority and consti-
tuted 21% of the Soviet population. Russians were the majority with 53% of the population. 23.2
million ethnic Ukrainians lived in Ukraine and an additional 7.9 million lived in Russia and Belarus.
      Importantly, Ukrainians were the largest ethnic group in areas that were officially designated as
"grain-surplus" areas (where production far exceeded subsistence levels during non-famine years).
      Ukrainians had a strong group identity that included their own language and culture. During the
Civil War, the Bolsheviks were forced to pay attention to the "national question" by strong politi-
cal opposition from nationalists in Ukraine. This contributed to the introduction of indigenization
policy. The Ukrainian communist party was the largest national branch of the Soviet communist
party. Soviet officials of the Republic of Ukraine tended to view themselves as representatives of
the interests of ethnic Ukrainians across the Soviet Union. In the countryside, ethnic Ukrainians

                                                   9
lived in concentrated communities both within and outside Ukraine (Martin, 2001). Thus, a region
(e.g., province) with a large share of ethnic Ukrainians usually contains a large number of sub-units
(e.g., villages) with ethnic Ukrainian majorities. This is important for interpreting the results we
present later in the paper.
       There are no systematic data on ethnic-specific mortality rates. One way to approximate eth-
nic Ukrainian mortality is to use the most cited total famine death toll for the USSR, 7 million
(Conquest, 1986), and the death toll of 2.6 million (Meslé, Vallin, and Andreev, 2013) to 3.9 mil-
lion (Rudnytskyi, Levchuk, Wolowyna, Shevchuk, and Kovbasiuk, 2015) for Ukraine. If famine
deaths were equally distributed between ethnic Ukrainians (80% of Ukraine) and others, and as-
suming that no ethnic Ukrainians died outside Ukraine, then ethnic Ukrainian deaths constitute
30% (.8 × 2.6/7 = .3) to 45% (.8 × 3.9/7 = .45) of the total famine deaths.
       Many historians argued that the strong resistance to collectivization among ethnic Ukrainians
was the key reason of their systematic persecution.14 Indeed, a common language and national
identity, and experience in resisting the Bolsheviks during the Civil War facilitated the collective
action of the Ukrainians. On the eve of the famine, when regional party officials began reporting
food shortages to Stalin and asking for procurement reductions, the central leadership believed that
the shortages resulted from intentional peasant resistance. The Stalin-led government believed that
the peasants, including Ukrainian peasants, should be penalized for their subversion.15
       In late summer of 1932, when it was obvious that enforcing procurement quotas would cause a
severe famine, Stalin received multiple reports indicating the reluctance of Party leaders at all levels
in Ukraine to facilitate the starvation of so many peasants.16 Stalin responded by sending special
commissions headed by his closest deputies, Vyacheslav Molotov and Lazar Kaganovich, neither of
whom were ethnic Ukrainians, to implement the full force of Soviet policies in Ukraine and North
Caucasus, the two key grain-producing regions where most ethnic Ukrainians lived (Kotkin, 2017).
       On December 14, 1932, the Politburo of the Communist Party and the Soviet government issued
a classified decree in which the government insisted on complete fulfillment of grain procurement in
Ukraine, North Caucasus and the Western region and required the arrests of communists (e.g., party
secretaries) and local officials who failed in this task. In the same decree, the communist leaders ac-
cused Ukrainian nationalists within the Communist Party and local bureaucracy of sabotaging grain
procurement. The decree required regional authorities in Ukraine (as well as the North Caucasus
and the Western region) to "crush" any resistance of "counter-revolutionaries" and nationalists and
to fulfill procurement quotas (Danilov, Manning, and Viola, 1999­2006, Volume 3, Document 226).
  14
      See, for example, Conquest (1986), Ellman (2007), Graziosi (2015), Mace (2004) and Snyder (2010).
  15
      There are many documents showing that Stalin advocated for over-procurement --­ leaving peasants with less than
subsistence -- as a method to discipline the peasants, whom he believed to have intentionally understated their production
capacity (Danilov, Manning, and Viola, 1999­2006; Davies and Wheatcroft, 2004).
   16
      For example, in a letter to his deputy Lazar Kaganovich from August 11, 1932, Stalin mentioned that the party
district committees in about fifty districts in Ukraine had spoken out against state procurement quotas. He expressed his
concerns that the Soviet government "could lose Ukraine" (Davies, Khlevniuk, Rees, Kosheleva, and Rogovaya, 2003).


                                                           10
3         Descriptive Statistics
3.1        Mortality
Our sample includes nineteen provinces from the three most populous republics of the Soviet Union:
Belarus, Russia and Ukraine. Altogether, the sample includes 84% of the 1926 Soviet population
and areas that contributed 88% of the 1928 Soviet grain production.17 The average province has 6.5
million people in 1926. All data are mapped to the 1932 province borders. See Appendix Section
G for a list of all data sources and a detailed discussion of the construction of our sample.
         Figure 1a plots mortality rates (the number of deaths divided by total population) from 1923 to
1940. This is our main dependent variable for the analysis later in the paper. It shows that mortality
rates are reasonably constant over time at approximately twenty per thousand, but spike in 1933 to
nearly forty per thousand. Figure 2a plots yearly mean mortality across provinces and the standard
deviation in mortality across provinces normalized by mean mortality. It shows that there is always
variation in mortality across provinces, but it increases dramatically during the famine. This means
that famine severity was very unequal across regions.18
         Appendix Figure A.1a maps famine excess mortality, defined as mortality in the famine 1933
year minus mortality in the "normal" 1928 year for the provinces in our sample.19 Ukraine along
with the southern provinces of Russia suffer higher excess mortality than other regions.20


3.2        Ukrainian Population
The 1926 Population Census is commonly viewed as one of the highest quality Soviet censuses
(Andreev, Darskij, and Kharkova, 1998). It is the latest census prior to agricultural collectivization.
In 1926, the population share of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians were 53.1% and 21.3% in the
Soviet Union, 57.2% and 23.1% in our sample, and 41.9 and 43.8% in "grain-producing" provinces.
Grain-producing provinces are a subset of our sample. This is an official designation used by Soviet
central planners and procurement agencies, it indicated the importance of a province for agricultural
production. These statistics show that Ukrainians were the second largest ethnic group compared to
    17
      Within Russia, our sample does not include Far East, Yakutia, and the ethnic territories of the North Caucasus re-
gion: Chechen Autonomous Province, Cherkess Autonomous Province, Dagestan Autonomous SSR, Ingush Autonomous
Province, Kabardino-Balkarian Autonomous Province, Karachay Autonomous Province, North Ossetian Autonomous
Province. The excluded regions comprise less than 3% of the 1926 population of Russia. For these regions, and for the
Soviet territories outside of Belarus, Russia and Ukraine, there are no reliable mortality data until the mid-1930s.
   18
      We conduct a caloric accounting exercise in the Appendix Section A. It shows that aggregate food production and
rural retention after procurement (food delivered to the urban areas and for export) was far above the level required for
maintaining population. This is true for the Soviet Union and for each of the republics in the sample. Thus, factors such
as high grain exports and the degree to which food was transferred to urban populations to support industrialization, both
of which are deducted when calculating rural retention, are not key to understanding overall famine mortality.
   19
      Using other years in the 1920s produces similar spatial patterns.
   20
      Appendix Figure A.1c maps excess mortality at the district level. Appendix Figure A.1e maps the excess mortality
after demeaning by province fixed effects. It shows that there is significant variation within provinces.



                                                           11
Russians, but the largest group in grain-producing provinces. For understanding the importance of
Ukrainians, it is worth noting that the next largest ethnic group was an order of a magnitude smaller.
Belorussians were 3.2% of total Soviet Union population and 3.5% of our sample.21
      Appendix Figure A.1b maps the share of ethnic Ukrainians in the rural population for each
province as reported in the 1926 Census. It shows that the greatest concentration of Ukrainians is in
Ukraine, but that there is also substantial variation outside of Ukraine. Agriculturally productive re-
gions are shaded in crosses. Ukrainians are concentrated, but not exclusively residing in productive
regions.22

3.3     Ukrainian Resistance to Collectivization
From declassified secret police reports, we have several measures of peasant resistance from January
1931 to March 1932, the period preceding the famine. The first is the number of anti-Soviet "violent
acts" per 1,000 people. These acts include murders or attempted murders of local officials, arsons
and the destruction of collective farm or state property. The second is the number of mass unrest
demonstrations in the countryside. The third is the number of anti-Soviet leaflets uncovered by the
secret police. For brevity, we examine the first principal component of the three indicators as the
dependent variable.
      Table 1 regresses this measure of peasant resistance on the population share of Ukrainians in
rural areas (column 1), the share of households that are collectivized in 1931­32 (column 2), and
then, in addition, the interaction of these two variables (column 3). The regressions use a cross-
section of nineteen provinces and control for urban population share. The positive coefficients for
collectivization in columns (2) and (3) show that peasant resistance was higher in provinces that
experienced more collectivization. The positive interaction coefficient in column (3) shows that
resistance to collectivization is increasing in the share of Ukrainians in rural areas.
      In interpreting these results, it is important to recall the high degree of residential segregation
across ethnic groups in rural areas of the Soviet Union. A higher share of rural ethnic Ukrainians in
a province means a higher number of ethnic Ukrainian villages. The positive association between
rural Ukrainian population share and per capita resistance is consistent with the findings by histo-
rians discussed in the background section and the conventional wisdom that strong group identity
and local organization facilitate organizing resistance.
      In columns (4)­(6), since both collectivization and resistance to it could have been driven by
grain productivity of the province, we control for officially reported 1928 grain production per
capita. These were the numbers used by central planners to determine regional production and
procurement quotas. The estimate for resistance is unchanged.
   21
      Appendix Table A.1 Panel A lists the ten largest ethnic groups in the Soviet Union, Panel B lists the ten largest ethnic
groups in our sample, and Panel C lists the ten largest ethnic groups in the grain-producing provinces of our sample.
   22
      Appendix Figure A.1d maps Ukrainians at the district level. Appendix Figure A.1f maps Ukrainians at the district
level after demeaning by province fixed effects. It shows that there is significant variation within provinces.


                                                             12
4         Famine Mortality in Ethnic Ukrainian Areas
4.1        Baseline Estimates
To examine whether areas with higher share of ethnic Ukrainians suffered higher mortality rates
than other ethnic groups, we estimate the following equation

                 mortalityi,t+1 =  + U krainiani × F aminet + X it + i + t + it .                                        (1)

Mortality rate in province i during year t + 1 is a function of: the interaction of the share of ethnic
Ukrainians in the rural population of province i in 1926, U krainiani , and a dummy variable that
equals one in the famine year, F aminet ; province fixed effects i ; and year fixed effects  t . Since
U krainiani is a time-invariant measure, the uninteracted term is absorbed by the province fixed
effects. The additional controls, Xit , include the per capita grain production in province i during
year t, Grainit , and its interaction with F aminet ; urban population share in province i during year
t, and its interaction with F aminet . Our baseline assumes that grain production in year t is used
mostly to feed the population in year t + 1. We define the famine dummy to equal one in 1932
because 1933 was the year with the highest mortality rates when the famine became apparent in all
regions. We estimate standard errors that are adjusted for spatial correlation.23
         All our estimates control for per capita grain production. Although there is no mention of
measurement error in official regional grain production figures, we cautiously predict production
using weather and natural conditions.24 We use monthly temperature and precipitation data from
Matsuura and Willmott (2014) together with province-level grain production for years prior to the
establishment of the communist regime, 1901 to 1915, and weather data during the period of our
study to predict weather-driven production.25 Controlling for urban population share and its inter-
action with the famine accounts for the fact that Soviet food policies varied between urban and rural
areas.26
         Table 2 column (1) estimates the relationship between province grain production and subsequent
mortality. If the famine was caused by local weather shocks and food shortages, the relationship
between grain production and famine mortality should be negative (more food should lead to less
deaths). However, inconsistent with the local weather shock explanation, the correlation between
predicted grain production and famine mortality is positive, although not statistically significant.27
    23
     We follow the recommendations by Colella, Lalive, Sakalli, and Thoenig (2019) in adjusting for spatial correlation
within 1,500 kilometers (the mean province width in our sample is 1,300 km).
  24
     Discussions about mismeasurement have focused exclusively on inflated official reports in aggregate production,
which was one of public indicators of Soviet economic growth (Wheatcroft and Davies, 1994; Davies and Wheatcroft,
2004).
  25
     See the Appendix Section C for a detailed discussion.
  26
     We control for time-varying urbanization measured at the province and year level. The results are similar if we
control for urbanization reported by the 1926 Census interacted with the famine dummy. They are available upon request.
  27
     The correlation between famine mortality and official reports of grain production is positive and statistically signifi-


                                                            13
    Column (2) is the baseline. The interaction of Ukrainian population share and the famine
dummy is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. Taken literally, column (2) implies
that in a province that was 100% ethnic Ukrainian, famine mortality rate would have been higher
than in a province with no ethnic Ukrainians by 51 per 1,000 individuals. To assess the magnitude
of the result, note that one standard deviation in 1933 mortality rates in our sample is 0.013 and
one standard deviation in Ukrainian population share is 0.216. Thus, during the famine, increasing
Ukrainian population share by one standard deviation would result in a 0.825 standard deviation
increase in mortality. This is a large effect.
    The fact that we are controlling for weather-determined food production means that higher
famine mortality in ethnic Ukrainian areas was not due to different weather conditions or food
production across regions. Note that we can alternatively control for individual weather conditions
instead of predicted grain. The interaction estimate of interest is very robust. See Appendix Table
A.4.
    In columns (3) and (4) of Table 2, we control for dekulakization and the depletion of livestock
that resulted from collectivization and took place in the years just before the famine. The decline
in the number of wealthy and productive peasants and livestock could have reduced production
in a way that is not fully accounted for in our predicted grain measure. Moreover, the depletion
of livestock meant that the traditional means of avoiding famine -- slaughtering and eating the
livestock -- were unavailable to Soviet peasants. To examine the sensitivity of the interaction
coefficient of interest, we control for the number of kulak households exiled from each region in
1930­31 divided by the 1930 population and the drop in per capita livestock between 1929 and July
of 1931. Since these variables are time invariant, we control for their interactions with the famine
indicator. The interaction of Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy variable in columns
(3) and (4) are similar to the baseline.28
    Column (5) replaces the province fixed effects in the baseline specification with an uninteracted
Ukrainian population share variable. This allows us to observe the relationship between Ukrainian
population share and mortality during non-famine years and to address the concern that province
fixed effects over-control by absorbing relevant cross-sectional variation. The interaction coeffi-
cient is identical to the baseline in column (2), which implies that province fixed effects do not
over-control in practice. Interestingly, the uninteracted Ukrainian coefficient is -0.007 and statisti-
cally significant at the 1% level. This means that in non-famine years, Ukrainian population share
is negatively associated with mortality. It is only during the famine that mortality is positively as-
sociated with Ukrainian population share. The sum of the interaction coefficient and uninteracted
coefficient presented at the bottom of the table is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level.
cant. For brevity and to be consistent through the paper, we do not present these results.
   28
      Appendix Table A.5 presents estimates with alternative measures of the Soviet dekulakization campaign. We do not
include dekulakization and the drop in livestock in our baseline controls. Since the famine and these variables are all
outcomes of agricultural collectivization, including them in the baseline conceptually over-controls.


                                                         14
4.1.1     Dynamic Estimates

To observe the timing of differential mortality in and outside ethnic Ukrainian areas, we estimate
an equation similar to the baseline, except that we interact Ukrainian population share (and all
controls) with dummy variables for all years instead of only 1932. Each interaction coefficient
is the difference in mortality rate in year t + 1 between regions with 100% Ukrainian population
share and regions with zero Ukrainian population share relative to the mortality difference in the
reference year, 1923. Figure 3a shows a sharp temporal pattern. Prior to the famine, Ukrainian
population share was unassociated with mortality rates across regions. However, the correlation
becomes positive in 1932 and peaks in 1933. This pattern is consistent with historical accounts
of some starvation after the 1931 harvest, which then became a full-blown famine after the 1932
harvest. After 1933, regions with higher shares of Ukrainians had mortality rates similar to other
regions.29
       The sharp temporal pattern shows that higher Ukrainian mortality is specific to the famine. The
dynamic estimates and their standard errors are presented in Appendix Table A.6.


4.2      Robustness
Alternative Measures of Ukrainian Population Share and Mortality Rates                                The baseline de-
pendent variable is total mortality rate because this variable is available for a larger sample than
rural or urban mortality rates.30 The baseline uses rural Ukrainian population share as the explana-
tory variable because the famine was driven by agricultural policies targeted at the rural population.
Table 3 examines the sensitivity of our estimates to alternative ways of measuring the left and the
main right-hand side variables.
       In Panel A, column (1) restates the baseline. Columns (2) and (3) replace total mortality with
urban and rural mortality, respectively. The results confirm that higher famine mortality in regions
with a larger share of ethnic Ukrainians was mostly a rural phenomenon. The estimate for urban
mortality in column (2) is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. The estimate in column
(3) for rural mortality is large and statistically significant at the 1% level. Figure 3b presents the
year-by-year estimates for rural mortality. As with total mortality, it shows a sharp increase in the
association between rural mortality and Ukrainian population share during the famine years.
       Columns (4) to (7) of Table 3 use different measures of our main independent variable. Our
results are nearly identical if we use the total share of Ukrainians in column (4). In column (5), we
use urban Ukrainian population share; the coefficient is positive, statistically significant and larger
than the baseline. The increase in magnitude is mechanical because the share of urban Ukrainians
  29
      The post-famine patterns could reflect the partial relaxation of the most extreme aspects of Soviet agricultural poli-
cies, and also positive selection for survival (e.g., if the weakest had perished during the famine, then the surviving
population will have lower mortality rates than otherwise).
   30
      Rural and urban mortality are available starting in 1926, while total mortality is available starting in 1923.



                                                            15
is smaller than the rural or total shares. The similarity of the standardized coefficients presented
in italics in the table shows that the implied explanatory power of Ukrainian population on famine
mortality is similar. Columns (6) and (7) use the share of people whose mother tongue is Ukrainian
according to the 1926 and 1897 Population Censuses. The estimates are robust to these alternative
measures. Henceforth, we use the 1926 rural Ukrainian population share as the explanatory variable.
       Since the first signs of famine were documented after the 1931 harvest, we can alternatively
define the famine dummy variable to be equal to one in 1931 and 1932. The interaction coefficient
in column (8) is smaller in size, but still large, positive and statistically significant at the 1% level.
The decrease in magnitude is due to there being less variation in mortality across regions in 1931
(recall Figure 2a).

Alternative Measures of Famine Severity We address the concerns that the mortality could be
mismeasured by using natality as an alternative outcome variable. Live births typically decrease
with the famine severity.31 Figure 1b shows that the temporal and spatial patterns are similar to
mortality. Average natality rates begin declining around 1928 and reach the lowest levels in 1933
and 1934. Note that national birth rates remained low in 1934, when mortality rates had already
recovered. This is consistent with the fact that those who were starving were unable to become
pregnant in 1933 and to give birth in 1934. The figure also plots the standard deviation of natality
normalized by the mean over time. It shows that the variation increases dramatically during the
famine.
       Table 3 Panel B present the same specification as in Panel A with natality as the dependent
variable. The estimates are all negative, mirroring those for mortality, and statistically significant at
the 1% level.32

Demographic and Geographic Controls                     One may be concerned that young children are particu-
larly vulnerable to famine, and higher mortality in ethnic Ukrainian areas may be due to differences
in demographic composition across ethnic groups. Similarly, studies of famines have found that
survival rates differ for men and women (Dyson and Ó Gráda, 2002; Mokyr and Ó Gráda, 2002).
Table 4 column (2) controls for the population gender ratio and the share of individuals aged ten
and younger (as reported by the 1926 Population Census), each interacted with the famine indicator.
The Ukrainian interaction coefficient is 0.048 and is significant at the 1% level.
       Our results are also robust to a large number of other demographic controls: e.g., the share of
the elderly, etc. See Appendix Table A.7.
  31
      Starvation is negatively associated with the probability of pregnancy (and marriage), and is positively associated with
the probability of miscarrying and stillbirths (Dyson and Ó Gráda, 2002).
   32
      Appendix Figures A.3a and A.3b plot the coefficients from the dynamic estimates. We see a decline in the interac-
tion coefficients around and during the famine year. This means that Ukrainian population share was more negatively
associated with the birth rates during the famine. See Appendix Table A.6 for the coefficients and standard errors.



                                                            16
       To address the possibility that factors which can affect famine intensity such as social capital
(e.g., Durante and Buggle, forthcoming) and Ukrainian population share may be correlated across
provinces, column (3) controls for the triple interaction of latitude, longitude and the famine dummy
and all lower-term interactions. With these controls, the interaction estimate of interest is similar to
the baseline.

Omit Outliers and Specific Regions               Next, we examine the sensitivity of the estimates to exclud-
ing outliers or particularly agriculturally productive regions. In column (4) and (5), we exclude
Ukraine, where 75% of all Ukrainians in our sample reside, and three other regions where food
production was particularly concentrated (Lower Volga, North Caucasus, and West Siberia). The
estimate is similar to the baseline.33
       We return to discuss column (6) later in the paper.

Other Controls It is possible that ethnic Ukrainian areas were wealthier or had higher levels of
economic development and that the Soviet government targeted wealthier/more developed regions
with its agricultural policies. Appendix Table A.8 controls for the interactions of various proxies of
pre-Soviet regional wealth with the famine dummy variable. These proxies are the nominal regional
income per capita in 1897, real regional income per capita in 1897, regional labor productivity in
1897, regional rural labor productivity in 1897 (upper and lower bound estimates) from Markevich
(2019), the value of agricultural equipment in 1910, the number of horses in 1916, the number of
cows in 1916 and livestock in 1916 (from Castañeda Dower and Markevich, 2018). Our estimate of
the Ukrainian interaction coefficient is robust.


4.3      District-Level Analysis
The district-level panel consists of two years: 1928 and 1933. Almost all data are manually collected
from former Soviet archives. Belarus is omitted because we were unable to collect 1928 mortality
data for the republic. The increased granularity allows us to provide several additional pieces of
evidence. First, these data allow us to examine the claim that there was a strong border effect and
that the famine was notably more severe on the Ukrainian side of the border between Russia and
Ukraine.34 We define excess mortality as the difference between 1933 and 1928 mortality rates, and
plot this excess mortality against the distance to the border between Ukraine and Russia.
       Figure 4a shows that there is a jump downwards in mortality rates as one crosses the border
from Ukraine to Russia. However, this jump disappears once we control for urbanization and the
  33
      Note that the standardized coefficient is smaller in column (5). This is because the variation in Ukrainian population
share declines with these omissions.
   34
      The government introduced a ban on migration from Ukraine and from North Caucasus region in January 1933
(Danilov, Manning, and Viola, 1999­2006, Vol. 3). See, for example, Applebaum (2017) Chapters 10 and 11 for
recollections of differences in famine intensity at the border.


                                                            17
rural population share of ethnic Ukrainians. This can be seen in Figure 4b, which plots the mortality
residuals against distance to the border. These results imply that the Soviet policies which led to the
famine targeted ethnic Ukrainians rather than Ukraine.
      Second, the disaggregated data allow us to examine whether similar patterns exist across dis-
tricts within provinces and across provinces. Soviet policies were centrally planned and imple-
mented top-down by the bureaucracy. If collectivization or procurement targets were partly based
on Ukrainian population share and implemented systematically, we would expect similar associa-
tions across smaller administrative units within the larger units as well as across the larger units.
Table 5 column (1) replicates the baseline specification, where we include district and year fixed
effects, with the exception that we also control for province-year fixed effects to isolate the within-
province variation.35 These interacted fixed effects isolate the within-province variation and control
for factors that vary by province and year (e.g., regional political competition, leadership in specific
provinces).36 The results exhibit similar spatial patterns as the province-level estimates. This is
consistent with the presence of a systematic and centrally planned policy.
      Columns (2) to (10) show that the results are qualitatively similar when we subject the district-
level estimates to the same sensitivity checks as the province-level estimates (to the extent that the
data allow).


4.4     Alternative Explanations
This section discusses alternative explanations for higher famine mortality in ethnic Ukrainian areas
that have arisen in the literature which do not require Soviet policy to have systematic bias against
Ukrainians.

Weather Earlier studies have found that famine mortality was higher in regions that experienced
bad weather (and therefore, lower harvests) (Davies and Wheatcroft, 2004; Rozenas and Zhukov,
2019).37 Weather cannot be the driver of our findings because the baseline estimates control for
contemporaneous per capita grain production as predicted by weather variables. In Appendix Table
A.4, we replace the interaction of predicted grain production and the famine dummy with raw
weather variables. The interaction of Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy variable is
very robust.38
  35
     Note that we use urbanization from 1926 and 1933 because urbanization at the district level is not available for 1928.
We also use FAO GAEZ data base to construct a grain suitability index for each district because we cannot predict grain
production at the district level.
  36
     We estimate standard errors that are adjusted for spatial correlation. We follow the recommendations by Colella,
Lalive, Sakalli, and Thoenig (2019) and adjust for spatial correlation within 400 kilometers (the mean district width in
our sample is 76 km). Note that the distance of 400 km delivers the largest (most conservative) standard errors.
  37
     Note that Rozenas and Zhukov (2019) argues that bad weather does not preclude the presence of bias against Ukraini-
ans.
  38
     See Appendix Section D for more details.



                                                           18
Inadequate Relief           A common cause of famine mortality is inadequate relief. If harvests declined
in some regions (because of pre-famine policies or natural factors) and the government did not
deliver adequate relief, then a famine can occur. If lower production and inadequate relief were
the sole causes of the famine, then famine mortality will be higher in regions that produced less
food. Since our main estimates control for predicted per capita food production, this mechanism
cannot explain our results for higher Ukrainian mortality. Moreover, Table 2 column (1) shows
that the relationship between predicted per capita grain production and mortality is positive (though
statistically insignificant) for both famine and non-famine years. This goes against the inadequate
relief explanation.39

Central Planning Rigidities              In the context of the Chinese Great Famine, Meng, Qian, and Yared
(2015) provide evidence that a positive association between food productivity and famine mortality
is a feature of the information rigidities in the centrally planned procurement system.40 Since the
design of the Chinese system was based on the Soviet one, similar patterns in the Soviet Famine
would not be surprising. However, Table 2 column (2) shows that the positive interaction effect of
grain and the famine year dummy on mortality is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant.
The standardized coefficients for the Ukrainian interaction coefficient (0.825) is much larger than
the one for the grain production interaction coefficient (0.017). These estimates imply that for the
Soviet famine, Ukrainian bias dominates the problems of rigidity in central planning.

Culture, Social Capital, Informal Institutions, Historical Wealth                           Social capital can play an
important role for surviving famines (Durante and Buggle, forthcoming). Thus, higher famine mor-
tality in ethnic Ukrainian areas may be due to differences in social capital, other social norms or
networks. To investigate this possibility, we study the 1892 famine, the last large famine in the
Russian empire, using province-level mortality data from 1885 to 1913.41 Table 4 column (6) es-
timates our baseline specification for this earlier famine and shows that 1892 famine mortality is
not associated with Ukrainian population share. This shows that our main results are unlikely to be
explained by slow-moving features of Ukrainian culture.
    Another way to test the relevance of long-run cultural or institutional features of ethnic Ukrainian
   39
      In fact, it goes against any "despite best intentions" explanations, since these predict higher mortality in regions that
produce less food. For there to be no relationship, the government has to procure more food away from the productive
regions so that mortality rates are unrelated to productivity. For example, consider the classical example of credit or
insurance market failures. The argument is that harvest shocks lower the wages of peasants in stricken areas, so that they
cannot buy food from those who produced surpluses. The lack of credit and insurance markets makes them unable to
smooth food consumption during the shock and survive the famine. In these cases, mortality should always be higher in
places that produce less food.
   40
      They show that if there is a production drop that is proportional across regions, ambitious government procurement
would have led to more over-procurement and famine in places that produced more food.
   41
      We are grateful to Volha Charnysh for sharing 1885­1896 mortality and natality data from Charnysh and McElroy
(2020).



                                                             19
communities is to control for these variables. We focus on institutions that would affect cooperative
behavior, attitudes towards labor and property, and religion. One important historical institution in
this context is the repartition commune. Living in one required a more cooperative behavior (than
in a hereditary commune), and according to the 1905 Land Census, repartition communes were less
widespread in Ukrainian-populated regions than in Russian-populated regions. If the values of co-
operation were transmitted intergenerationally, this difference could contribute to the difference in
mortality between the two ethnicities.
       In addition, we control for other potentially important variables that could be correlated with
cultural norms, institutional development and historical wealth: the share of serfs in 1858 (three
years before the abolition of serfdom), the shares of Catholics and Orthodox Christians (the two
major religion groups in Ukraine) from the 1897 Population Census, the land Gini estimated from
the 1905 Land Census and peasant revolts per capita from 1895 to 1914. Appendix Table A.9
shows that our results are robust when we control for interactions of these variables with the famine
dummy.42


4.5      Back-of-the-Envelope Calculation
We conduct a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation to understand what famine mortality would
have been had there been no Ukrainian bias -- i.e., if the interaction coefficient of Ukrainian pop-
ulation share and the famine dummy variable in equation (1) was zero. Using the estimates from
equation (1) in Table 2 column (2), we predict that the number of deaths in non-famine years is on
average 2.70 million, and in 1933 is 4.97 million.43 The difference, 2.27 million (4.97 - 2.70 = 2.27
million) is the number of excess deaths due to the famine. If we assign the Ukrainian interaction co-
efficient to be zero, predicted deaths in 1933 would have been 3.22 million. The number of famine
deaths without ethnic bias would have been the difference between this number and the number of
deaths in non-famine years, 0.52 million (3.22 - 2.70 = 0.52 million). It follows that ethnic bias
accounts for 77% (1 - .52/2.27 = .77) of famine deaths in our sample.44
       To assess the plausibility of the back-of-the-envelope calculation, note that non-Ukrainian mor-
tality rates in our sample are low. Although we lack data on ethnic-specific mortality, the large
difference in mortality rates between ethnic Ukrainians and ethnic Russians is evident from com-
paring the mortality rates between Russia (where 78% are ethnic Russians) and Ukraine (where
80% are ethnic Ukrainians). For example, if we take total famine deaths to be seven million, and
subtract the deaths in Kazakhstan (1 to 1.5 million) and Ukraine (2.6 to 3.9 million), we are left
with approximately 1.6 to 3.4 million deaths for Russia (since there was little famine mortality in
  42
     Note that early Soviet policies such as dekulakization could have significantly affected social norms. These differ-
ences are addressed earlier when we controlled for pre-famine Soviet policies.
  43
     Note that this is close to 4.81 million 1933 deaths reported in our sample.
  44
     See Appendix Table A.10.



                                                          20
other republics). This implies famine mortality rates of 14 to 30 per 1,000 for the 112 million res-
idents of Russia. A similar calculation for Ukraine, which had a population of 32 million, yields
a famine mortality rate of 81 to 122 per 1,000, which is around four to six times larger than the
implied famine mortality rate in Russia. The large difference in mortality rates between the two
republics suggests that total mortality should be much lower if ethnic Ukrainians died at the same
rate as ethnic Russians.
      We can repeat the exercise for Ukraine separately. We find that in Ukraine during non-famine
years, predicted deaths are 0.52 million. Predicted deaths in 1933 are 2.03 million. The difference,
1.50 million (2.03 - 0.52 million, note that there is a small discrepancy due to rounding), is the
number of excess deaths due to the famine. If we assign the Ukrainian interaction coefficient a
value of zero, we predict deaths in 1933 to be 0.64 million. Famine excess deaths without ethnic
bias would have been the difference between this number and mortality in non-famine years, 0.12
million (0.64 - 0.52 = 0.12). Thus, ethnic bias accounts for 92% (1 - 0.12/1.50 = 0.92) of famine
excess deaths in Ukraine. Since approximately 80% of the population of Ukraine were ethnically
Ukrainian, our estimates imply higher mortality rates for ethnic Ukrainians than other ethnicities
(who were mostly Russians) in Ukraine.
      These estimates should not be interpreted literally, but as illustrative of the importance of ethnic
bias towards Ukrainians in explaining famine mortality.


5      Additional Results
This section provides additional descriptive facts that connect higher Ukrainian famine mortality to
the political and economic motivations of the regime. It also connects these motivations to centrally
planned policies known to have contributed to famine mortality.


5.1     Control over Grain Production
The most prominent political-economic explanation for the higher famine mortality in ethnic Ukrainian
areas is the regime's need to control grain production. Since Ukrainians were the largest ethnic
group in productive areas, had a stronger ethnic identity than other groups and were in sharp con-
flict with the Bolsheviks in 1917 and during the Civil war, the regime may have repressed Ukraini-
ans more than other groups living in productive regions to overcome potentially stronger resistance
(Graziosi, 2015). Consistent with this view is the earlier descriptive evidence that Ukrainian peas-
ants resisted collectivization more than other peasants. To investigate the grain control hypothesis,
we estimate the triple interaction of the importance of the region for grain production, the Ukrainian
population share and the famine dummy variable on mortality. If the regime systematically re-
pressed Ukrainians above and beyond other groups living in equally productive lands, the triple
interaction effect should be positive.

                                                    21
       As before, we measure a region's importance for grain production from the perspective of the
central planners with official per capita grain production in 1928. Agriculturally productive regions
were prioritized in collectivization efforts (e.g., Danilov, Manning, and Viola, 1999­2006).
       We focus our discussion on the triple interaction estimates in Table 6 Panel B. For brevity, we
do not discuss Panel A, which shows that the baseline estimates are robust to controlling for the
additional double interaction terms.
       In Panel B column (1), we estimate the triple interaction effect of 1928 grain production,
Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy on mortality. To account for the possible cor-
relation between urbanization and grain production, we also control for the triple interaction of
urbanization, Ukrainian population share and famine dummy. For similar reasons, we add the triple
interaction of predicted grain, Ukrainian population share and famine dummy. We control for all
lower order interaction terms that are not absorbed by the fixed effects.
       The triple interaction coefficient is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. This
means that during the famine, mortality in regions populated by Ukrainians was increasing in the
amount of grain production. The double interaction coefficient of grain production in 1928 and
the famine dummy is small and statistically insignificant. The precisely estimated zero implies that
grain production does not increase famine mortality in regions with no Ukrainian population.
       The double interaction coefficient of Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy is neg-
ative and statistically significant at the 1% level. We do not interpret the negative interaction of
Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy literally since it is out-of-sample (i.e., there are
no provinces with a large share of Ukrainians and zero grain production in 1928). However, the
fact that the estimate is not positive implies that the disproportionally high famine mortality rates in
regions populated by Ukrainians are specific to grain-producing areas.
       The estimates in column (1) are consistent with the hypothesis that the regime repressed Ukraini-
ans more than other ethnic groups living in agriculturally productive regions because of a stronger
opposition of ethnic Ukrainians to the Bolshevik regime. The finding that grain production does not
lead to higher famine mortality in regions without Ukrainians highlights the focus of the repression
towards Ukrainians.
       To examine the dynamic effects of the triple interaction, we estimate a similar specification
except that we replace the famine dummy variable with year fixed effects. Figure 5a plots the triple
interaction coefficients. The timing is very sharp. The triple interaction is zero in all years except
during the famine, when it spikes up.45
       Since we do not have 1928 grain output disaggregated by districts, we cannot replicate the
specification from column (1) at the district level. Instead, we use the FAO GAEZ grain suitability
index as a proxy for grain production potential of a district, and add the triple interaction of this
measure with famine dummy and Ukrainian population share into the baseline for the district-level
  45
       The triple interaction coefficients and their standard errors are presented in Appendix Table A.11.


                                                              22
estimates. The triple interaction coefficient in Panel B is positive and significant at the 1% level,
and the lower order interactions are statistically zero. They are consistent with the province-level
estimates.


5.2      Political Loyalty and State Capacity
The regime may also have had political motivations to repress Ukrainians during the famine (e.g.,
due to imagined or real fears of Ukrainian nationalist movement). To investigate this, we estimate
the triple interaction effects of Ukrainian population share, the famine dummy variable, and proxies
for regional political loyalty to the regime and state capacity on mortality. We examine three proxy
variables (that are only available at the province level).
       The first is the share of votes for the Bolshevik Party in the 1917 Constituency Assembly elec-
tion.46 This measure is a proxy for both political loyalty and state capacity as the Bolshevik regime
recruited cadres for state and party apparatus from loyal population. Table 6 Panel B column (3)
shows that the triple interaction effect is positive and statistically significant, which implies that
Ukrainian famine mortality was increasing in political loyalty and state capacity. The double inter-
action coefficient of Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy variable is precisely zero,
which implies that Ukrainians had similar famine mortality rates as other ethnic groups in provinces
that were not loyal to the regime. The interaction coefficient of the Bolshevik vote share and the
famine dummy is negative and statistically significant. This means that famine mortality was in-
creasing with political loyalty and state capacity only in provinces with ethnic Ukrainians.47
       The second proxy is the number of Communist Party Members (averaged over 1922, 1927 and
1931) per 1,000 individuals in each province. Party members were the key enforcers of state policy
in the countryside and were responsible for grain procurement. The triple interaction coefficient
is positive and statistically significant. The double interaction coefficient of the number of Party
members and the famine dummy is a precise zero. Thus, in provinces with no Ukrainians, political
loyalty and state capacity are unrelated to famine mortality. But the famine-mortality-Ukrainian-
population-share gradient is increasing in political loyalty and state capacity. These results are
consistent with the estimates for Bolshevik vote share.
       The third proxy is the number of Party secretaries (at the province, district, city and, if the city
was large, the borough level) who attended the 1930 Party Congress to vote formally for the policy of
comprehensive collectivization. Since the Congress was a showcase of support for collectivization
and all delegates voted in the affirmative, the number of voting delegates can be interpreted as a
  46
      The 1917 election was a free and universal election, the first and only until the end of the Bolshevik rule. Ap-
proximately 60% of the eligible voters turned out to vote. We follow Castañeda Dower and Markevich (2021) and use
disaggregated district-level data on votes for the Bolsheviks from Protasov, V.V. Zhuravlev, and Shelokhaev (2014). See
the Data Appendix for details.
   47
      The negative coefficient is also consistent with the fact that Stalin was known to reward group loyalty to the regime
with better access to food for the group (Gregory, 2003, Ch. 4).



                                                           23
proxy for loyalty of the local elites to the regime or commitment to agricultural collectivization,
as well as administrative capacity for implementing central policy.48 We are able to identify the
ethnicity of the delegates.49 Thus, we can separately examine the triple interaction of the number
of delegates according to whether they are ethnically Ukrainian or not. Panel B column (5) shows
that both triple interaction coefficients are positive and statistically significant, but the coefficient is
larger in magnitude for ethnically Ukrainian delegates. The difference between the two coefficients
is almost statistically significant at the 15% level (the p-value for equality of the coefficients is 0.16
and shown at the bottom of the table).
       These estimates imply that famine mortality in ethnic Ukrainian areas increased with the number
of delegates regardless of the ethnicity of the latter. However, non-ethnic Ukrainian delegates had
a larger effect on famine mortality in ethnic Ukrainian areas. These results are consistent with
historical accounts of ethnic Ukrainian Party members opposing harsh state policies once the famine
ensued (Kotkin, 2017). The double interaction coefficients are statistically zero.
       The three proxy variables produce consistent results. The positive association between famine
mortality and political loyalty and state capacity is increasing in Ukrainian population share. We
observe no association between political loyalty and state capacity and famine mortality in regions
without Ukrainians. As with the 1928 grain production analysis, this highlights the focus of the
repression towards Ukrainians.
       To parsimoniously capture the variation in the political proxies in one regression, we construct
the principal component of these three proxy variables. The triple interaction effect of the principal
component in Panel B column (6) is consistent with the estimates in columns (3) to (5).
       To examine the dynamic effects of the triple interaction, we replace the famine dummy variable
with year fixed effects. Figures 5b to 5f plot the dynamic triple interaction effects. The triple
interaction estimates are zero in all years except during the famine, when it increases dramatically.
The timing is sharp and shows that the effect manifests during the famine and is unlikely to be
driven by spurious correlations.50


5.3      Grain versus Other Political Factors
The triple interaction estimates of 1928 grain production and the political proxy variables support
the claim that the Soviet regime used the famine to systematically repress Ukrainians. The results are
ostensibly consistent with the repression being a result of the regime's political-economic objectives
  48
      The Sovietology literature (e.g., Frank, 1974) hypothesized that Party Congress delegates might be considered as a
proxy for the importance or loyalty of a region. Recent archive-based studies on center-regional relations in the Soviet
union do not usually challenge this interpretation (e.g., Khlevniuk and Gorlizki, 2020).
   49
      Upon arriving to the Congress, each delegate had to fill a registration form which had a question on ethnicity, and
these forms are available in the former Soviet archives. See the Data Appendix for exact references. There is insufficient
variation to distinguish between non-Ukrainian ethnic minorities.
   50
      The coefficients and their standard errors are presented in Appendix Table A.11.



                                                           24
(e.g., to control grain) as well as other political factors (e.g., to reduce the Ukrainian population for
political reasons unrelated to controlling agriculture).
       However, a closer examination of the evidence rules out the second hypothesis. First, we con-
sider an indirect statistical test. If the famine was meant to reduce Ukrainians regardless of grain
production, we should see higher famine mortality for ethnic Ukrainian areas everywhere. Yet, Ta-
ble 6 Panel B columns (1) and (2) show that Ukrainian areas do not suffer higher famine mortality
if they are not agriculturally productive.
       Second, we conduct a direct horse race between the triple interaction of per capita grain pro-
duction in 1928 and the first principal component of political proxies. If higher famine mortality in
ethnic Ukrainian areas was driven by political motivations that are unrelated to grain, the triple in-
teraction of political proxy will survive the horse race. Panel B column (7) presents the results. The
triple interaction estimate of the political proxy is small in magnitude and statistically imprecise.
In contrast, the triple interaction estimate of grain production is similar to column (1) in magni-
tude and remains statistically significant at the 1% level. These estimates go against the hypothesis
that repression of Ukrainians was driven by political factors unrelated to grain. They are consistent
with the main cause for repression being driven by the need to control grain production (or politi-
cal factors highly correlated with 1928 grain production, but uncorrelated with the political proxy
variables).51


5.4      Collectivization
This section connects the Ukrainian population share and regional importance to grain production
to centrally planned policies known to have contributed to famine mortality: agricultural collec-
tivization. Collectivization was the main Soviet economic policy for rural areas. It was supposed to
increase procurement by strengthening state control over harvests, as well as boost production by
increasing economies of scale and mechanization.
       Table 7 Panel A documents the relationship between famine mortality and collectivization poli-
cies. We estimate the baseline, equation (1), with two departures. First, we replace the interaction
of Ukrainian population share and the famine year dummy with the interaction of collectivization
and the famine year dummy. Since collectivization varies over time, we also control for the unin-
teracted collectivization term. Second, analogous to Table 6 Panel A column (1), we control for
  51
     The insights of Horowitz (1985) offer a complementary explanation to our preferred explanation that Ukrainian
repression was a result of the regime's desire to control grain. Lacking precise information on the likelihood of subversion,
the regime may have used Ukrainian population share, which we show to be more positively correlated with resistance
against collectivization than other groups, as a crude marker on which it conditioned its policies. This is a complementary
explanation for why we would find a positive triple interaction effect of grain production in 1928, Ukrainian population
share and the famine dummy on mortality. However, Appendix Table A.12 shows a positive triple interaction effect of
peasant resistance to collectivization prior to the famine, Ukrainian population share and the famine dummy on mortality.
This implies that the policy-marker hypothesis is consistent with the data if the regime believes that observed resistance
under-predicts future resistance for Ukrainians relative to other groups.



                                                            25
grain production in 1928 interacted with the famine dummy variable. We discuss this more when
discussing the results for Panel B.
       Columns (1) and (2) in Panel A examine two measures of collectivization: the share of house-
holds that belong to collective farms in column (1) and the cumulative sum of the annual rate of
collectivization since 1927 in column (2). The interaction effects are positive in both cases. Thus,
the intensity of collectivization is positively associated with famine mortality. At the district level,
we have data on collectivization only for 1930.52 In column (3), we adjust the specification accord-
ingly and show that collectivization is positively associated with 1933 excess mortality rates across
districts.
       Columns (4) and (5) return to using the province-level panel. As we discussed earlier in the
paper, collectivization is a bundle of policies. Amongst the policies that most directly contributed
to low food availability in the year of the famine, we were able to obtain the most consistent data
for food procurement.53 Since food procurement is naturally higher in larger regions, we normalize
grain procurement by production. Column (4) shows that the interaction effect of procurement and
the famine dummy on mortality is unsurprisingly positive and statistically significant.
       Column (5) examines tractor horsepower, a measure of mechanization. This is unrelated to
mortality and we return to discuss the variable when we present the results in Panel B.
       Panel B investigates whether these centrally planned policies were differentially implemented
in regions with higher Ukrainian population shares. We estimate the baseline, equation (1), with
the various aspects of collectivization as dependent variables. The only difference from the baseline
is that we also control for grain production in 1928 interacted with famine, which distinguishes
between the hypotheses that central planners targeted productive areas to collectivize versus that
they targeted Ukrainian areas to collectivize. Columns (1) and (2) show that the interaction of
Ukrainian population share and famine is positive for both collectivization measures. The estimates
at the district level in column (3) are consistent. Column (4) shows that the interaction effect is
positive for procurement. This means that during the famine, for two areas with the same degree
of grain production as perceived by central planners in 1928, the one with a larger ethnic Ukrainian
population share had been more intensively collectivized and suffered higher food procurement as
a share of production.
       Column (5) examines tractors, which were central to Soviet efforts to mechanize agriculture.
Ukrainian communists had hoped that cooperation with the central authorities in Moscow would
  52
     Collectivization is measured as the share of rural households in collective farms.
  53
     Another direct contributor to food availability is regional production. But since the main results show higher famine
mortality in ethnic Ukrainian areas while controlling for predicted production (see Table 2), regional production cannot
play an important role in explaining higher famine mortality in ethnic Ukrainian areas.
   In addition, collectivization reduced the traditional buffer savings of food, such as the backyard production of potatoes
and the destruction of livestock, or deteriorated social networks by breaking traditional family/village units by forcing
people to work in relatively artificial work teams and by removing family and friends who resisted collectivization. We
do not have data to examine these potentially important channels.



                                                            26
help mechanize agriculture in Ukraine (Martin, 2001). Tractors were valuable commodities and
centrally allocated by the highest levels of government (Lazarev and Gregory, 2003). Since tractors
were allocated according to grain productivity as perceived by the central planner, we normalize
the number by grain production in 1928. We find that the tractors are uncorrelated with mortality.
We find that the estimates on tractors have the opposite sign as for mortality, collectivization and
procurement. Central planners withheld tractors from areas with large Ukrainian populations.
    Panel C examines the triple interaction of grain production in 1928, Ukrainian population share
and the famine dummy on collectivization.54 If higher Ukrainian famine mortality is driven by state
policy, then the triple interaction effects on the intensity of collectivization and procurement should
have the same signs as those shown earlier in Table 6 Panel B columns (1) and (2) for mortality. We
find that this is true. Interestingly, we find that the triple interaction effect on tractor horsepower
has the opposite sign. This is consistent with the state systematically withholding tractors from
Ukrainians.
    The number of observations is smaller for the estimates in Table 7 because of the limited avail-
ability of variables measuring collectivization and other aspects of Soviet agricultural policy. Thus,
we do not provide year-by-year estimates for these outcomes.
    To examine the extent to which Ukrainian bias in collectivization and procurement led to higher
overall famine mortality, we instrument for the interaction of collectivization and the famine dummy
variable with the interaction of Ukrainian population share and the famine year dummy variable.
Table 8 Panel A shows that the instrumented effects of collectivization and procurement on mortality
are positive and statistically significant. Panel B shows the first stage estimates. The first stage F-
statistic presented at the bottom of the panel are mostly small. To address the problem of weak
instruments, we present conditional instrumental variable confidence intervals at the bottom of the
panel (Mikusheva and Poi, 2006; Mikusheva, 2010). The confidence intervals are all positive and do
not include zero. Nevertheless, because Ukrainian bias can affect famine mortality through channels
other than these policies, the 2SLS estimates should be interpreted as purely illustrative.55


6     Conclusion
The Soviet Great Famine was one of the largest and most controversial economic disasters in recent
history. Within just two years, the ethnic Ukrainian population, the second largest ethnic group in
the Soviet Union, was decimated. Between 1926 and 1939, Ukrainians declined from 21.3 to 16.5%
of Soviet population. In grain-producing areas, it declined from 43.8 to 37.1%. To understand why
   54
      As in the previous table, we also control for the lower order interactions, as well as on the triple interaction of
urbanization, Ukrainian population share and famine dummy, and the triple interaction of predicted grain, Ukrainian
population share and famine dummy.
   55
      The total effect of Ukrainian bias on famine mortality is given by the back-of-the-envelope calculation in Section
4.5.



                                                          27
this happened, we construct a large new data set that allows us to distinguish between the hypotheses
that have emerged in this controversial debate, and shed light on the underlying political-economic
mechanisms.
    Our findings show that higher Ukrainian famine mortality was due to state policy. That ethnic
bias played such an important role is particularly interesting in the Soviet context because Bolshevik
ideology did not contain an ethnic component. All ethnic groups were supposed to be treated
equally.
    It is beyond the scope of our empirical analysis to be conclusive about exactly why the regime
repressed Ukrainians. However, the empirical results together with the historical facts form a co-
herent story. The problem stems from the regime's need to control agricultural production and the
resistance from peasants towards its policies. In his letter to Sholokhov on May, 6 1933, Stalin
claimed that peasants "sabotaged" his policy and accused them of engaging in a "silent war" against
the Soviet state (Murin, 1997). As Graziosi (2015) explains, in Stalin's mind, the peasants required
an "an unforgettable lesson".
    Amongst the subversive peasants according to Stalin's view, ethnic Ukrainians were the most
problematic. They were the largest ethnic group on agriculturally productive land, had a well-
defined group identity, were relatively organized and had given stronger resistance to Soviet agri-
cultural policy than other ethnic groups. Ukrainians had a history of conflict with the Bolsheviks
going back to the Civil War. Thus, it is likely that the Soviets systematically repressed Ukrainians
during the famine to strengthen their control over agriculture. This is an important avenue for future
research.
    Our study highlights two other subjects for future research. The first is to more fully understand
the long-term ramifications of the famine in Eastern Europe. Recent studies have shown that the
famine led to ethnic tensions between Ukrainians and Russians that affect current political (Rozenas
and Zhukov, 2019) and economic outcomes in Ukraine (Korovkin and Makarin, 2019). There are
likely many other effects that have not yet been documented. The second is to understand the
Kazakh famine experience. Kazakhstan, where most ethnic Kazakhs lived at the time of the famine,
may have lost up to 22% of its population to famine. We are unable to study this important event
due to a lack of data.



References
ACEMOGLU , D., T. H ASSAN , AND J. ROBINSON (2019): "Social Structure and Development: A
 Legacy of the Holocaust in Russia," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 895­946.

A DENA , M., R. E NIKOLOPOV, M. P ETROVA , V. S ANTAROSA , AND E. Z HURAVSKAYA (2015):
  "Radio and the Rise of The Nazis in Prewar Germany," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  130(4), 1885­1939.

                                                 28
A LLEN , R. (2003): Farm to Factory: A Reinterpretation of the Soviet Industrial Revolution. Prince-
  ton University Press, Princeton.

A NDREEV, E., L. DARSKIJ , AND T. K HARKOVA (1998): Demographicheskaya Istroriya Rossii:
  1927­1959. Informatika, Moscow.

A PPLEBAUM , A. (2017): Red Famine: Stalin's War on Ukraine. Penguin Press, New York.

BAUER , T. K., S. B RAUN , AND M. K VASNICKA (2013): "The Economic Integration of Forced
 Migrants: Evidence for Post-War Germany," The Economic Journal, 123(571), 998­1024.

B ECKER , S. O., I. G ROSFELD , P. G ROSJEAN , N. VOIGTLANDER , AND E. Z HURAVSKAYA
  (2020): "Forced Migration and Human Capital: Evidence from Post-WWII Population Trans-
  fers," American Economic Review, 110(5), 1430­63.

B ERELOWITCH , A., AND V. DANILOV (eds.) (2000­2012): Les campagnes Soviétiques vues par
  la Tchéka­O.G.P.U.­N.K.V.D. 1918­1939. Recueil de documents et matériaux en 4 volumes.
  Sovetskaya derevnya glazami VChK­OGPU­NKVD. 1918­1939 gg. Dokumenty i materialy v
  4 tomakh. Rosspen, Moscow.

B UGGLE , J., AND S. NAFZIGER (2019): "The Long-Run Consequences of Labor Coercion: Evi-
  dence from Russian Serfdom," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87, 217­234.

B URGESS , R., AND D. D ONALDSON (2017): "Railroads and the Demise of Famine in Colonial
  India," Working paper, MIT.

C ASELLI , F., AND W. J. C OLEMAN II (2013): "On the Theory of Ethnic Conflict," Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 11(s1), 161­192.

C ASTAÑEDA D OWER , P., E. F INKEL , S. G EHLBACH , AND S. NAFZIGER (2018): "Collective
  Action and Representation in Autocracies: Evidence from Russia's Great Reforms," American
  Political Science Review, 112(1), 125­47.

C ASTAÑEDA D OWER , P., AND A. M ARKEVICH (2018): "Labor Misallocation and Mass Mobiliza-
  tion: Russian Agriculture during the Great War," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(2),
  245­59.

        (2021): "Did Industrialization Increase Support for the Radical Left? Evidence from the
  1917 Russian Revolution," Working paper.

C ASTAÑEDA D OWER , P., A. M ARKEVICH , AND S. W EBER (forthcoming): "The Value of a Sta-
  tistical Life in a Dictatorship: Evidence From Stalin," The European Economic Review.

C HARNYSH , V., AND B. M C E LROY (2020): "Explaining outgroup bias in weak states: religion and
  legibility in the 1891­92 Russian famine," project in progress.

C HEREMUKHIN , A., M. G OLOSOV, S. G URIEV, AND A. T SYVINSKI (2017): "The Industrializa-
  tion and Economic Development of Russia through the Lens of a Neoclassical Growth Model,"
  The Review of Economic Studies, 84(2), 613­649.



                                                29
C OLELLA , F., R. L ALIVE , S. O. S AKALLI ,   AND   M. T HOENIG (2019): "Inference with Arbitrary
  Clustering," .

C ONQUEST, R. (1986): The Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivization and the Terror-Famine.
  Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

DANILOV, V., R. M ANNING , AND L. V IOLA (eds.) (1999­2006): Tragediya Sovetskoj Derevni.
 Kollektivizatsiya i raskulachivanie. Dokumenti i materialy v 5 tomakh, 1927­1939. Rosspen.

DASGUPTA , P., AND D. R AY (1986): "Inequality as a Determinant of Malnutrition and Unemploy-
 ment: Theory," The Economic Journal, 96, 1011­1034.

DAVIES , R., M. H ARRISON , AND S. W HEATCROFT (1994): The Economic Transformation of the
 Soviet Union, 1913­1945. Cambridge University Press.

DAVIES , R. W., O. V. K HLEVNIUK , E. A. R EES , L. P. KOSHELEVA , AND L. A. ROGOVAYA
 (eds.) (2003): The Stalin-Kaganovich Correspondence, 1931­36. Yale University Press, New
 Haven.

DAVIES , R. W., AND S. G. W HEATCROFT (2004): The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931­
 1933, vol. 5 of The Industrialization of Soviet Russia. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK.

D ELLAV IGNA , S., R. E NIKOLOPOV, V. M IRONOVA , M. P ETROVA , AND E. Z HURAVSKAYA
  (2014): "Cross-Border Media and Nationalism: Evidence from Serbian Radio in Croatia," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(3), 103­132.

D URANTE , R., AND J. B UGGLE (forthcoming): "Climatic Risk, Cooperation, and the Co-Evolution
  of Culture and Institutions," Economic Journal.

DYSON , T., AND C. Ó G RÁDA (eds.) (2002): Famine Demography: Perspectives from the Past
 and Present. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

E GOROV, G., R. E NIKOLOPOV, A. M AKARIN , AND M. P ETROVA (2020): "Divided We Stay
  Home: Social Distancing and Ethnic Diversity," NBER Working Papers 27277, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.

E GOROV, G., AND K. S ONIN (2011): "Dictators and Their Viziers: Endogenizing the Loyalty-
  Competence Trade-off," Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(5), 903­930.

        (2020): "The Political Economics of Non-democracy," University of Chicago, Becker
  Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, (2020-142).

E LLMAN , M. (2005): "The Role of Leadership Perceptions and of Intent in the Soviet Famine of
   1931­1934," Europe-Asia Studies, 57(6), 823­841.

       (2007): "Stalin and the Soviet famine of 1932­33 Revisited," Europe-Asia Studies, 59(4),
  663­693.

E STEBAN , J., M. M ORELLI , AND D. ROHNER (2015): "Strategic Mass Killings," Journal of Polit-
   ical Economy, 123(5), 1087­1132.


                                                30
F INKEL , E., AND S. G EHLBACH (2020): Reform and Rebellion in Weak States, Elements in Politi-
   cal Economy. Cambridge University Press.

F INKEL , E., S. G EHLBACH , AND D. KOFANOV (2017): "(Good) Land and Freedom (for For-
   mer Serfs): Determinants of Peasant Unrest in European Russia, March-October 1917," Slavic
   Review, 76(3), 710­721.

F RANK , P. (1974): "Constructing A Classified Ranking of Cpsu Provincial Committees," British
   Journal of Political Science, 4(2), 217­230.

G EHLBACH , S., K. S ONIN , AND M. W. S VOLIK (2016): "Formal Models of Nondemocratic Poli-
  tics," Annual Review of Political Science, 19(1), 565­584.

G OKMEN , G., AND D. KOFANOV (2020): "Career incentives in political hierarchy: evidence from
  Imperial Russia," European Review of Economic History, 24(2), 264­287.

G ORODNICHENKO , Y., AND G. ROLAND (2017): "Culture, Institutions, and the Wealth of Na-
  tions," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(3), 402­416.

G RAZIOSI , A. (2015): "The uses of hunger Stalin's solution of the peasant and national questions
  in Soviet Ukraine, 1932 to 1933," in Famines in European History. The Last Great European
  Famines Reconsidered, ed. by L. L. Declan Curran, and A. G. Newby, pp. 223­260. Routledge.

G REGORY, P. (2003): The Political Economy of Stalinism: Evidence from the Soviet Secret
  Archives. Cambridge University Press.

G REGORY, P. R., P. J. S CHRÖDER , AND K. S ONIN (2011): "Rational dictators and the killing of
  innocents: Data from Stalin's archives," Journal of Comparative Economics, 39(1), 34­42.

G ROSFELD , I., A. RODNYANSKY, AND E. Z HURAVSKAYA (2013): "Persistent Antimarket Culture:
  A Legacy of the Pale of Settlement after the Holocaust," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 5(3), 189­226.

G ROSFELD , I., S. O. S AKALLI , AND E. Z HURAVSKAYA (2020): "Middleman Minorities and Eth-
  nic Violence: Anti-Jewish Pogroms in the Russian Empire," The Review of Economic Studies,
  87(1), 289­342.

H OROWITZ , D. L. (1985): Ethnic groups in conflict. University of California Press, Berkeley.

K ESSLER , G. (2002): The Peasant and the Town. Rural-Urban Migration in the Soviet Union,
  1929­40. PhD Thesis. European University Institute.

K HLEVNIUK , O., AND Y. G ORLIZKI (2020): Substate Dictatorship: Networks, Loyalty, and Insti-
  tutional Change in the Soviet Union. Yale University Press, New Haven.

KONDRASHIN , V. (2008): Golod 1932­1933 godov: Tragediya Sovetskoj derevni. Rosspen,
 Moscow.

KOROVKIN , V., AND A. M AKARIN (2019): "Conflict and Inter-Group Trade: Evidence from the
 2014 Russia-Ukraine Crisis," EIEF Working paper.


                                                31
KOTKIN , S. (2017): Stalin. Waiting for Hitler, 1929­1941. Penguin Press, New York.

L AZAREV, V., AND P. G REGORY (2003): "Commissars and cars: A case study in the political
  economy of dictatorship," Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(1), 1­19.

L I , W., AND D. T. YANG (2005): "The Great Leap Forward: Anatomy of a Central Planning
    Disaster," Journal of Political Economy, 113(4), 840­877.

L OSITSKIJ , A. (1920): "Pishchevoe znachenie sovremennikh produktov pitaniya [Nutritive value
  of modern food products]," Vestnik statistiki, 1920(1­4), 102­121.

         (1926): Sostoyanie pitaniya gorodskogo naseleniya SSSR, 1919­1924 [The State of Nutri-
  tion of Urban Population of the USSR, 1919­1924]. TsSU.

          (ed.) (1928): Sostoyanie pitaniya selskogo naseleniya SSSR v 1920­1924 [The State of
  Nutrition of Rural Population of the USSR in 1920­1924]. TsSU.

M ACE , J. E. (2004): "Soviet Man-Made Famine in Ukraine," in Century of Genocide: Critical
  Essays and Eyewitness Accounts., ed. by W. S. P. Totten Samuel, and I. W. Charny. Routledge.

M ARKEVICH , A. (2019): "A Regional Perspective on the Economic Development of the late Rus-
  sian Empire," Working paper.

M ARKEVICH , A., AND E. Z HURAVSKAYA (2018): "The Economic Effects of the Abolition of
  Serfdom: Evidence from the Russian Empire," American Economic Review, 108(4­5), 1074­
  1117.

M ARTIN , T. (2001): The Affirmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet Union,
  1923­1939. Cornell University Press.

M ATSUURA , K., AND C. W ILLMOTT (2014): "Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation:
  1900­2014 Gridded Monthly Time Series (Version 4.01)," National Oceanic and Atmospheric
  Administration.

M ENG , X., N. Q IAN , AND P. YARED (2015): "The Institutional Causes of China's Great Famine,
  1959­1961," The Review of Economic Studies, 82(4), 1568­1611.

M ESLÉ , F., J. VALLIN , AND E. A NDREEV (2013): "Demographic Consequences of the Great
  Famine: Then and Now," in After the Holodomor: The Enduring Impact of the Great Famine on
  Ukraine, ed. by A. Graziosi, L. A. Hajda, and H. Hryn. Harvard University Press.

M IKUSHEVA , A. (2010): "Robust confidence sets in the presence of weak instruments," Journal of
  Econometrics, 157(2), 236­247.

M IKUSHEVA , A., AND B. P. P OI (2006): "Tests and Confidence Sets with Correct Size when
  Instruments are Potentially Weak," The Stata Journal, 6(3), 335­347.

M ITRA , A., AND D. R AY (2014): "Implications of an Economic Theory of Conflict: Hindu-Muslim
  Violence in India," Journal of Political Economy, 122(4), 719­765.



                                              32
M OKYR , J., AND C. Ó G RÁDA (2002): "What do people die of during famines: the Great Irish
  Famine in comparative perspective," European Review of Economic History, 6(3), 339­363.

M URIN , Y. (ed.) (1997): Pisatel' i vozhd': perepiska M.A. Sholokhova s I.V. Stalinym 1931­1950
  gody : sbornik dokumentov iz lichnogo arkhiva I.V. Stalina. Raritet.

NAUMENKO , N. (2021): "The Political Economy of Famine: the Ukrainian Famine of 1933," The
 Journal of Economic History, 81(1), 156­197.

N OVE , A. (1992): An Economic History of the U.S.S.R. The Penguin Press.

Ó G RÁDA , C. (1999): Black '47 and Beyond: The Great Irish Famine in History, Economy, and
  Memory. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

        (2009): Famine: A Short History. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

P OLYAKOV, Y., AND V. Z HIROMSKAYA (eds.) (2000): Naselenie Rossii v XX veke: istoricheskie
   ocherky. Vol. 1 1900­1939. Rosspen.

P ROTASOV, L., A. R. V.V. Z HURAVLEV, AND V. S HELOKHAEV (2014): Vserossijskoe uchred-
   itelnoe sobranie. Entsiklopedia. (All-Russian Constitutional Assembly. Encyclopedia). Rosspen,
   Moscow.

ROLAND , G. (2010): "The Long-Run Weight of Communism or the Weight of Long-Run His-
 tory?," WIDER Working Paper Series wp-2010-083, World Institute for Development Economic
 Research (UNU-WIDER).

ROZENAS , A., AND Y. M. Z HUKOV (2019): "Mass Repression and Political Loyalty: Evidence
 from Stalin's `Terror by Hunger'," American Political Science Review, 113(2), 569­583.

RUDNYTSKYI , O., N. L EVCHUK , O. W OLOWYNA , P. S HEVCHUK , AND A. KOVBASIUK (2015):
 "Demography of a man-made human catastrophe: The case of massive famine in Ukraine 1932­
 1933," Canadian Studies in Population, 42(1­2), 53­80.

S EN , A. (1981): Poverty and Famines. An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation. Oxford University
   Press, Oxford, UK.

S NYDER , T. (2010): Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. Basic Books, New York City,
   NY.

S TALIN , I. (15 April 1925): "Concerning the National Question in Yugoslavia," Bol'shevik, 7.

S TATE D UMA (2008): "Russian: Postanovleniye GD FS RF ot 02.04.2008 N 262-5 GD O Za-
   yavlenii Gosudarstvennoy Dumy Federal'nogo Sobraniya Rossiyskoy Federatsii "Pamyati zhertv
   goloda 30-kh godov na territorii SSSR"," .

TALIBOVA , R., AND Y. M. Z HUKOV (2018): "Stalin's terror and the long-term political effects of
  mass repression," Journal of Peace Research, 55(2), 267­283.

TAUGER , M. (2001): "Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931­1933,"
  The Carl Beck Papers in Russian and East European Studies.

                                                33
TAUGER , M. B. (1991): "The 1932 Harvest and the Famine of 1933," Slavic Review, 50(1), 70­89.

U KRAINIAN PARLIAMENT (2006): "About 1932-33 Holodomor in Ukraini," Vedomosti Verkhovnoj
  radi Ukraini, 50(504).

V IOLA , L. (1996): Peasant Rebels Under Stalin: Collectivization and the Culture of Peasant Re-
   sistance. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

        (2007): The Unknown Gulag: The Lost World of Stalin's Special Settlements. Oxford
  University Press, Oxford.

W HEATCROFT, S., AND R. DAVIES (1994): "Agriculture," in The Economic Transformation of
  the Soviet Union, 1913­1945, ed. by R. Davies, M. Harrison, and S. Wheatcroft. Cambridge
  University Press.

W HEATCROFT, S. G. (2001): "O zernovikh balansakh i otsenkakh urozhajnosti v SSSR v 1931­
  1933," in Tragediya Sovetskoj Derevni. Kollektivizatsiya i raskulachivanie. Dokumenti i materialy
  v 5 tomakh, 1927­1939. Vol. 3. Konetz 1930­1933, ed. by V. Danilov, R. Manning, and L. Viola.
  Rosspen.




                                                34
Table 1: Ethnic Composition and Peasant Resistance




                       35
Table 2: Famine Mortality in Ethnic Ukrainian Areas




                        36
Table 3: Famine Mortality and Natality in Ethnic Ukrainian Areas ­ Alternative Measures




                                          37
Table 4: Famine Mortality and Natality in Ethnic Ukrainian Areas ­ Control for Demographic and
                     Geographic Characteristics, Omitting Influential Observations




                                             38
     Table 5: Famine Mortality in Ethnic Ukrainian Areas ­ District-level Analysis




39
     Table 6: Heterogeneous Effects of Political Factors on Famine Mortality in Ethnic Ukrainian Areas




40
Table 7: Heterogeneous Effects of Political Factors on Collectivization, Mechanization and Grain
                                Procurement in Ethnic Ukrainian Areas




                                              41
Table 8: 2SLS Estimates of the Effects of Collectivization on Famine Mortality




                                      42
                               Figure 1: Mortality and Natality Rates over Time
                        (a) Mortality                                                   (b) Natality




Notes: Mortality is the number of deaths per 1,000 individuals. Natality is the number of live births per 1,000 individuals.



       Figure 2: Cross-Province Mean and Standard Deviation of Mortality and Natality Rates
                        (a) Mortality                                                   (b) Natality




Notes: Mean mortality (natality) rate is the average mortality (natality) rate across provinces in each year. Cross-province
SD/Mean is the standard deviation in mortality (natality) rates across provinces in year t divided by the mean mortality
(natality) rate in year t. Source: See the Data Appendix.




                                                            43
      Figure 3: The Dynamic Relationship between Ukrainian Population Share and Mortality
                     (a) Total Mortality                                          (b) Rural Mortality




Notes: The figures show the interaction coefficients of Ukrainian population share and year dummy variables with their
95% confidence intervals. Figures 3a and 3b plot estimates from two regressions. The estimates and their standard errors
are presented in Appendix Table A.6.



Figure 4: District-Level Excess Mortality in 1933 and Distance from the Ukrainian-Russian Border
                 (a) Excess Mortality in 1933                          (b) Residualized Excess Mortality 1933




Notes: In Figure 4a, excess mortality 1933 is mortality in 1933 minus mortality in 1928. In Figure 4b, excess mortality
is demeaned by urbanization and the rural share of ethnic Ukrainians in each district. Distance to the border is measured
in kilometers.




                                                          44
 Figure 5: The Dynamic Relationship between Political Factors and Mortality in Ethnic Ukrainian
                                                Areas
      (a) Ukrainians × Grain 1928 × Year FE                         (b) Ukrainians × Bolshevik votes 1917 × Year FE




 (c) Ukrainians × Communists 1922, 27, 31 × Year                  (d) Ukrainians × Ethnic Ukrainian Delegates in 1930
                       FE                                                          Congress × Year FE




(e) Ukrainians × Ethnic non- Ukrainian Delegates in                 (f) Ukrainians × Political Principal Component ×
               1930 Congress × Year FE                                                     Year FE




Notes: Figures 5a - 5c and Figure 5f plot coefficients and their 95% confidence intervals estimated from four separate
regressions. Figures 5d and 5e are estimated from one regression. The estimates and their standard errors are presented
in Appendix Table A.11.




                                                         45
Online Appendix (Not for Publication)

A    Food Accounting
The goal of this exercise is to estimate per capita food production and per capita food requirements
for the Soviet Union and to examine whether production was sufficient to avoid the famine. The
most important source of food, which was also the main target of government procurement, was
grain.
    We start with official data on population, production and procurement (rows (1) to (3) and (5)
in Appendix Table A.2, Panel I). Row (6) presents reported procurement as a share of production
and shows that it increased over time from 14.9% in 1927 to 30.7% in 1939, with the peak during
the famine years, when procurement share was 32.9% and 27.2% in 1931 and 1932, respectively.
Note that food produced in a given year is used to feed the population in the following year. Thus,
we focus on production in 1932 to study mortality in 1933.
    Row (7) shows that per capita grain production in 1931 and 1932 were 433kg and 428kg, re-
spectively, lower than the previous four and subsequent three years. However, production in 1929,
when there was no famine, was only slightly higher at 465kg. Row (8) converts grain from kilo-
grams to calories per day using calories per one kilogram of Russian grain estimated by Lositskij
(1920).
    Rows (12) and (13) present two levels for caloric requirements. The first is the "business as
usual" measure that maximizes labor productivity and healthy child development. This measure
assumes that all rural prime age males do heavy labor and all urban prime age males do light work.
We use official Soviet estimates for caloric requirements from Lositskij (1928), which are higher
than the estimates for other countries or international standards. They are 3,750 and 2,750 calories
per day for the two types of labor. We adjust the requirements by the demographic composition
(age and gender) using Soviet official data on relative requirements (Lositskij, 1926) and the 1926
Population Census data on demographic composition.
    The second caloric requirement is the "staying alive" measure. For this, we use 900 calories
required for prime age males provided by Dasgupta and Ray (1986). We adjust it in the same way
as the first threshold to account for demographic composition.
    Row (12) shows that for "business as usual," the USSR required 2,439 to 2,427 calories per
capita during 1931 and 1932. Per capita grain production in row (8) for these years, 3,716 and
3,675 calories, are 152% and 151% higher than these requirements. Row (13) shows that to avoid
mortality, the USSR required 621 and 622 calories on average. In 1931 and 1932, grain production
was 599% and 591% higher than these requirements.
    To address potential over-reporting of aggregate grain production, we use Davis and Wheatcroft's
(2004) adjusted estimates as a lower bound for production in rows (4) and (9). They are lower



                                                 1
than official estimates, but do not overturn the point of sufficient aggregate production for avoiding
famine.56
         In the centrally planned food distribution system, food is procured from rural areas to urban
areas and for export, and it is known that famine mortality rates were lower in urban areas.57 To
investigate whether aggregate grain procurement is sufficient for explaining famine mortality with-
out additional inequality in food distribution across the rural population, we calculate average rural
grain retention (row 10). We use data on the reported amount of grain procured by the central gov-
ernment. We convert retention into calories in row (11). These calculations show that average rural
grain retention was 128% and 141% of the "business as usual" threshold and 503% and 553% of the
"staying alive" threshold. Thus, aggregate procurement of food to supply urban areas and exports
cannot explain the famine. For the famine to have occurred, there must have been unequal food
distribution across the rural population.
         Table A.2, Panel II repeats the exercise for Ukraine. Rural per capita grain retention during the
famine is always higher than the food required to avoid famine.
         Some of the production may be wasted (e.g., due to poor storage). Lositskij (1920) estimates
waste for wheat and rye to be approximately 5% in Russia. We do not know of estimates for
the early 1930s. While these factors may be relevant, we have not heard any reliable estimates
of mis-reporting or waste that are large enough in magnitude to overturn the main point that the
famine would not have occurred if food were equally distributed across the population, or the rural
population.


B         Province-level Sample
The province-level panel includes 1922 to 1940 and 19 provinces within the republics of Belarus,
Russia and Ukraine. These provinces correspond to the 1932 administrative division. Belarus and
Ukraine were a single province each. 84% of the 1926 Soviet population and 88% of the 1928 grain
production come from the provinces in our sample. The omitted territories are those with no reliable
mortality data: Far Eastern Province, Yakut Autonomous SSR, and the North Caucasus ethnic ter-
ritories: Chechen Autonomous Province, Cherkess Autonomous Province, Dagestan Autonomous
SSR., Ingush Autonomous Province, Kabardino-Balkarian Autonomous Province, Karachay Au-
tonomous Province, North Ossetian Autonomous Province. Figure A.1a maps the provinces in our
sample. Omitted territories are in white. See Appendix Section G for a list of data sources.
    56
      Tauger (2001) argues that the true 1932 grain harvest was a meager 50 million tons which is the most conservative
estimate in the literature. This transforms into 2,630 calories per day that is still above our estimate of the "business as
usual" caloric requirement.
   57
      Grain exports during 1931­32 were approximately five million metric tons, 7% of the total production (Nove, 1992).




                                                             2
C     Predicted Grain
To estimate the grain production function, we use a sample from 1901­15. We regress log grain
production (total harvests) on log province area, log FAO GAEZ grain suitability index, their in-
teraction, temperature and precipitation for each of the four seasons, their pairwise interactions and
square terms (without a constant). The seasons are: fall (October, November, and December of
the previous calendar year), winter (January, February, March), spring (April, May, June), summer
(July, August, September). Appendix Table A.3 presents the estimated grain production function.
We then use this production function to predict grain harvest from 1922 to 1940. The predicted grain
and actual grain are closely correlated, with two exceptions: Karelia and East Siberia provinces. The
in-sample R-squared is 0.90. The out-of-sample R-squared is 0.77, see Appendix Figure A.2. The
high out-of-sample predictive power is consistent with the lack of major technological changes in
Soviet agriculture before the 1930s (e.g., Allen, 2003).


D     Weather
Appendix Table A.4 controls for weather directly instead of grain production predicted by weather
(and other natural conditions). Column (1) presents the baseline without controlling for predicted
grain and its interaction. Column (2) controls for spring and summer temperature and precipitation,
since weather in the spring and summer of 1931 and 1932 is discussed most often as a cause of
poor harvests during the famine (e.g., Davies and Wheatcroft, 2004; Tauger, 1991). It also controls
for the following year's winter temperature and precipitation since 1933 winter weather conditions
may have directly affected mortality. Column (3) controls for monthly temperature and precipita-
tion and their squared terms (48 additional controls). Column (4) controls for monthly temperature
and precipitation and their interactions (36 additional controls). Column (5) controls for monthly
weather shock indicators following the standard in the literature, where the weather shock indicator
is equal to one if the month's temperature or precipitation is more than one standard deviation away
from the long-term (1900­50) mean (12 additional controls). Column (6) controls for the devia-
tions from the long-term median of monthly temperature and precipitation (24 additional controls).
Finally, following Rozenas and Zhukov (2019), column (7) controls for monthly deviations in tem-
perature and precipitation from the long-term median over two years (48 additional controls). The
main interaction coefficient of the rural share of ethnic Ukrainians and the famine indicator changes
little with these controls.




                                                  3
E     Dekulakization
Appendix Table A.5 shows that our main result is robust to different ways of controlling for the
extent of dekulakization in the region. These measures are the number of exiled kulak households
during 1930­31 according to Davies and Wheatcroft (2004, Table 28), the number of exiled kulak
households during 1930­31 according to a secret police report in Berelowitch and Danilov (2000­
2012, Document 253), ex ante 1930 quotas for kulak exile, secret police estimates of total number
of kulaks in countryside, and the number of arrested peasants.


F     District-Level Data
There is substantial variation in famine mortality across districts, even those within the same province.
Appendix Figure A.4 presents the mean and normalized standard deviation in district-level mortal-
ity for Russia and Ukraine. District-level analysis do not include the republic of Belarus because we
were not yet able to collect 1928 mortality data for Belarus. It shows that mean mortality and the
variation across districts increase in 1933, for the full sample and for each republic. These results
show that the spatial patterns which exist at the province level for the full sample also exist across
districts within republics. See Appendix Section G for a list of data sources.



G     Data Sources
G.1    Province-level Panel
Total and Urban Population 1920: Tsentralnoye Statisticheskoye Upravleniye [Central Statis-
tical Office] (1926) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1924 god (Vypusk pervyy) [Statistical Yearbook
1924 (First Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 7 of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statisticheskogo Upravleniya
[Proceedings of the Central Statistical Office], Part I, Table 1.B. 1922: total population is interpo-
lated between 1920 and 1923; urban population is interpolated between 1920 and 1925. 1923: total
population is calculated using the total number of deaths and deaths per 10,000 from Tsentralnoye
Statisticheskoye Upravleniye [Central Statistical Office] (1926) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1924
god (Vypusk pervyy) [Statistical Yearbook 1924 (First Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 7 of Trudy Tsen-
tralnogo Statisticheskogo Upravleniya [Proceedings of the Central Statistical Office], Part I, Table
5; urban population is interpolated between 1920 and 1925. 1924: total population is calculated
using the total number of deaths and deaths per 10,000 from Tsentralnoye Statisticheskoye Up-
ravleniye [Central Statistical Office] (1926) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1924 god (Vypusk pervyy)
[Statistical Yearbook 1924 (First Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 7 of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statistich-
eskogo Upravleniya [Proceedings of the Central Statistical Office], Part I, Table 8; urban population
is interpolated between 1920 and 1925. 1925: Tsentralnoye Statisticheskoye Upravleniye [Cen-
tral Statistical Office] (1926) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1924 god (Vypusk pervyy) [Statistical
Yearbook 1924 (First Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 7 of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statisticheskogo Up-


                                                   4
ravleniya [Proceedings of the Central Statistical Office], Part I, Table 1.B. 1926: is interpolated
between 1925 and 1927. 1927: December 17, 1926 Population Census. 1928­1932: is interpolated
between 1927 and 1933. 1933: Russian state archive of economy (hereafter, RGAE) 1562/329/19 p.
1­12. 1934­1936: is interpolated between 1933 and 1937. 1937: the 1937 Population Census from
Zhiromskaya, V.B. and Kiselev, I.N. and Polyakov, Yu.A. (1996) "Polveka pod grifom "sekretno":
Vsesoyuznaya perepis naseleniya 1937 goda [Classified for half a century: All-Union population
census of 1937]", Moscow: Nauka. 1938: is interpolated between 1937 and 1939. 1939: the 1939
Population Census corrected for the centralized additions (pripiski) from Demoscope.ru. 1940: used
1939 value.
    Data for each year are reported for different administrative boundaries, at more disaggregated
levels than the province boundaries we construct. For consistency, we use ArcGIS and manually
aggregate the population data to 1932 province borders. One issue is that small changes in borders
that occur over time lead to large changes in population if we assume that the population is uniformly
distributed across space in sparsely populated provinces such as Ural, and West and East Siberia.
To address this, we use the 1897 Population Census (the most recent available census prior to the
start of our sample), which can be disaggregated to the Uezd level (of which there are 817 for the
Russian Empire). These data allow us to calculate population density, which we use to attribute
population to the 1932 province borders.

Births and Deaths 1923: Tsentralnoye Statisticheskoye Upravleniye [Central Statistical Office]
(1926) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1924 god (Vypusk pervyy) [Statistical Yearbook 1924 (First
Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 7 of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statisticheskogo Upravleniya [Proceedings
of the Central Statistical Office], Part I, Table 5. 1924: Tsentralnoye Statisticheskoye Upravleniye
[Central Statistical Office] (1926) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1924 god (Vypusk pervyy) [Sta-
tistical Yearbook 1924 (First Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 7 of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statistich-
eskogo Upravleniya [Proceedings of the Central Statistical Office], Part I, Table 8. 1925: Tsen-
tralnoye Statisticheskoye Upravleniye S.S.S.R. [Central Statistical Office of the USSR] (1928)
"Yestestvennoye dvizheniye naseleniya Soyuza S.S.R. 1923­1925 [Natural movement of the pop-
ulation of the USSR]", Volume I, Issue 1, Table 1. 1926: Yestestvennoye dvizheniye naseleniya
Soyuza S.S.R. v 1926 g, Izdaniye TsSU SS.S.R. (1929), Table 1. 1927­1932: Belarus, Ukraine ­
RGAE 1562/329/256; Russia ­ Demoscope.ru. 1933­1940: Demoscope.ru.
     We assign these data into 1932 province boundaries following the same procedure as for popu-
lation. The rural-urban decomposition of deaths and births is available since 1926.

Natality and Mortality Natality is the number of live births divided by population (crude birth
rate). Mortality is the total number of deaths divided by population (crude death rate).

Ethnic Composition Ethnic composition comes from the 1897 and the 1926 Population Cen-
suses. The 1897 Census reports population by mother tongue. We use the share of people whose
mother tongue is Belorussian, Russian (Velikorusskiy), and Ukrainian (Malorusskiy). The 1926 Cen-
sus reports population by self-proclaimed ethnicity and by mother tongue, we use both. Data are
calculated in our province borders using 1897 and hand-created district (volost)-level 1926 maps.
The 1897 map is from Kessler, Gijs and Andrei Markevich, Electronic Repository of Russian His-
torical Statistics, 18th - 21st centuries, https://ristat.org/, Version I (2020).


                                                  5
Age Structure Region (okrug)-level population by 1-year age groups from the 1926 Population
Census is reported by Demoscope.ru. We calculated the share of people aged 10 and younger using
hand-created region (okrug)-level map. This procedure is legitimate because regions (okruga) are
smaller than our provinces.

Gender Ratio Male to female ratio is from the 1926 Population Census. We calculated it in our
province borders using hand-created district (volost)-level 1926 map. This procedure is legitimate
because districts (volosty) are smaller than our provinces.

Grain Harvest, Sown Area, and Yield 1901­1914: Obukhov V.M. (1927) "Dvizheniye urozhayev
zernovykh kultur v Yevropeyskoy Rossii v period 1883­1915 g.g. [Movement of grain crops in Eu-
ropean Russia in the period 1883­1915]" and Yezhegodnik Rossii 1904­1916. 1922: Tsentralnoye
Statisticheskoye Upravleniye [Central Statistical Office] (1924) "Sbornik statisticheskikh svedeniy
po Soyuzu S.S.R. 1918­1923. Za pyat let raboty Tsentralnogo Statisticheskogo Upravleniya [A
collection of statistical information on the USSR 1918­1923. Five years of work of the Central
Statistical Office.]", Volume XVIII of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statisticheskogo Upravleniya [Proceed-
ings of the Central Statistical Office], Part VI, Tables 7 and 8. 1923: Tsentralnoye Statistich-
eskoye Upravleniye [Central Statistical Office] (1924) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1922 i 1923
g. (Vypusk pervyy) [Statistical Yearbook 1922 and 1923 (First Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 5
of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statisticheskogo Upravleniya [Proceedings of the Central Statistical Office],
Part III, Tables 3 and 4. 1924: Tsentralnoye Statisticheskoye Upravleniye [Central Statistical Office]
(1926) "Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik 1924 god (Vypusk pervyy) [Statistical Yearbook 1924 (First
Issue)]", Volume VIII, Issue 7 of Trudy Tsentralnogo Statisticheskogo Upravleniya [Proceedings
of the Central Statistical Office], Part III, Tables 6 and 7. 1925­1927: Statisticheskoye izdatelstvo
TsSU SS.S.R. [Statistical Publishing House of the Central Statistical Office of the USSR] (1929)
"Selskoye khozyaystvo SS.S.R. 1925­1928. Sbornik statisticheskikh svedeniy k XVI Vsesoyuznoy
partkonferentsii [Agriculture of the USSR 1925­1928. A collection of statistical information for
the XVI All-Union Party Congress]", Part III. 1928: RGAE 1562/329/1409. 1929­1930: Go-
sudarstvennoye sotsialno-ekonomicheskoye izdatelstvo [State Socio-Economic Publishing House]
(1932) "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SS.S.R.. Statisticheskiy spravochnik 1932 [The national economy
of the USSR. Statistical Handbook 1932]", Part II.3.A, Tables 30 and 33. 1931: Gosudarstvennoye
izdatelstvo kolkhoznoy i sovkhoznoy literatury "Selkhozgiz" [State publishing house of collective
and state farm literature "Selkhozgiz"] (1936) "Selskoye khozyaystvo SS.S.R.. Yezhegodnik 1935
[Agriculture of the USSR. Yearbook 1935]", p. 269, Tables 106 and 107. 1932­1940: RGAE
1562/329/1409.
    We map the grain data into 1932 provinces borders following the same procedure as for popula-
tion. The years 1922, 1924­27 are reported for larger units than our provinces. Thus, we map them
into the province borders proportional to the 1913 Uezd sown area data.

Procurement 1924: Tsentralnoye Konventsionnoye Byuro Khlebozagotoviteley [Central Con-
ventional Bureau of Grain Procurers] (1928) "Yezhegodnik khlebnoy torgovli N1 [Yearbook of grain
trade N 1]", Table 6. 1925: Tsentralnoye Konventsionnoye Byuro Khlebozagotoviteley [Central
Conventional Bureau of Grain Procurers] (1928) "Yezhegodnik khlebnoy torgovli N1 [Yearbook
of grain trade N 1]", Table 14. 1926: Tsentralnoye Konventsionnoye Byuro Khlebozagotovite-
ley [Central Conventional Bureau of Grain Procurers] (1928) "Yezhegodnik khlebnoy torgovli N1

                                                  6
[Yearbook of grain trade N 1]", Table 22. 1927: Statisticheskoye izdatelstvo TsSU SS.S.R. [Statis-
tical Publishing House of the Central Statistical Office of the USSR] (1929) "Selskoye khozyaystvo
SS.S.R. 1925­1928. Sbornik statisticheskikh svedeniy k XVI Vsesoyuznoy partkonferentsii [Agricul-
ture of the USSR 1925­1928. A collection of statistical information for the XVI All-Union Party
Congress]", Part V. 1928: calculated from the 1928 grain harvest and procurement as a share of
harvest from RGAE 4372/30/871 p. 30. 1929: Narodnyy Komissariat Snabzheniya SS.S.R. [Peo-
ple's Commissariat of Supply of the USSR] (1932) "Yezhegodnik khlebooborota N4 [Yearbook of
grain turnover N 4]", Tables 3 and 10. 1930: Narodnyy Komissariat Snabzheniya SS.S.R. [Peo-
ple's Commissariat of Supply of the USSR] (1932) "Yezhegodnik khlebooborota N4 [Yearbook of
grain turnover N 4]", Table 29 and Table 36. 1931: Komitet po zagotovkam S.-Kh produktov pri
SNK SS.S.R. [Committee for Procurement of Agricultural Products under the Council of People's
Commissars of the USSR] (1934) "Yezhegodnik khlebooborota za 1931-32, 1932-33 i predvaritel-
nyye itogi zagotovok 1933 g. [Yearbook of grain turnover for 1931-32, 1932-33 and preliminary
results of procurement in 1933]", Table 21. 1932: Komitet po zagotovkam S.-Kh produktov pri
SNK SS.S.R. [Committee for Procurement of Agricultural Products under the Council of People's
Commissars of the USSR] (1934) "Yezhegodnik khlebooborota za 1931-32, 1932-33 i predvaritel-
nyye itogi zagotovok 1933 g. [Yearbook of grain turnover for 1931-32, 1932-33 and preliminary
results of procurement in 1933]", Table 33. 1933: Komitet po zagotovkam S.-Kh produktov pri
SNK SS.S.R. [Committee for Procurement of Agricultural Products under the Council of People's
Commissars of the USSR] (1934) "Yezhegodnik khlebooborota za 1931-32, 1932-33 i predvaritel-
nyye itogi zagotovok 1933 g. [Yearbook of grain turnover for 1931-32, 1932-33 and preliminary
results of procurement in 1933]", Table 53.
    We calculated 1925­27 procurement data in administrative borders corresponding to our provinces
using hand-created ArcGIS maps (each year is reported using a different administrative division).
This operation is legitimate because reported data are more disaggregated than our provinces. 1928­
33 data is used as reported.

Collectivization 1927: Statizdat TSSU SS.S.R. [Statistical publishing house of the Central Statis-
tical Office of the USSR] (1929) "Kollektivizatsiya Sovetskoy derevni. Predvaritelnyye itogi splosh-
nykh obsledovaniy 1928 i 1929 gg. [Collectivization of the Soviet countryside. Preliminary results
of comprehensive surveys in 1928 and 1929]", Table 10. 1928: RGAE 1562/82/271. 1929: Gos-
plan S.S.S.R. i RSFSR. Ekonomiko-statisticheskiy sektor [State Planning Committee of the USSR
and the RSFSR. Economic and statistical sector] (1931) "Kolkhozy v 1929 g. Itogi sploshnogo ob-
sledovaniya kolkhozov [Collective farms in 1929. Results of a comprehensivy survey of collective
farms]". 1930: Gosplan S.S.S.R.. Upravleniye Narodnokhozyaystvennogo Ucheta [State Planning
Committee of the USSR. Department of National Economic Accounting] (1931) "Kolkhozy v 1930
g. Itogi raportov kolkhozov k XVI s'yezdu VKP(b) [Collective farms in 1930. Resume of the col-
lective farms' reports to the XVI Congress of the CPSU(b)]". 1931: Izd. Kolkhoztsentra SS.S.R.
i RSFSR [Publishing House of the Collective Farm Center of the USSR and the RSFSR] (1931)
"Kolkhoznoye stroitelstvo v SS.S.R. [Collective farms building in the USSR]", p. 15 and Davies
and Wheatcroft (2004), Table 27. 1932: RGAE 1562/82/271. 1933: "Plan. Zhurnal Gosplana i
TsUNKhU SS.S.R. [Plan. Journal of the State Planning Committee and TsUNKhU USSR]", 2-1933.
1934­1936: RGAE 1562/82/271. 1937: interpolated between 1936 and 1938. 1938: Gosplanizdat
(1939) "Selskoye khozyaystvo Soyuza S.S.R. 1939 (Staticticheskiy spravochnik) [Agriculture of the
USSR 1939 (Statistical handbook)]", Part IV.

                                                 7
   Collectivization is the share of rural households in collective farms.

Dekulakization The baseline measure of kulak households exiled during 1930--31 per 1930 pop-
ulation is estimated as the average between Exiled kulaks (DW) and Exiled kulaks (OGPU) defined
below. Exiled kulaks (DW) is the number of dekulakized and exiled households in Category II of
kulaks in 1930--31 according to Davies and Wheatcroft (2004) (Table 28) per 1930 population. Ex-
iled kulaks (OGPU) is the number of dekulakized and exiled households of all categories between
01.01.1930 and 01.07.1931 according to an OGPU (secret police) 1931 report per 1930 population.
The report is published in Berelovich A. and V. Danilov (2003). "Sovetskaya derevnya glazami
VChk-OGPU-NKVD. 1918--1939. Documents i materialy" [Soviet Countryside from the Perspec-
tive of VChK-OGPU-NKVD]. Moscow: Rosspen. Vol. 3 "1930--1934 gg.", Book 1. "1930--
1931 gg.", document 253. Planned kulaks (lower bound) and Planned kulaks (upper bound) is the
OGPU (secret police) planned number of dekulakizations by as of February, 1930 per 1930 pop-
ulation. The planned figures are published in Danilov, Victor, Robert Manning and Lynne Viola
(Eds.). (1999-2006). "Tragediya Sovetskoj Derevni. Kollektivizatsiya i raskulachivanie. Doku-
menti i materialy v 5 tomakh, 1927-1939" [Tragedy of the Soviet Countryside. Collectivization and
Dekulakization. Documents and Materials. 5 volumes]. Moscow: Rosspen. Volume 2 "November
1929 -- December 1930", Document 69. Total kulaks (OGPU estimate) is the total number of ku-
laks in the rural population according to the OGPU (secret police) estimate published in Berelovich
A. and V. Danilov (2003). "Sovetskaya derevnya glazami VChk-OGPU-NKVD. 1918--1939. Doc-
uments i materialy" [Soviet Countryside from the Perspective of VChK-OGPU-NKVD]. Moscow:
Rosspen. Vol. 3 "1930--1934 gg.", Book 1. "1930--1931 gg.", document 253. Arrested kulaks
1930 is the number of peasants processed by "troiki" in 1930 per 1930 population according to
the OGPU (secret police) estimate published in Berelovich A. and V. Danilov (2003). "Sovetskaya
derevnya glazami VChk-OGPU-NKVD. 1918--1939. Documents i materialy" [Soviet Countryside
from the Perspective of VChK-OGPU-NKVD]. Moscow: Rosspen. Vol. 3 "1930--1934 gg.",
Book 1. "1930--1931 gg.", document 279.

Peasant Resistance to the Soviet Regime "Terrorist acts", unrest demonstrations, and anti-Soviet
leaflets registered by the OGPU (secret police) between 01.01.1932 and 01.04.1932 per 1,000 1930
population are according to two OGPU reports. The reports are published in Berelovich A. and V.
Danilov (2003). "Sovetskaya derevnya glazami VChk-OGPU-NKVD. 1918--1939. Documents i
materialy" [Soviet Countryside from the Perspective of VChK-OGPU-NKVD]. Moscow: Rosspen.
Vol. 3 "1930--1934 gg.", Book 1. "1930--1931 gg.", document 272, and Danilov, Victor, Robert
Manning and Lynne Viola (Eds.). (1999-2006). "Tragediya Sovetskoj Derevni. Kollektivizatsiya
i raskulachivanie. Dokumenti i materialy v 5 tomakh, 1927-1939" [Tragedy of the Soviet Coun-
tryside. Collectivization and Dekulakization. Documents and Materials. 5 volumes]. Moscow:
Rosspen. Volume 3 "Late 1930 -- 1933", Document 118.

Peasant Resistance to the Tsarist Regime      Peasant revolts in 1895--1914 are from Gokmen and
Kofanov (2020).

Bolshevik Votes 1917 Bolshevik vote share is from Protasov, V.V. Zhuravlev, and Shelokhaev
(2014). Data is calculated in our province borders using district (uezd)-level 1917 map from Cas-


                                                 8
tañeda Dower and Markevich (2021).

Communists Communists is the average number of Communist Party members and candidates
over 1922, 1927, and 1931. 1922: Izdatelskoye otdeleniye TsK RKP [Publishing Department of
the Central Committee of the RCP] (1922) "Vserosssiyskaya perepis chlenov RKP 1922 goda [All-
Russian census of the members of the RCP in 1922]", Issue 3, Table 6. 1927: Statisticheskiy otdel
TsK VKP(b) [Statistical Department of the Central Committee of the CPSU(b)] (1927) "Vsesoyuz-
naya partiynaya perepis 1927 goda. Chislennyy sostav VKP(b) na 10 yanvarya 1927 g. [All-Union
Party Census of 1927. The composition of the CPSU(b) on January 10, 1927]", Issue 1. 1931: Tsen-
tralnyy Komitet VKP(b). Organizatsionno-instruktorskiy otdel [Central Committee of the CPSU(b).
Organizational and instructor department] (1932) "Sostav VKP(b) v tsifrakh. Dinamika osnovnykh
pokazateley rosta parti za 1930 i pervoye polugodiye 1931 g. [Composition of the CPSU(b) in
numbers. Dynamics of the main indicators of the growth of the party for 1930 and the first half of
1931]"
    We calculated 1922 and 1927 data in administrative borders corresponding to our provinces
using hand-created ArcGIS maps (each year is reported using a different administrative division).
The reported data are more disaggregated than our provinces. For 1931, we use the reported data.

Voting Delegates 1930 We collected location and ethnicity of all 1930 Party Congress delegates
that served as province-, district-, city-, or borough-level Party secretary from Rossiyskiy Gosu-
darstvennyy Arkhiv Sotsial'no-Politicheskoy Istorii (Russian State Archive of Socio-Political His-
tory, RGASPI), Fund 58, Register 1, Files 1­16.

Province Latitude and Longitude The latitude and longitude of the province centroid, calculated
using ArcGIS.

Tractors 1927­1928: the number of collective farms' tractors times 13 (the average tractor horse
power in 1929) from Vsesoyuznyy Sovet Kolkhozov [All-Union Council of Collective Farms]
(1929) "Kolkhozy SS.S.R. (Statisticheskiy spravochnik) [Collective farms of the USSR (Statisti-
cal handbook)]. 1929: horse power of tractors belonging to collective farms and to machine-tractor
stations from Gosplan SS.S.R. i RSFSR. Ekonomiko-statisticheskiy sektor [State Planning Com-
mittee of the USSR and the RSFSR. Economic and statistical sector] (1931) "Kolkhozy v 1929 g.
Itogi sploshnogo obsledovaniya kolkhozov [Collective farms in 1929. Results of a comprehensivy
survey of collective farms]", Tables 1 and 2. 1930: horse power of tractors belonging to collec-
tive farms is from Gosplan SS.S.R.. Upravleniye Narodnokhozyaystvennogo Ucheta [State Plan-
ning Committee of the USSR. Department of National Economic Accounting] (1931) "Kolkhozy
v 1930 g. Itogi raportov kolkhozov k XVI s'yezdu VKP(b) [Collective farms in 1930. Resume of
the collective farms' reports to the XVI Congress of the CPSU(b)]"; horse power of tractors be-
longing to machine-tractor stations is from Tsentralnoye Upravleniye Narodnokhozyaystvennogo
Ucheta Gosplana SS.S.R. [The Central Statistical Administration of Gosplan] (1935) "Sotsialis-
ticheskoye stroitelstvo SS.S.R. (Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik), 1935 g. [Socialist construction of the
USSR (Statistical Yearbook), 1935]", Part II.6, Table 3. 1931­1934: Tsentralnoye Upravleniye Nar-
odnokhozyaystvennogo Ucheta Gosplana SS.S.R. [The Central Statistical Administration of Gos-
plan] (1935) "Sotsialisticheskoye stroitelstvo SS.S.R. (Statisticheskiy yezhegodnik), 1935 g. [Social-


                                                  9
ist construction of the USSR (Statistical Yearbook), 1935]", Part II.6, Table 3. 1935­1936: RGAE
1562/79/275 p. 26­30. 1937: RGAE 1562/81/276a. 1937: RGAE 1562/81/269. 1937: RGAE
1562/83/222.
     In 1929­30, 87% of tractors belonged to collective farms. In 1931, a shift occurred ­ the ma-
jority of tractors moved to machine-tractor stations (MTS) that served collective farms but formally
were a state property. Therefore, we use collective farms' and machine-tractor stations' tractors in
1927­30, and use tractors belonging to machine-tractors stations from 1931 onward. The raw data
are reported for different administrative boundaries each year. However, these are at a more deseg-
regated level than the province boundaries we use. Thus, we are able to manually map the reported
data into our province boundaries.

Grain Suitability Each province's average FAO GAEZ wheat suitability index for rain-fed low-
input agriculture.

Weather Land surface temperature and precipitation are from Matsuura and Willmott (2014). For
each province, we calculated the province's average monthly temperature and precipitation using
ArcGIS.

Religious Composition Religious composition is from the 1897 Population Census, available at
Kessler, Gijs and Andrei Markevich, Electronic Repository of Russian Historical Statistics, 18th -
21st centuries, https://ristat.org/, Version I (2020).

Shares of Repartition Commune and Private Land Data on commune and private land owner-
ship are originally from the 1905 Land Census. We calculate province shares from district (uezd)-
level figures taken from Castañeda Dower and Markevich (2018), using manually constructed Ar-
cGIS district (uezd)-level maps.

Pre-Soviet Wealth Measures Nominal regional income per capita in 1897, real regional income
per capita in 1897, regional labor productivity in 1897, regional rural labor productivity in 1897 (up-
per and lower estimates) are calculated from corresponding measures for imperial provinces, using
hand-created ArcGIS district (uezd)-level maps. Imperial province estimates are from Markevich
(2019). We estimate the value of agricultural machines by multiplying the number of agricultural
machines of different types by their prices and taking the sum. Agricultural machines data are
originally from the 1910 Census of Agricultural Machines. We calculate province shares from dis-
trict (uezd)-level figures taken from Castañeda Dower and Markevich (2018), using hand-created
ArcGIS district (uezd)-level maps. Prices are from Ministerstvo Zemledeliya [Ministry of Agri-
culture] (1917). "Sbornik statistiko-ekonomicheskikh svedenij po sel'skomu khozyajstvu Rossii i
inostrannikh gosudarstv. [A collection of statistical and economic information about agriculture
in Russian and foerign countries]", Volume X. Horses, cows, and livestock in 1916 are originally
from the 1916 Agricultural Census. We calculate province shares from district (uezd)-level figures
taken from Castañeda Dower and Markevich (2018), using hand-created ArcGIS district (uezd)-
level maps.

The 1892 Famine      The sample includes the 50 European provinces of the Russian Empire.


                                                  10
Population 1885­1896: kindly shared by Volha Charnysh from an ongoing project (Charnysh
and McElroy, 2020). 1897: Census. 1898: interpolated between 1897 and 1899. 1899­1914:
Yezhegodnik Rossii 1904­1916.

Births and Deaths 1885­1896: kindly shared by Volha Charnysh from an ongoing project (Charnysh
and McElroy, 2020). 1899­1914: Yezhegodnik Rossii 1904­1916.

Ethnic Composition     1897 Population Census.

Grain, Sown area, Yield Obukhov V.M. (1927) "Dvizheniye urozhayev zernovykh kultur v Yevropeyskoy
Rossii v period 1883­1915 g.g. [Movement of grain crops in European Russia in the period 1883­
1915]".

G.2   District-level Panel
District-level dataset spans two years, 1928 and 1933, and covers some 1,600 districts of the re-
publics of Russia and Ukraine. These districts correspond to the 1934 administrative division.
Omitted are territories for which no 1933 mortality data are available. Figure A.1c shows our
districts on the map (omitted territories are in white).

Mortality 1928: Russia: State archive of the Russian federation (GARF) 374/23/7, 13, 31­32,
67, 72­91, 132, 158; Ukraine: Tsentralna Statistichna Uprava USRR [Central Statistical Office of
Ukraine] (1929) "Ukraina: Statisticheskiy Schorichnik 1929 [Ukraine: Statistical Yearbook 1929]."
1933: RGAE 1562/329/18­19.

Ethnic Composition Ethnic composition comes from the 1926 Population Census. This census
reports population by self-proclaimed ethnicity and by mother tongue, we use both. Data is calcu-
lated in our district borders using hand-created district (volost)-level 1926 map.

Urbanization 1928: used value from December 1926 Population Census. This census reports
district (volost)-level rural population and, separately, the population of each urban settlement.
To calculate rural and urban population in 1934 administrative borders, we hand-created district
(volost)-level 1926 map and located all urban settlements on the map. 1933: RGAE 1562/329/18­
19.

Grain Suitability District's average FAO GAEZ wheat suitability index for rain-fed low-input
agriculture.

Gender Ratio Gender ratio is a ratio of males to females according to the 1926 Population Census.
To calculate data in 1934 administrative borders, we hand-created district (volost)-level 1926 map.

District Latitude and Longitude      The latitude and longitude of the district centroid, calculated
using ArcGIS.


                                                11
Collectivization Gosplan S.S.S.R.. Upravleniye Narodnokhozyaystvennogo Ucheta [State Plan-
ning Committee of the USSR. Department of National Economic Accounting] (1931) "Kolkhozy
v 1930 g. Itogi raportov kolkhozov k XVI s'yezdu VKP(b) [Collective farms in 1930. Resume of
the collective farms' reports to the XVI Congress of the CPSU(b)]." 1930 districts matched to 1933
districts by name.




                                               12
Table A.1: Ethnic Composition in the USSR




                   13
Table A.2: Per Capita Food Production and Requirements for the USSR




                                14
Table A.3: The Effect of Weather and Natural Conditions on Grain Production




                                    15
   Table A.4: Ukrainian Population Share and Famine Mortality ­ Controlling for Weather




Table A.5: Ukrainian Population Share and Famine Mortality ­ Controlling for Dekulakization




                                            16
Table A.6: The Dynamic Relationship between Ukrainian Population Share and Famine Intensity




                                            17
Table A.7: Ukrainian Population Share and Famine Mortality ­ Controlling for Demographic
                                             Structure




 Table A.8: Ukrainian Population Share and Famine Mortality ­ Controlling for Historical
                                       Economic Indicators




 Table A.9: Ukrainian Population Share and Famine Mortality ­ Controlling for Historical
                                            Institutions




                                           18
Table A.10: Back-of-the-Envelope Calculation




                    19
Table A.11: Heterogenous Effects of Political Factors on Mortality in Ukrainian Areas




                                         20
Table A.12: Heterogenous Relationship of Peasant Resistance and Various Outcomes in Ukrainian
                                                  Areas




                                             21
                                                  Figure A.1: Maps
 (a) Province Excess Mortality 1933 and Grain-Producing (b) Province Ethnic Ukrainians (1926) and Grain-Producing
                          Regions                                                 Regions




             (c) District Excess Mortality 1933                          (d) District Ethnic Ukrainians 1926




 (e) District Excess Mortality 1933 Demeaned by Province (f) District Ethnic Ukrainians 1926 Demeaned by Province
                         Fixed Effects                                            Fixed Effects




Notes: Excess mortality 1933 is mortality in 1933 minus mortality in 1928. Ethnic Ukrainians 1926 is the share of ethnic
Ukrainians in the rural population according to the 1926 Population Census.




                                                          22
                                   Figure A.2: Reported and Predicted Grain
               (a) In-Sample Fit, R2 = 0.90                                (b) Out-of-Sample Fit, R2 = 0.77




Notes: Log reported grain is plotted against log predicted grain with a 45-degree line for 1901­1915, a sample on which
grain production function is estimated (in-sample fit) in Figure A.2, and for 1922­1940 (out-of-sample fit) in Figure A.2a.
See Appendix section C for details.



     Figure A.3: The Dynamic Relationship Between Ukrainian Population Share and Natality
                     (a) Total Natality                                             (b) Rural Natality




Notes: The figures show the interaction coefficients of Ukrainian population share and year dummy variables with their
95% confidence intervals. Figures A.3a and A.3b plot estimates from two regressions. The estimates and their standard
errors are presented in Appendix Table A.6.




                                                           23
             Figure A.4: Cross-District Mean and Standard Deviation of Mortality Rates
       (a) Russia and Ukraine                        (b) Russia                              (c) Ukraine




Notes: Mean mortality rate is the average mortality rate across districts in each year. Cross-district SD/Mean is the
standard deviation in mortality rates across districts in year t divided by the mean mortality rate in year t.




                                                         24
