                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   PROPAGATION AND AMPLIFICATION OF LOCAL PRODUCTIVITY SPILLOVERS

                                        Xavier Giroud
                                        Simone Lenzu
                                        Quinn Maingi
                                        Holger Mueller

                                      Working Paper 29084
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29084


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank Costas Arkolakis, Lorenzo Caliendo, Xavier Gabaix, Cecile Gaubert, Elisa Giannone,
Matthias Kehrig, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Philipp Schnabl, Pete Schott, Amit Seru, Andrei
Shleifer, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Sharon Traiberman, and various seminar audiences for
helpful comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Jun Wong for excellent research assistance.
Any views expressed are those of the authors and not those of the U.S. Census Bureau. The
Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure Avoidance Officers have reviewed this
information product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and have approved
the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this release. This research was performed at a
Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number 1908 (CBDRB-FY21-
P1908-R9062). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Xavier Giroud, Simone Lenzu, Quinn Maingi, and Holger Mueller. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Propagation and Amplification of Local Productivity Spillovers
Xavier Giroud, Simone Lenzu, Quinn Maingi, and Holger Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 29084
July 2021
JEL No. C51,C68,E23,E24,L23,O4,R12,R13,R3

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper shows that local productivity spillovers propagate throughout the economy through
the plant-level networks of multi-region firms. Using confidential Census plant-level data, we
show that large manufacturing plant openings not only raise the productivity of local plants but
also of distant plants hundreds of miles away, which belong to multi-region firms that are
exposed to the local productivity spillover through one of their plants. To quantify the
significance of plant-level networks for the propagation and amplification of local productivity
shocks, we develop and estimate a quantitative spatial model in which plants of multi-region
firms are linked through shared knowledge. Our model features heterogeneous regions, which
interact through goods trade and labor markets, as well as within-location, across-plant
heterogeneity in productivity, wages, and employment. Counterfactual exercises show that while
knowledge sharing through plant-level networks amplifies the aggregate effects of local
productivity shocks, it widens economic disparities between individual workers and regions in the
economy.

Xavier Giroud                                   Quinn Maingi
Columbia Business School                        Stern School of Business
Finance Division                                New York University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 806                    44 West Fourth Street Suite
New York, NY 10027                              9-190
and NBER                                        New York, NY 10012
xavier.giroud@gsb.columbia.edu                  rmaingi@stern.nyu.edu

Simone Lenzu                                    Holger Mueller
Stern School of Business                        Stern School of Business
New York University                             New York University
44 West Fourth Street                           44 West Fourth Street Suite
Suite 9-190                                     9-190
New York, NY 10012                              New York, NY 10012-1126
slenzu@stern.nyu.edu                            and NBER
                                                hmueller@stern.nyu.edu
1     Introduction
Local governments spend billions of dollars in subsidies every year for companies to
locate within their jurisdictions (Story, 2012; Bartik, 2020). From an e ciency standpoint,
a common rationale for such place-based incentives is the existence of Marshallian
agglomeration economies--spillovers to the local economy in the form of input sharing,
labor market pooling, and knowledge externalities--that raise the productivity of local
workers and businesses (Moretti, 2010; Kline and Moretti, 2014a; Neumark and Simpson,
2015). In this paper, we provide both reduced-form and model-based evidence that these
local productivity spillovers propagate throughout the economy through the plant-level
networks of multi-region rms.
      Identifying local productivity spillovers is di cult. In our reduced-form analysis, we
build on the natural experiments in Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010), who study
the e ects of large plant openings ("Million Dollar Plants," or MDPs) on the productivity
of incumbent plants. In their setting, plants in one or more runner-up counties, which
narrowly lost the competition, provide a counterfactual for incumbent plants in the
"winner" county, where the MDP ultimately located. Using con dential plant-level data
from the Census Bureau, we show that the MDP openings raise the productivity of
incumbent plants by 4%. This ("local") productivity spillover is strong within a 50 mile
radius around the MDP, weaker within a 100 mile radius, and insigni cant beyond. Hence,
consistent with a large empirical literature, we nd that productivity spillovers between
(plants of) di erent rms decay rapidly with geographical distance.1
      A di erent picture emerges when we examine how productivity spillovers spread
within rm boundaries. We consider large multi-plant, multi-region rms which are
exposed to the MDP openings, and thus to the local productivity spillover, by having a
plant in the winner county. We nd that, in response to the MDP openings, these rms'
plants outside the winner county ("treated plants") experience productivity gains of 1.8%,
along with employment gains of 1.6%. To identify the ("global") productivity spillover on
plants outside the winner county, we compare plants in the same county, industry, and
year that belong to rms which either own plants in the winner county (treatment) or the
runner-up counties (control). This speci cation accounts for the possibility of correlated
shocks between the county of the treated plant and the winner county, thus addressing
potential concerns that the productivity gains at treated plants may be due to common
regional shocks rather than internal spillovers within the rm's boundaries.
    1 Rosenthal
              and Strange (2004, 2020) and Combes and Gobillon (2015) review the empirical literature on
agglomeration economies. Most empirical studies nd that these economies are highy localized.


                                                   1
      What explains the global productivity spillover? While the local productivity gains
may be due to either labor market pooling or knowledge spillovers, it is unlikely that a
thicker labor market in the winner county would a ect the productivity of treated plants
hundreds of miles away. Knowledge, on the other hand, can be used in local and distant
plants alike. Indeed, once it spills over to the rm's local plant, it can be freely shared
with other plants inside the rm's boundaries (Markusen, 1984). To explore this issue, we
examine if the global productivity spillover becomes weaker as we increase the distance to
the MDP. We nd that the estimates remain virtually unchanged if we exclude all plants
within a 500 mile radius, or within the same state or Census division as the MDP. Hence,
unlike the local productivity spillover, which takes place across plants of di erent rms,
the global productivity spillover, which takes place across di erent plants of the same rm,
does not decay with geographical distance. Further, and also consistent with knowledge
sharing, we nd that the global productivity spillover is much stronger if the distant plant
and either the MDP or the rm's plant in the winner county are in the same industry or in
(knowledge-based) industries characterized by mutual R&D ows or patent citations.
      In a recent survey article, Rosenthal and Strange (2020) write:

      "Implicit in the idea that spatial concentration increases productivity is another
      idea: the degree of proximity matters. Agglomeration economies must decay
      with distance. How close, then, do rms and workers need to be to each other
      to bene t from agglomeration economies? Or more colloquially, how close is
      close?" (p. 27).

Our paper provides a nuanced answer. On the one hand, rms must have a nearby plant
to bene t from knowledge spillovers. As we show, the local agglomeration economy is
strongly signi cant only within a 50 mile radius around the MDP. On the other hand, not
all of a rm's plants need to be located nearby. In fact, it may su ce if only one of the
  rm's plants is located in close proximity to the MDP. Once the knowledge spills over to
that plant, it can be passed on to other plants inside the rm's boundaries, increasing the
productivity of distant plants hundreds of miles away.
       To quantify the signi cance of knowledge sharing through plant-level networks,
we develop and estimate a quantitative spatial model with goods trade, labor mobility,
plant-level networks, and a rich and realistic geography. While we build on the theoretical
framework developed by Allen and Arkolakis (2014), Ahlfeldt et al. (2015), Redding (2016),
and Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018), we depart from the canonical model in
a number of signi cant ways.2 Our model features nitely many rms, some of which
  2 Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017) provide a comprehensive taxonomy of the modeling assumptions and



                                                 2
have multiple plants in di erent regions. Plants of the same rm, across regions, are
linked through shared knowledge, as in Markusen (1984). Speci cally, we assume that
plant-level productivity depends on local knowledge and knowledge in the other regions
in which the rm operates. This generates heterogeneity in plant-level productivity within
a given location and provides a direct mechanism through which productivity shocks in one
location may propagate to other locations.3
      Another point of departure from the canonical model is our focus on within-location
labor markets. Speci cally, we assume workers have idiosyncratic preferences over both
locations and plants within a location. In conjunction with heterogeneity in plant-level
productivity, this implies plants within a given location pay di erent wages, departing
from the standard assumption of each location having a single wage. Similar to McFadden
(1978), we express workers' location choice problem as a nested choice between di erent
locations and then, within locations, between di erent plants. This decomposition results
in analytically separable within- and across-location problems, which greatly simpli es the
computational and analytical characterization of the model's solution. Given parameter
values and fundamentals, the model has a unique equilibrium. Moreover, given parameter
values and observed data, there exist unique values of the unobserved fundamentals that
rationalize the data as an equilibrium of the model.
      The typical economic geography model focuses on regional outcomes; parameters
can thus often be identi ed using regional aggregates. By contrast, our model features
within-region, across-plant heterogeneity. Hence, plant-level micro moments are needed
to identify the parameters. To this end, we use an indirect inference approach and target
as moments reduced-form estimates--semi-elasticities of plant-level employment, wages,
and productivity to the MDP openings--that are informative about plant-level outcomes.
To obtain model-based estimates that correspond to these reduced-form estimates, we
build a model economy that mirrors the geography of production networks in the United
States. Within this model economy, we simulate local productivity shocks that resemble
the MDP openings, providing us with a micro-level data set with "pre-" and "post-shock"
observations. We then use this data set to estimate plant-level di erence-in-di erences
regressions that mirror those in our reduced-form analysis, providing us with model-based
moments and allowing us to estimate the parameters.
building blocks in quantitative spatial models.
    3 Our model is designed to study productivity spillovers within rms across regions, as well as their

implications for the within- and across-region distribution of economic activity. This sets our model apart
from a recent literature on endogenous growth that focuses on the evolution of the (national) productivity
distribution through the di usion of knowledge (e.g., Lucas and Moll, 2014; Perla and Tonetti, 2014; and the
papers surveyed in Buera and Lucas, 2018).


                                                     3
      Given our parameter estimates, we undertake counterfactual analyses to quantify
the signi cance of knowledge sharing through plant-level networks for the distribution of
economic activity, as well as for the propagation and ampli cation of local productivity
shocks. In one counterfactual, we increase the strength of within- rm, across-region
knowledge sharing. We nd that knowledge sharing between plants widens economic
disparities between regions: those with high real GDP become richer, while those with
low real GDP become poorer. In another counterfactual, we simulate local productivity
shocks--such as those arising from place-based policies--with and without knowledge
sharing between plants. While the welfare gains are 64% higher with knowledge sharing,
they are not evenly distributed. In particular, workers in other regions working for plants
that are "connected" (through plant-level networks) to the region with the productivity
shock experience utility gains that are ve times larger than workers at non-connected
plants. At the regional level, we nd that the welfare gains are disproportionately
concentrated in highly populous regions, as those tend to have the most connected
plants. Hence, knowledge sharing through plant-level networks leads to a highly uneven
distribution of the welfare gains from local productivity shocks.
      Our paper is related to several strands of literature. First, it is related to papers
that study the aggregate implications of place-based policies. In this literature, general
equilibrium e ects arise from worker migration and goods trade, and possibly also from
  rm sorting (Busso, Gregory, and Kline, 2013; Kline and Moretti, 2014b; Gaubert, 2018;
Fajgelbaum and Gaubert, 2020; Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and Schwartzman, 2020; Gaubert,
Kline, and Yagan, 2020). Our paper focuses on a new (direct) channel through which
place-based policies may a ect the rest of the economy: productivity gains that spill
over to other regions through the plant-level networks of multi-region rms. Unlike
classical externalities from place-based policies, this externality has a positive e ect on
other regions.4 However, not all regions bene t equally; we nd that the welfare gains
are disproportionately concentrated in the most populous regions.
      Relatedly, Caliendo et al. (2018) and Hornbeck and Moretti (2020) document how
regional productivity shocks may impact other regions through trade ows and worker
migration. Our paper focuses on productivity spillovers through the plant-level networks
of multi-region rms. Our paper is also related to Bilir and Morales (2020) who, in an
   4 The  prevailing view is that, unless workers migrate to regions with higher elasticities of productivity
to agglomeration, place-based policies are at best a zero-sum game (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008; Moretti
2010; Kline and Moretti, 2014a). However, Fajgelbaum and Gaubert (2020) and Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and
Schwartzman (2020) show that even when agglomeration elasticities are homogeneous, the decentralized
equilibrium may be ine cient, leaving room for welfare-enhancing spatial policies. Bartelme et al. (2019)
analyze optimal industrial policies at the sectoral (as opposed to regional) level.


                                                     4
international setting, study how parent rm R&D may a ect the value added of foreign
a liates. We study a domestic setting. Moreover, we consider productivity shocks that
originate outside of rms' boundaries. That being said, both papers have in common the
idea that knowledge is being shared within the rm.
      Finally, our paper is related to a growing literature, going back to Long and Plosser
(1983) and Acemoglu et al. (2012), that studies how shocks propagate through production
networks. In particular, our paper is related to a branch of this literature that considers
shocks at the rm (as opposed to sectoral) level, both empirically (Barrot and Sauvagnat,
2016; Carvalho et al., 2020) and theoretically (Acemoglu and Tahbaz-Salehi, 2020). In
contrast to this literature, our paper focuses on production networks within rms.5 Also,
productivity spillovers in our framework are not driven by input-output linkages. On the
other hand, our paper shares with the literature on production networks the idea that small
shocks may propagate and have signi cant aggregate e ects.6
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides reduced-form
evidence. Section 3 develops a quantitative spatial model in which plants of multi-region
  rms are linked through shared knowledge. Section 4 presents the structural estimation of
the model. Section 5 provides counterfactual analyses. Section 6 concludes.


2     Reduced-Form Evidence
2.1     Research Design
We examine how local productivity spillovers propagate across U.S. regions through the
plant-level networks of multi-plant, multi-region manufacturing rms. To identify local
productivity spillovers, we build on the natural experiments in Greenstone, Hornbeck,
and Moretti (2010, GHM), who study the e ects of large plant openings ("Million Dollar
Plants," or MDPs) on the productivity of local incumbent plants. In their setting, plants
in one or more runner-up counties, which narrowly lost the competition after surviving
a long selection process, serve as a counterfactual for incumbent plants in the "winner"
county, where the MDP ultimately located.7 We match the MDP openings in the Appendix
    5 Giroud  and Mueller (2019) study an alternative channel through which establishments of the same rm
may be linked: through a rm-wide nancial (or budget) constraint. Focusing on large restaurant and retail
(i.e., nontradable) rms during the Great Recession, they show how a drop in local consumer demand in one
location tightens the rm's nancial constraint and forces it to lay o employees in other locations.
     6 Our result that local productivity shocks may spread and amplify within rm boundaries provides a

possible microfoundation for rm-level productivity shocks in granular economies (Gabaix, 2011).
     7 Winner and runner-up counties are from the reported location rankings of rms in the corporate real

estate journal Site Selection. The journal includes a regular feature article, Million Dollar Plants, that describes


                                                         5
of Greenstone and Moretti (2003) to plants in the Census Bureau's Standard Statistical
Establishment List (SSEL) based on rm and county name. Like GHM do, we identify 11
MDP openings between 1982 and 1985, 18 MDP openings between 1986 and 1989, and 18
MDP openings between 1990 and 1993, adding up to 47 MDP openings.
      We source data from three establishment-level data sets provided by the Census
Bureau. The rst two data sets are the Census of Manufactures (CMF) and the Annual
Survey of Manufactures (ASM). They contain information about key plant-level variables,
such as shipments, assets, material inputs, employment, payroll, capital expenditures,
industry sector, and location. The third data set is the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD). It contains longitudinal establishment identi ers along with data on employment,
payroll, industry sector, location, and rm a liation.
      We rst study the ("local") spillover from the MDP openings on incumbent plants
in the winner county. For each MDP opening, we identify all plants in the winner and
runner-up counties. We require a plant to be present before and after the MDP opening.
We use all observations from ve years before until ve years after, which leaves us with
157,000 plant-year observations.8 We next study the ("global") spillover on plants outside
the winner county belonging to multi-county (MC) rms with plants in the winner county.
To have a counterfactual for these plants, we construct various control groups. We use
again all observations from ve years before until ve years after the MDP opening. We
always exclude the MDPs themselves, as well as any plants owned by rms that own the
MDPs. Depending on the control group, this leaves us with 1,407,000; 1,046,000; or 423,000
plant-year observations. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998.
      Table 1 provides descriptive statistics from the year before the MDP opening. Panel
A shows that the typical plant in the local spillover sample has 141.7 employees, pays an
average wage of $39,530, and its productivity (TFP) is close to the industry average.9 Panels
B and C pertain to the global spillover sample with 423,000 plant-year observations. This
sample is composed of plants outside the winner and runner-up (or "loser") counties that
belong to MC rms with plants in the winner county ("treated plants"), as well as plants in
the same counties as the treated plants belonging to MC rms with plants in the runner-up
counties ("control plants"). Panel B shows that the typical plant in the global spillover
sample has 268.2 employees, which is larger than in the local spillover sample, since the
where a rm decided to locate a large manufacturing plant. The feature article was last published in 1993.
     8 All sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 1,000 following Census Bureau disclosure guidelines.
     9 TFP is the estimated residual from a plant-level regression of output on capital, labor, and material inputs

(all in logs). To allow for di erent factor intensities across industries and over time, we estimate the regression
separately for each 3-digit SIC code industry and year. Accordingly, TFP can be interpreted as the relative
productivity of a plant within a given industry and year.


                                                        6
global spillover sample only includes plants of MC rms. Moreover, the typical plant in
the global spillover sample pays an average wage of $38,850, and its productivity is again
close to the industry average. Finally, Panel C describes the parent rms associated with
the plants in Panel B. As can be seen, the typical parent rm has 1,987.5 employees and 7.4
plants, which are spread out across 5.4 counties and 2.7 states.


2.2     Local Productivity Spillover
We rst study the local productivity spillover from the MDP openings on incumbent plants
in the winner county. We estimate the following speci cation:

                         =    +     +     +   1        +   2(           ×         )+       ,               (1)

where         denotes plant-level productivity (TFP), denotes counties, denotes cases,
denotes plants, denotes industries, denotes years,              is an indicator for case from
the treatment year (i.e., the year of the MDP opening) onward,               is an indicator for
the winner county, and , , and           are case, plant, and industry × year xed e ects. A
"case" comprises the winner county and the associated runner-up counties. The case and
plant xed e ects capture time-invariant heterogeneity across cases and plants, respectively.
Importantly, the case xed e ects force comparisons to be made between plants within a
given winner-loser pair. The industry × year xed e ects capture time-varying shocks at
the industry level. Industries are de ned at the 3-digit SIC code level. The main coe cient of
interest is 2 , which captures the mean change in productivity among plants in the winner
county relative to plants in the runner-up counties.
       Table 2 presents the results. In this and all other tables, we only report the main
coe cient(s) of interest and write "MDP" in lieu of                  ×         for brevity. As
column (1) shows, the MDP openings raise the productivity of incumbent plants in the
winner county by 4%.10 In column (2), we examine if the local productivity spillover varies
with distance between the incumbent plants and the MDP. To this end, we rst identify
all incumbent plants within a 250 mile radius around the MDP. Naturally, this includes
plants outside the winner county. We then create three dummy variables, ( < 50 miles) ,
( 50 to 100 miles) , and ( 100 to 250 miles) , that indicate whether the incumbent plant lies
within 50 miles, between 50 and 100 miles, or between 100 and 250 miles from the MDP,
  10 Our  estimate lies well within the range of TFP estimates reported by GHM (1.46% to 6.13%), albeit it is
slightly lower than their baseline estimate (4.77%). While we require plants to be present before and after the
MDP opening, their baseline analysis requires plants to be present for eight consecutive years before the MDP
opening. This excludes smaller plants in the ASM, which are randomly (re-)sampled every ve years.



                                                      7
and interact these dummy variables with both terms in equation (1). As is shown, the local
productivity spillover decays rapidly with geographical distance. It is strong within a 50 mile
radius around the MDP, much weaker within a 100 mile radius, and insigni cant beyond.
Hence, consistent with a large empirical literature, we nd that productivity spillovers
between (plants of) di erent rms are highly localized.


2.3    Global Productivity Spillover
We next study the global productivity spillover on treated plants outside the winner
county that belong to rms with plants in the winner county. We estimate the same
di erence-in-di erences speci cation as above, except that              is now an indicator
for whether the plant's parent rm owns a plant in the winner county, the xed e ects vary
by control group, and a "case" is more generally de ned as comprising all treated plants as
well as all plants in the corresponding control group.
       Table 3 presents the results. In column (1), the control group consists of all plants
outside the runner-up counties that belong to MC rms with plants in the runner-up
counties ("runner-up rms"). This speci cation includes plant, industry × year, and case
  xed e ects. Accordingly, we compare treated plants with plants of runner-up rms in
the same industry and year, but possibly in di erent counties. In column (2), the control
group consists of all plants of MC rms in the same county as the treated plant. This
speci cation includes plant and industry × county × year xed e ects. Thus, we compare
treated plants with other plants in the same county, industry, and year. This accounts for
the possibility of common shocks between the county of the treated plant and the winner
county, thus addressing potential concerns that the productivity gains at treated plants
may be due to common regional shocks rather than internal spillovers within the rm's
plant-level network. Finally, in column (3), the control group is a subset of that in column
(2): it consists of all plants of runner-up rms in the same county as the treated plant. In
addition to plant and industry × county × year xed e ects, this speci cation also includes
case xed e ects. Hence, we compare plants in the same county, industry, and year that
belong to parent rms which either own plants in the winner county (treatment group) or
in the corresponding runner-up counties (control group).
       As is shown, the MDP openings raise the productivity of treated plants outside
the winner county by 1.8% to 2%. The estimate is stable across speci cations, despite
varying control groups and xed e ects. While the productivity gains at treated plants
are less than the productivity gains in the winner county, Table 1 shows that the typical
"treated" MC rm has about 6.3 (treated) plants outside the winner county. Indeed, using


                                              8
a back-of-the-envelope calculation, we illustrate below that almost twice as many jobs are
created outside the winner county than among all plants in the winner county combined.


2.4     Treatment E ect Dynamics
Table A.1 of Online Appendix A shows the dynamics of the treatment e ect, both for the
local and global productivity spillover. The purpose of the analysis is twofold: i) provide
support for the parallel trends assumption, and ii) compare the timings of the local and
global spillovers. If the productivity gains spread through rms' plant-level networks,
then the global spillover should set in around the same time as (or at least not before)
the local spillover. As is shown, there are no signi cant di erences in pre-trends between
either plants in the winner and runner-up counties, or between treated plants and plants
of runner-up rms in the same county as the treated plant. Furthermore, the global
productivity spillover sets in around the same time as the local productivity spillover. In
either case, the estimates remain economically large and stable until the end, suggesting
that the productivity gains are not temporary.


2.5     Mechanism
Marshall (1890) famously divides agglomeration economies into three categories: i) labor
market pooling, ii) knowledge spillovers, and iii) input-output linkages. Using various
measures of economic distance between the MDP and the incumbent plants, GHM nd that
the local productivity spillover is consistent with either labor market pooling or knowledge
spillovers, but not with input-output linkages.11
      While labor market pooling and knowledge spillovers may both contribute to the
local productivity spillover, it is unlikely that a larger labor market in the winner county
would a ect the productivity of distant plants hundreds of miles away. Knowledge, on the
other hand, can be used in local and distant plants alike. Indeed, once it spills over to the
  rm's local plant, it can be freely shared with other plants inside the rm's boundaries
  11 "[T]his evidence is consistent with intellectual externalities to the extent that they are embodied in
workers who move from rm to rm and to the extent that they occur among rms that use technologies that
are reasonably similar. The estimates ... seem less consistent with the hypothesis that agglomeration occurs
because of proximity to customers and suppliers" (p. 577). In Tables A.2 and A.3 of Online Appendix A, we
con rm that input-output linkages play no signi cant role for either the local or global productivity spillover.
This also addresses the possibility that the global productivity spillover may be driven by local demand from
the MDP, which in turn relaxes rm-wide nancial constraints and thereby bene ts distant plants. To further
explore this hypothesis, we have examined if the global productivity spillover is stronger for more nancially
constrained rms. As Tables A.4 and A.5 of Online Appendix A show, rm-wide nancial constraints play no
signi cant role for either the local or global productivity spillover.


                                                       9
(Markusen, 1984). To explore this issue, we examine if the global productivity spillover
becomes weaker as we increase the distance to the MDP. Table 4 shows the results. Based
on our tightest speci cation in column (3) of Table 3, we exclude all plants within a 100
mile, 250 mile, or 500 mile radius around the MDP (columns (1) to (3)), or in the same state
or Census division as the MDP (columns (4) and (5)). As is shown, the estimates are stable
and practically identical to the original estimate in column (3) of Table 3. Hence, unlike
the local productivity spillover, which takes place across plants of di erent rms, the global
productivity spillover, which takes place across di erent plants of the same rm, does not
decay with geographical distance.
      Why is the local productivity spillover twice as large as the global productivity
spillover?12 For one, not all of the productivity gains in the winner county may be due
to knowledge spillovers. As noted above, they are likely due to both knowledge spillovers
and thicker labor markets. Furthermore, some knowledge may not be passed on to other
plants of the rm, as it may be location-speci c or di cult to share ("soft information").
In contrast, knowledge about speci c products or production processes is likely relevant
for, and easier to share with, other plants of the rm. We explore this idea in columns (1)
and (2) of Table 5 by interacting both terms in equation (1) with indicators for whether
the treated plant is in the same 4-digit SIC code industry as either the MDP or the rm's
plant in the winner county. The 4-digit industry classi cation is extremely ne; it comprises
459 manufacturing industries in the CMF/ASM. Plants in the same 4-digit industry produce
similar goods and use similar production processes. For example, "nitrogenous fertilizers"
(SIC 2873), "phosphatic fertilizers" (SIC 2874), and "fertilizers, mixing only" (SIC 2875) all
have di erent 4-digit SIC codes. As is shown, the global productivity spillover is much
stronger if the treated plant and either the MDP or the rm's plant in the winner county are
in the same narrow industry.
      Finally, in columns (3) to (6), we interact both terms in equation (1) with measures
of knowledge sharing at the industry-pair level. The rst measure, "mutual R&D ows,"
captures how R&D in one industry ows out to bene t another industry. The second
measure, "mutual patent citations," captures the extent to which technologies associated
with one industry cite technologies associated with another industry.13 In either case, we
measure the extent of knowledge sharing between the industry of the treated plant and
  12 This is true even if we estimate the local productivity spillover using only plants of MC rms. Their
productivity gain in the winner county is 3.9%, which is twice as large as outside the winner county.
   13 The measures of mutual R&D ows and patent citations are the unidirectional measures Tech 

max{TechIn  , TechOut  } and Patent  max{PatentIn  , PatentOut  } at the 3-digit SIC code level from
Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010). As the authors note (p. 1202): "we base our metrics of information ows on
patents and research and development (R&D), which re ect only the highest level of information ows."


                                                    10
either the industry of the MDP or the industry of the rm's plant in the winner county.
As is shown, the global productivity spillover is much stronger if the treated plant and
either the MDP or the rm's plant in the winner county are in (knowledge-based) industries
characterized by mutual R&D ows or patent citations.14 The e ects are economically
signi cant. For instance, in column (3), a one-standard deviation increase in the R&D ow
measure (0.022) raises the productivity gains at treated plants by 1.3 percentage points.


2.6      Employment and Wages
We nally study the implications for employment and wages. Table 6 examines the local
employment and wage spillovers in the winner county. As can be seen, employment and
wages increase by 3.5% and 3.7%, respectively, which is of the same order of magnitude as
the productivity gains.15 Table 7 examines the global employment and wage spillovers. As
is shown, employment at treated plants increases by 1.6% to 1.7%, which is again of the
same order of magnitude as the productivity gains.16 However, wages only increase by a
small amount. This is not surprising; in any given county outside the winner county, only
relatively few plants are treated, putting only mild pressure on local wages.
       With the usual caveats, we can perform a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation
to determine the total number of jobs created outside the winner county versus those
created in the winner county. In the winner county, about 52,600 workers are employed
in manufacturing prior to the MDP opening. By comparison, about 211,900 workers are
employed at treated plants outside the winner county. Given the estimates in Tables 6 and
7, this implies that 0.035 × 52, 600 = 1, 841 jobs are created in the winner county versus
0.016 × 211, 900 = 3, 390 jobs outside the winner county. Hence, almost twice as many jobs
are created outside the winner county than at all plants in the winner county combined.


3       Theoretical Framework
We develop a quantitative spatial model to quantify the impact of knowledge sharing
through plant-level networks on sub-regional, regional, and aggregate outcomes. At the
    14 TableA.6 of Online Appendix A applies the tests from Table 5 to the local productivity spillover. The
results mirror those in Table 5.
   15 The increase in employment is much larger when the MDP itself is included. Using county-level data,

which includes the MDP, Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) nd that employment in the winner
county increases by 5.7% after the MDP opening. Indeed, GHM (Table 1) note that the average MDP is large
relative to the rest of the winner county--it accounts for 8.6% of total output one year before the MDP opening.
   16 Table A.7 of Online Appendix A shows that the employment e ects do not decay with geographical

distance to the MDP.


                                                      11
regional level, our model resembles a canonical Armington model in which regions are
linked through goods trade and labor mobility (Armington, 1969; Anderson, 1979; Allen
and Arkolakis, 2014). We extend the model to include nitely many plants in each region.
Plants can either be stand-alone ("single-county plant" or "SC plant") or belong to a parent
  rm which has plants in other locations ("multi-county plant" or "MC plant"). Plants'
productivities depend on local knowledge; MC plants' productivities additionally depend
on knowledge in other regions in which the parent rm has a plant. This induces direct
productivity linkages across regions and heterogeneity in plants' productivities within a
region. At the sub-regional level, our production technology is reminiscent of Eaton and
Kortum (2002) and similar Ricardian models. The main di erence is that, in our model,
multiple plants in each location produce a location-speci c continuum of intermediate
goods instead of multiple countries producing an economy-wide continuum.17 Moreover,
we extend traditional preferences over locations to preferences over both locations and
plants within a location. In equilibrium, this induces plants in the same location to pay
di erent wages; in particular, more productive plants pay higher wages. Altogether, our
model includes classical Armington model forces at the regional level; Ricardian model
forces at the sub-regional level, plant-level network-based productivity linkages across
regions; and within-location heterogeneity in productivity, employment, and wages.


3.1    Primitives
Our model economy consists of heterogeneous regions (also "locations" or "counties")
which interact through trade in goods markets and labor mobility. Locations, denoted
by , ,  , exogenously di er from one another with regard to knowledge stock, land
supply, amenities, and the spatial allocation of intermediate goods producers. We refer
to intermediate goods producers as plants. Plants are organized into networks which
we call rms, denoted by , .           rms consist of a single plant ("single-county rms"
or "SC rms"), while         rms have plants in multiple counties ("multi-county rms" or
"MC rms"). Each county has at least one SC plant, and each MC rm has at most one
plant per county. We refer to individual plants by their location- rm tuple { , }. Let E
be the set of locations in which rm has a plant, and let  be the set of rms with a
plant in location . Plant { , }'s productivity depends on location 's knowledge as well
as knowledge in all other locations in E . Plants in each region produce a region-speci c
  17 When  combined with the rest of our model, this di erence allows us to separate the calculation of the
across-location equilibrium from the calculation of the within-location equilibrium, which greatly simpli es
the computational and analytical characterizations of the model equilibrium and its inversion.



                                                    12
continuum of intermediate goods, which is aggregated by nal goods producers, and then
shipped to, and consumed by, consumers in all regions.


3.2     Consumer Preferences
Workers are geographically mobile and endowed with one unit of labor each that is
inelastically supplied. Worker working for plant { , } earns wage              and derives
utility from goods consumption ( ), residential land use ( ), and plant-level idiosyncratic
amenities (     ):
                                                                    1-
                                                            
                                   =                                     ,                       (2)
                                                           1-
where     ( 0, 1) and    is drawn from a multivariate Fréchet distribution given by:

                                                                                         1-   
                                                                              1
                                                                                  - 1-
                                                                                              
                                                                             1-
                P                      ,   =           -                                         (3)
                    =1 
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
for all        : 
                        [0, ) | | . The amenity scale parameter       indexes the average
draw of idiosyncratic utility for plants in location . The amenity shape parameter > 1
controls dispersion in idiosyncratic draws across locations; as  , the distribution
degenerates to a set of mass points ordered by { }  . Finally, the amenity correlation
parameter  [0, 1) controls the strength of the correlation of within-location, across-plant
idiosyncratic utility draws.
      Consumers have CES preferences over nal goods sourced from each location with
an elasticity of substitution equal to :

                                                               -1
                                                       -1
                                           =                                                     (4)
                                               

where     is the amount of location 's nal good consumed by consumer .


3.3     Production Technology
Perfectly competitive plants located in county produce a location-speci c continuum of
intermediate goods      [0, 1] with technology ( ) = ( ) ( ) , where ( ) and
  ( ) are plant { , }'s (idiosyncratic) productivity and labor, respectively, for producing
                       1
good . We assume (        ) is a Pareto distributed random variable with productivity scale



                                               13
parameter ¯1 and common productivity shape parameter .18 We assume idiosyncratic
productivity draws which are independent across plants and intermediate goods. Plants
take their wage      and productivity distribution as given.
      Perfectly competitive nal goods producers use intermediate goods to make the
location-speci c nal good and ship it to all regions for consumption. Final goods producers
use equal quantities of each intermediate good to assemble the nal good. Goods trade
is subject to bilateral "iceberg" trade costs such that      1 units must be shipped from
location in order for one unit to arrive in location . Final goods producers' marginal cost
is thus the product of trade costs and the average production cost of intermediate goods. We
assume trade is frictionless within a location,     = 1. Across locations, for our estimation,
we parameterize trade costs as a constant elasticity function of haversine distance between
country centroids,      =    =       .


3.4    Knowledge and Productivity
We assume plants' productivity scale parameters depend on exogenous knowledge
and endogenous agglomeration economies that depend on local population size .19
Speci cally, building on Markusen (1984), we assume plants draw on rm-wide shared
knowledge (or "knowledge capital"):

                                           ¯ =           -       ,                                     (5)

where is knowledge in county , - represents rm 's knowledge from its other plants,
and represents classical, local agglomeration economies.
      For MC rms, we assume - is the geometric mean of knowledge in the other
locations in which the rm operates:
                                                                1
                                                             | E | -1
                                          -   =  E    \{ }              .                              (6)

For SC rms, which operate in a single location, we set - = 1, in which case equation
(5) reduces to ¯ =       . In counties with only SC plants, our productivity process is
thus similar to a standard Armington model. By contrast, counties with MC plants are
connected to other counties through a knowledge-sharing network allowing for direct
  18 We employ the inverse Pareto distribution for two reasons: (1) closed-form expressions for realized

productivity and labor shares, and (2) to allow plants to produce with heterogeneous realized productivity.
  19 Plant output is thus a function of both labor and knowledge, as in Caliendo and Rossi-Hansberg (2012)

and Caliendo, Monte, and Rossi-Hansberg (2015).



                                                    14
productivity spillovers across locations, in line with our global spillover estimates. The
key parameter which controls the strength of within- rm, across-location productivity
spillovers is the "knowledge-sharing parameter" . Ceteris paribus, a higher puts more
weight on knowledge in the other locations in which the rm operates.


3.5        Solution to Consumer Problem
3.5.1      Goods and Housing

Consider consumer       in location . Standard CES demand results give us:

                                                       -          -1
                                             =                         ,                            (7)

where is the amount consumer spends on goods,          is the price of nal goods shipped
from location to location , and is the Dixit-Stiglitz price index:
                                                                        1
                                                                       1-

                                                   (       ) 1-                .                    (8)
                                                

Consumption choices aggregate such that:

                                                       -          -1
                                             =                         ,                            (9)

where       is the quantity of location 's nal good consumed in location , and     is total
expenditure on consumption in location .
      We assume that land is inelastically supplied and owned by immobile landlords, who
receive land rents from workers as income and consume their local consumption bundle
(see Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg, 2018). Cobb-Douglas preferences across goods
and land imply that the expenditure share of labor income on land consumption is given by
( 1 - ) .20 Total labor income is the product of average wages    and local population .
Land market clearing implies that equilibrium land rents are given by:

                                                (1 - )
                                            =                              .                      (10)

Our assumptions on competition and landlords' consumption imply that total consumption
expenditures in each location equal total labor income, which in turn equals total
expenditures on goods produced in that location:
  20 SeeDavis and Ortalo-Magné (2011) for evidence in support of the constant housing expenditure share
implied by the Cobb-Douglas representation in equation (2).


                                                   15
                                                 1-        -1
                                      =                                 .                                   (11)
                                           


3.5.2   Location Choice and Welfare

Each worker chooses a plant that maximizes her utility. Worker 's indirect utility from
working for plant { , } is given by        1- . In the spirit of McFadden (1978), worker

faces a nested choice; we can decompose this choice problem into a choice of location and,
within location , a choice of plant   . Using results from Lind and Ramondo (2021),
we show in Online Appendix B.1 that the labor share of location is given by:

                                                                            1-
                              P { chooses } =                                                  ,            (12)
                         ¯                                                       
                                                                                 1-
                                                                                 

where the "amenity wage"       is an aggregator of plant-level wages in location :
                                                              1-

                                                      1-
                                      :=                            .                                       (13)
                                              


     Furthermore, Online Appendix B.1 shows that within-location (supply-side) labor
shares are given by:

                                                                                          1-

                       = P { chooses | chooses n} =                                                     ,   (14)
                                                                                                   1-
                                                                                 : E

where represents labor supplied to plant { , } given plant-level wages {        }  . Plants
face an upward-sloping labor supply curve. To attract additional workers with lower
idiosyncratic preference draws, real wages  /(    1- ) must increase. When plant { , } 's

real wage increases, if > 0, it attracts workers from both within location and other
locations. As  1, within-location preferences become perfectly correlated.
      In Online Appendix B.1, we show average realized utility, or welfare, is given by:
                                                                                 1

                             ¯ =    -1
                                                                   1-
                                                                                      ,                     (15)
                                              

where  (·) denotes the gamma function.



                                              16
3.6     Solution to Producer Problem
3.6.1    Plant Production

Under perfect competition, each intermediate good is produced by the plant with the lowest
marginal cost. We show in Online Appendix B.1 that within-location (demand-side) labor
shares are given by:


                                            = LD         , {¯ ,     }       ,                                (16)

where represents labor demand by plant { , } given productivity scale parameters and
wages { ¯ ,   }  . LD is homogeneous of degree zero and exhibits gross substitution
in both productivity scale parameters and wages.21 LD is also strictly greater than zero,
which ensures that all plants produce in equilibrium.22 Finally, controls the elasticity of
LD with respect to both productivity scale parameters and wages ; as increases, labor
demand becomes more elastic. We provide the exact form of LD in Online Appendix B.1.
      We also show in Online Appendix B.1 that plants produce with realized average
productivity ^ given by:

                                                                                       ¯
               ^ E             ( ) | produces           =E         ( ) RS          ,              ,          (17)
                                                                                             

where E      ( ) = +1 ¯ is nite for all > 0. RS denotes Ricardian spillovers capturing
productivity gains from comparative advantage across plants. It is bounded between 1 and
 +1
    , homogeneous of degree zero in wage-adjusted productivity scale parameters ¯       ,
                                                                                                                
                                                                   ¯
decreasing in , increasing in | | , and decreasing in                   . We provide the exact form of RS
in Online Appendix B.1.

3.6.2    Final Goods Production

Since plants and nal goods producers are perfectly competitive, nal goods are supplied at
marginal cost. This implies:
  21 In our model,                                                                          LD             LD
                     gross substitution in productivity scale parameters is equivalent to    ¯   > 0 and    ¯   <
                                                                  LD            LD
0    \ { } ; gross substitution in wages is equivalent to             < 0 and         > 0   \ { } .
    22 This is di erent from models of granular rms in international trade (e.g., Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo, 2012;

Gaubert and Itskhoki, 2021), where only a subset of rms produces in equilibrium. In our (domestic) setting,
it is crucial that all plants produce in equilibrium in order to mimick the economic footprints of plant-level
networks in Census data.




                                                        17
                                                  1
                                 =                            ( )         =          ,                  (18)
                                              0
where     ( ) is the marginal cost to supply intermediate good   and the (Marshallian)
"e ciency wage"      captures the average cost to produce one unit of output. Without
                                                                               1
dispersion in wages, we would have                =           E min                 . However, because more
                                                                              ( )
productive plants will o er higher wages in equilibrium, the formula is somewhat more
subtle in our case. We show in Online Appendix B.1 that:

                                                          ¯
                                         =Z           ,               ,                                 (19)
                                                                

where the productivity aggregator Z is homogeneous of degree -1, decreasing in
wage-adjusted productivity scale parameters, and decreasing in | | . The parameter
controls the relative importance of e cient and ine cient plants; as increases, plants with
a higher wage-adjusted productivity scale parameter become relatively more important. We
provide the exact form of Z in Online Appendix B.1.


3.7    General Equilibrium
De ne the following endogenous objects: within-location labor shares l :=                                  ,
                                                                                                     : 
within-location relative wages w :=                            , county-level labor L := { }           , and
                                                   : 
county-level average wages W := { }  . Moreover, de ne the following exogenous
fundamentals: land endowments H := { }  , amenity scale parameters B := { }  ,
knowledge K := { }  , plant-level networks E := E  , and bilateral trade costs
 := { } { , } 2 .
      We are ready to characterize equilibria of our model. Equilibrium labor allocations
and wages {l, w, L, W } are pinned down by equations (11) (total expenditure equals labor
income), (12) (county-level labor shares), (14) (within-location (supply-side) labor shares),
and (16) (within-location (demand-side) labor shares). Further, if {l, w, L, W } solve all four
equations, there exists an equilibrium with those labor allocations and wages and, given
fundamentals {H , B, K , E,  }, we can recover the equilibrium values of all endogenous
objects in closed form. We thus refer to equilibria by their corresponding labor allocations
and wages, {l, w, L, W }.

Proposition      1.     Given    parameter    values           { , , , , , , }           and   fundamentals
                                                                    - -1
                          - -1                    1+ +( -1)
{H , B, K , E,  }, if            +    0 and       1+ ( 1- )-        - -1        [-1, 1] , the equilibrium of

                                                  18
the model exists and is unique (up to a normalization in wages).

Proof. See Online Appendix B.2.

       The rst condition in Proposition (1) guarantees that dispersion forces are (weakly)
stronger than agglomeration forces. The second condition is the same condition as in
Theorem 2 of Allen and Arkolakis (2014), subject to a relabeling of the parameters.23
The proof of Proposition (1) hinges critically on the separability of the within-location
equilibrium conditions from the across-location equilibrium conditions. We rst prove
that each location has unique within-location labor shares and relative wages satisfying
equations (14) and (16). We then show that the unique within-location solution implies
that, in equilibrium, e ciency wages and amenity wages are linear functions of average
wages. Finally, using the linearity of e ciency wages and amenity wages, if the su cient
conditions in Proposition (1) hold, we prove the existence of unique vectors of county-level
employment and (up to a normalization) county-level average wages satisfying equations
(11) and (12). In the nal step of the proof, we show that the across-location equilibrium
conditions are isomorphic to (a discretized version of) the equilibrium conditions in Allen
and Arkolakis (2014) and apply the main theorem from Allen, Arkolakis, and Li (2020).24


3.8     Model Inversion
The following proposition shows that the model can be inverted to recover unique (up
to a normalization) values of {B, K } and {l, w } which are consistent with the observed
distribution of economic activity.

Proposition 2. Given parameter values { , , , , , , }, fundamentals {H , E,  }, and
observed data {L, W }, if      < 1, there exist unique (up to a normalization) unobserved
fundamentals {B, K } and plant-level distributions of employment and wages {l, w } that
rationalize the data as an equilibrium of the model.

Proof. See Online Appendix B.2.

We rst prove that, given parameter values, fundamentals, and observed data, there exist
unique (up to a normalization) e ciency wages that satisfy equation (11) (total expenditure
  23 Allen  and Arkolakis (2014) show that for certain parameter values the second condition is implied by the
  rst.
   24 Allen and Arkolakis (2014, Online Appendix A.2) in turn show that their model is isomorphic to a broad

class of gravity models, including models with exogenous entry (e.g., Eaton and Kortum, 2002; Melitz, 2003,
as considered in Chaney, 2008) and free entry (e.g., Krugman, 1980; Melitz, 2003, as considered in Arkolakis
et al., 2008), as well as economic geography models (e.g., Redding, 2016).


                                                     19
equals labor income). We then invert the formula for e ciency wages (equation (19)) to
provide a recursive formulation for unobserved knowledge. We prove that, if < 1, this
recursive formulation is a contraction mapping. This implies the existence of a unique
vector of unobserved knowledge that generates the recovered e ciency wages, which in
turn uniquely pins down the plant-level distributions of employment and wages. We nally
show that there exist unique (up to a normalization) amenity scale parameters that satisfy
equation (12) (location labor shares).


4       Structural Estimation
4.1      Model Economy
We simulate an economy with a large number of locations, plants, and rms that mirrors
the geography of production networks in U.S. Census data. Each location = 1, ...,
corresponds to a speci c county. We assign each county its actual geographical coordinates
and land area using information from the U.S. Gazetteer Files provided by the Census
Bureau. Moreover, we assign each county its actual manufacturing employment and wages
using 1987 Census data. We use data from 1987 as our estimation targets reduced-form
estimates based on the MDP openings, which took place between 1982 and 1993.
      We populate the economy with SC and MC plants and rms as in 1987 Census data.
Key for our estimation and counterfactuals is the spatial allocation of MC plants. We assign
MC plants to counties by matching their empirical distribution in Census data. As Figure
1 shows, this distribution is heavily skewed. While about 60% of MC plants are located in
the 10% most populous counties, the 50% least populous counties have only about 7% of
MC plants. We assign MC plants to rms based on their empirical distribution in Census
data. As plants in our model are uniquely identi ed by their location and rm a liation,
we assume that any given MC rm has at most one plant per location. Also, we assume SC
 rms are single-plant rms.25 Overall, our model economy consists of 328,000 plants.26
    25 The ratio of SC plants torms in the 1987 CMF is 1.01; thus, practically all SC rms are single-plant rms.
    26 Our
         model economy has 275,000 SC plants and 53,000 MC plants, exactly as in the 1987 CMF. Figure A.1
of Online Appendix A shows that our model economy implies a realistic geography of manufacturing activity.
As in the data, most manufacturing plants are located in the North East, the Rust Belt, and along the West
coast, and to a lesser extent in the South East.




                                                      20
4.2   Parameters
We divide the parameters,         := { , , , , , , , , }, into two sets. The rst consists
of parameters which we calibrate using values from the literature. We set the share of
housing in consumer expenditure (1 - ) equal to 0.34 (Davis and Ortalo-Magné 2011;
Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg, 2018), the elasticity of local rm productivity to
agglomeration ( ) equal to 0.023 (Gaubert, 2018), the elasticity of trade cost to distance ( )
equal to 0.43 (Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg, 2018), the elasticity of substitution ( )
equal to 4 (Bernard et al., 2003; Broda and Weinstein, 2006; Redding, 2016), and the amenity
shape parameter ( ) equal to 3 (Redding, 2016; Bryan and Morten, 2019). The second set
consists of parameters which have no direct counterpart in the literature, and which we
therefore estimate: the knowledge-sharing parameter , the (Pareto) productivity shape
parameter , the amenity correlation parameter , and the parameter described below.


4.3   Micro-Level Data Set
Our model features within-region, across-plant heterogeneity. Hence, plant-level micro
moments are necessary to identify the parameters. To this end, we employ an indirect
inference approach and target as moments reduced-form estimates--semi-elasticities
of plant-level employment, wages, and productivity to the MDP openings--that are
informative about plant-level outcomes. To obtain model-based estimates that correspond
to these reduced-form estimates, we simulate local productivity shocks that resemble the
MDP openings. This provides us with a micro-level data set with "pre-" and "post-shock"
observations, allowing us to estimate plant-level di erence-in-di erences regressions that
closely mirror those in our reduced-form analysis. We construct the data set in two steps.
Further details are provided in Online Appendix C.

Step 1. Pre-Shock Equilibrium and Recovery of Fundamentals. Given parameter values
and observed fundamentals, we recover the unobserved fundamentals and plant-level
distributions of employment and wages that rationalize the data as an equilibrium of
the model. Speci cally, we assign each county its employment, wages, and observed
fundamentals using Census data. We then invert the equilibrium conditions of the model
and use its recursive structure to recover the unobserved county-level fundamentals
(amenity scale parameters and knowledge) and within-county plant-level distributions of
employment and wages that rationalize the data as an equilibrium of the model.

De nition 1. Given parameter values and fundamentals {H , B ( ), K ( ), E,  ( )}, the
pre-shock equilibrium is given by {L, W , l ( ), w ( )} .

                                             21
We explicitly write B ( ), K ( ) , l ( ), and w ( ) as a reminder that the unobserved
county-level fundamentals {B, K } and within-county plant-level distributions {l, w } are
functions of the parameters to be estimated. Proposition 2 shows that the model can be
inverted to recover unique (up to a normalization) values of {B, K } and {l, w }.


Step 2. Post-Shock Equilibrium. The second step involves re-computing the endogenous
objects after perturbing the pre-shock equilibrium with local productivity shocks that
resemble the MDP openings. Speci cally, we randomly select 47 winner and runner-up
county pairs from the top quintile of the population distribution (as in the actual MDP
openings) and assume the MDP openings increase log local knowledge         in the winner
county by . The parameter , which measures the semi-elasticity of knowledge in the
winner county to the MDP openings, is jointly estimated with the other parameters. For
each MDP opening, we compute the post-shock equilibrium implied by the reallocation
of economic activity under the new distribution of knowledge. Precisely, holding xed
all parameters and fundamentals (except in the winner county, where         increases) at
their pre-shock values, we solve for the unique county- and plant-level distributions of
employment and wages that constitute an equilibrium of the model.

De nition 2. Given parameter values and fundamentals {H , B ( ), K ( ), E,  ( )}, the
post-shock equilibrium is characterized by {L ( ), W ( ), l ( ), w ( )}.

The prime superscript denotes variables that are a ected by the MDP openings, and
denotes "cases," consistent with our reduced-form analysis.

      Proposition 1 states that, under certain parametric restrictions, the post-shock
equilibrium is unique up to a normalization. It is easy to verify that these restrictions
hold under the calibrated parameter values. Proposition 2 states that we can recover
unique values of the unobserved fundamentals and plant-level distributions of employment
and wages that rationalize the data as an equilibrium of the model. Together, these two
uniqueness results imply that our counterfactuals yield determinate predictions.


4.4   Estimation
Using the micro-level data set, we run plant-level di erence-in-di erences regressions that
mirror those in our reduced-form analysis. This yields model-based estimates m ( ) that
constitute the counterparts of our reduced-form estimates m. Given the estimates, the
parameter vector estimate ^ minimizes the loss function ( m - m ( )) G ( m - m ( )),

                                            22
where G is a positive de nite weighting matrix set equal to the inverse of the sample
variance-covariance matrix of the data moments.
      Panel A of Table 8 presents the estimation results.27 The parameter measures the
semi-elasticity of knowledge in the winner county to the MDP openings. The estimated
value of 0.039 implies an increase in local knowledge which, in conjunction with the
(calibrated) elasticity of local productivity to agglomeration , allows us to perfectly
match the local productivity response in the winner county. The parameter controls
the magnitude of the global productivity spillover. The estimated value of 0.94 implies a
signi cant degree of knowledge sharing across plants within rm boundaries, generating
productivity spillovers that are consistent with our reduced-form estimates. Finally,
the parameters and control within-location labor supply and demand, respectively.
Together, they determine the wage and employment responses to the global productivity
spillover. As for , the estimated value of 0.61 implies within-location labor supply is
highly elastic, albeit not perfectly elastic, generating meaningful within-location wage
heterogeneity. As for , the estimated value of 0.013 implies a relatively high degree of
specialization across plants within a given location, implying a muted response of labor
demand to productivity changes.
      Panel B compares the model-based estimates with their reduced-form counterparts.
We target four central moments which, as discussed above, are tightly linked to the four
parameters of interest: the local productivity spillover estimate (linked to ), the global
productivity spillover estimate (linked to ), and the global employment and wage spillover
estimates (linked to and ). As is shown, our model exactly matches all four moments,
a rming the close link between structural parameters and economic forces in our model.
We note that our model also matches the other two spillover estimates well; it (almost)
exactly matches the local employment spillover estimate, and our estimate of the local wage
spillover lies comfortably within one standard error of the reduced-form estimate.


5      Counterfactuals
Given our parameter estimates, we can undertake counterfactuals to quantify the
signi cance of knowledge sharing through plant-level networks for the distribution of
economic activity, as well as for the propagation and ampli cation of local productivity
shocks. We rst consider the e ects of an increase in within- rm, across-location
    27 Standarderrors are calculated using conventional asymptotic theory. The sample variance-covariance
matrix is estimated via in uence functions (Hampel, 2011); the Jacobian of the objective function is calculated
using numerical di erentiation.


                                                      23
knowledge sharing on the distribution of economic activity. Subsequently, we consider
the general equilibrium e ects of local productivity shocks, such as those arising from
place-based policies, with and without knowledge sharing between plants.


5.1     Distributional E ects of Knowledge Sharing
In our model, the strength of within- rm, across-location knowledge sharing is governed
by the structural parameter . Holding all (other) parameters and fundamentals xed,
we counterfactually increase by 1% and solve for the (new) county- and plant-level
distributions of employment and wages that constitute an equilibrium of our model.
Intuitively, an increase in makes MC plants more productive. Given a reduction in
marginal costs, MC plants increase labor demand, pushing up nominal wages, but not
enough to o set the reduction in marginal costs. As a result, goods prices decline, which
pushes up real wages. In equilibrium, counties with more MC plants experience relatively
large average real wage increases, as well as labor in ows, while counties with fewer MC
plants experience smaller average real wage increases and labor out ows.28
      Figure 2 shows the distributional e ects of an increase in . Counties are sorted
into percentiles based on their population in 1987 Census data. As can be seen, the
county-level population distribution is strongly skewed; the 10% most populous counties
have a population share of about 63%. Importantly, as shown in Figure 1, these counties
have about 60% of all MC plants. Hence, the productivity gains from an increase in
are disproportionately concentrated in the most populous counties. As Figure 2 shows,
these counties experience large average real wage gains, as well as labor in ows, while
less populous counties experience smaller average real wage gains and labor out ows.
The combined e ect--i.e., combining changes in real wages and labor ows--is that the
most populous counties experience large gains in real GDP, while less populous counties
experience real GDP losses.29 Note that more populous counties also exhibit higher levels
of real GDP; the correlation between population and real GDP at the county level in 1987
is 92%. Accordingly, an increase in the strength of within- rm, across-location knowledge
sharing widens economic disparities between regions: those with high real GDP become
richer, and those with low real GDP become poorer.
  28 While  labor in ows (out ows) cause land prices to increase (decrease), this does not fully o set the
nominal wage and goods price e ects.
  29 In our model, county-level real GDP is
                                                1- . Hence, for real GDP to decline in less populous counties,

the (percent) gain in average real wages must be less than the (percent) decrease in county-level employment.




                                                     24
5.2       Knowledge Sharing and Local Productivity Shocks
Our reduced-form analysis shows signi cant spillover e ects of local productivity
shocks; treated plants in distant counties experience large increases in productivity and
employment. While informative, inferences drawn from our reduced-form analysis are
limited, for two reasons. For one, without a suitable empirical proxy for utility, it cannot
speak to the welfare implications of local productivity shocks. Second, since all plants in
the economy are a ected through general equilibrium e ects (labor ows, goods trade),
non-treated plants in distant counties provide an imperfect counterfactual to quantify the
signi cance of knowledge sharing for the ampli cation of local productivity shocks. For
example, as (manufacturing) goods are tradable, changes in goods prices a ect real wages
across all plants in the economy, including non-treated plants.
      Our second counterfactual addresses both of these issues. We measure changes in
worker-level utility resulting from local productivity shocks, such as those arising from
place-based policies, with and without knowledge sharing between plants. In the scenario
with knowledge sharing, we implement Steps 1 and 2 of Section 4.3 using the estimated
parameter values. In the scenario without knowledge sharing, we do the same, except
we counterfactually set       = 0.30 In both cases, we simulate productivity shocks at
the state level by increasing log local knowledge       in the state by .31 Together with
classical agglomeration forces, this implies state-level productivity increases by 4%. We
independently shock all 50 U.S. states and report averages across the 50 experiments.

5.2.1     Aggregate Welfare

We rst quantify by how much knowledge sharing ampli es the aggregate welfare e ects
of local productivity shocks. Aggregate welfare is computed as in equation (15). Without
knowledge sharing, a 4% state-level productivity shock generates, on average, a 0.083%
increase in aggregate productivity and a corresponding 0.053% increase in aggregate
welfare. With knowledge sharing, aggregate productivity increases by 0.15%, while
aggregate welfare increases by 0.087%. Thus, knowledge sharing through plant-level
networks signi cantly ampli es the welfare gains from local productivity shocks.

5.2.2     Worker-Level Heterogeneity

We next explore heterogeneity in worker-level utility changes from local productivity
shocks. In models with labor mobility and Fréchet-distributed idiosyncratic preferences
  30 If   = 0, our model admits a representative plant in each location, similar to a standard Armington model.
  31 Simulating   county-level productivity shocks yield similar results, except the welfare gains are smaller.

                                                      25
over locations, changes in average utility are equalized across locations. However, utility
changes are not (generically) equalized across individuals. To explore heterogeneity in
utility changes at the individual level, we compare workers based on their ex-ante (i.e.,
pre-shock) location and plant choices.32 Speci cally, we compare the utility changes of i)
workers who ex-ante live in the state with the productivity shock, ii) workers who ex-ante
live in another state working for a plant that is connected to the shocked state (through the
  rm's plant-level network), and iii) workers who ex-ante live in another state working for
a plant that is not connected to the shocked state.
       Table 9 presents the results. Without knowledge sharing, only plants in the shocked
state become more productive. Workers in that state experience utility gains of 1.19%, driven
by wage increases and falling prices of goods produced in the state (and only partly o set
by rising land prices). Worker in other states also bene t from the fall in goods prices,
albeit much less due to the gravity relationship in goods trade. Their utility increases by
0.029% (non-connected plants) and 0.028% (connected plants), respectively. Thus, without
knowledge sharing between plants, workers in other states bene t similarly from the
productivity shock, regardless of which type of plant they work for.
       With knowledge sharing, some plants in other states also become more productive.
Workers in the state with the productivity shock experience utility gains of 1.22%, which
is only slightly higher than before. For those workers, the wage and price e ects in their
own state remain the driving force behind their utility gains. In contrast, for workers in
other states, the utility gains are now much higher than before. As some plants in those
states become more productive, goods produced in those states become cheaper, which
mainly bene ts workers in (or near) those states due to the gravity relationship in goods
trade. As a result, workers at non-connected plants now experience utility gains of 0.056%,
which is almost twice as large as before. Crucially, workers at connected plants experience
utility gains of 0.30%, which is ten times larger than before. Those workers bene t from
nominal wage increases, in addition to falling goods prices, as their plants have become
more productive. Hence, while knowledge sharing between plants bene ts all workers, it
especially bene ts workers in other states working at connected plants.
  32 Equalization of changes in average utility across locations is based on comparing the utilities of workers
who ex-post live in a location with the utilities of workers who ex-ante live in the location. Thus, if there is
either in- or out-migration, equalization of changes in average utility is based on comparing di erent sets of
workers. By contrast, we hold individual workers xed and compare their utilities before and after the shock.




                                                      26
5.2.3    Region-Level Heterogeneity

To explore the regional implications of the worker-level heterogeneity, we average changes
in worker-level utility at the county level based on workers' ex-ante location choices.
In Figure 3, counties are sorted into percentiles based on their population in 1987. As
can be seen, without knowledge sharing, all counties bene t similarly from a state-level
productivity shock; the distribution of average utility gains is e ectively at. With
knowledge sharing, the entire distribution is shifted upward. Importantly, it is highly
skewed; the most populous counties, which have the most connected plants, exhibit by
far the largest average utility gains. Hence, knowledge sharing between plants leads to a
highly uneven distribution of the welfare gains from local productivity shocks.


6       Conclusion
We provide both reduced-form and model-based evidence that local productivity spillovers
propagate throughout the economy through the plant-level networks of multi-region rms.
In our reduced-form setting, we show that large manufacturing plant openings not only
raise the productivity of local incumbent plants but also of distant plants hundreds of
miles away, which belong to multi-region rms that are exposed to the local productivity
spillover through one of their plants. This "global" productivity spillover does not decay
with geographical distance and is stronger in (knowledge-based) industries characterized
by mutual R&D ows and patent citations.
      To quantify the signi cance of plant-level networks for the propagation and
ampli cation of local productivity shocks, we develop and estimate a quantitative spatial
model with goods trade, labor mobility, plant-level networks, and a rich geography,
where plants of the same rm, across regions, are linked through shared knowledge.
Counterfactuals show that knowledge sharing between plants widens disparities across
regions; those with high real GDP become richer, whereas those with low real GDP
become poorer. Moreover, while knowledge sharing ampli es the aggregate e ects of local
productivity shocks, it leads to a highly uneven distribution of the welfare gains--highly
populous regions, which tend to be more connected (through plant-level networks) to the
region with the productivity shock, experience by far the largest average utility gains.




                                           27
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2012, The
    Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations, Econometrica 80, 1977­2016.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2020, Firms, Failures, and Fluctuations: The
    Macroeconomics of Supply Chain Disruptions, mimeo, MIT.
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel, Stephen Redding, Daniel Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf, 2015, The Economics
      of Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall, Econometrica 83, 2127­2189.
Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis, 2014, Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1085­1140.
Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Xiangliang Li, 2020, On the Equilibrium Properties of
      Network Models with Heterogeneous Agents, mimeo, Dartmouth College.
Anderson, James, 1979, A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation, American
     Economic Review 69, 106­116.
Arkolakis, Costas, Svetlana Demidova, Peter Klenow, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2008,
     Endogenous Variety and the Gains from Trade, American Economic Review Papers &
     Proceedings 98, 444­450.
Armington, Paul, 1969, A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of
     Production, IMF Sta Papers 16, 159­178.
Barrot, Jean-Noël, and Julien Sauvagnat, 2016, Input Speci city and the Propagation of
      Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production Networks, Quarterly Journal of Economics 131,
      1543­1592.
Bartelme, Dominick, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare,
      2019, The Textbook Case for Industrial Policy: Theory Meets Data, mimeo, University
      of Michigan.
Bartik, Timothy, 2020, Using Place-Based Jobs Policies to Help Distressed Communities,
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 34, 99­127.
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, 2003, Plants and
     Productivity in International Trade, American Economic Review 93, 1268­1290.
Bilir, Kamran, and Eduardo Morales, 2020, Innovation in the Global Firm, Journal of Political
       Economy 128, 1566­1625.
Broda, Christian, and David Weinstein, 2006, Globalization and the Gains from Variety,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 541­585.
Bryan, Gharad, and Melanie Morten, 2019, The Aggregate Productivity E ects of Internal
     Migration: Evidence from Indonesia, Journal of Political Economy 127, 2229­2268.
Buera, Francisco, and Robert Lucas, 2018, Idea Flows and Economic Growth, Annual
     Review of Economics 10, 315­345.

                                             28
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline, 2013, Assessing the Incidence and
     E ciency of a Prominent Place Based Policy, American Economic Review 103,
     897­947.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2012, The Impact of Trade on
      Organization and Productivity, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1393­1467.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Ferdinando Monte, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2015, The Anatomy of
      French Production Hierarchies, Journal of Political Economy 123, 809­852.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Fernando Parro, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte, 2018,
      The Impact of Regional and Sectoral Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy,
      Review of Economic Studies 85, 2042­2096.
Carvalho, Vasco, Makoto Nirei, Yukiko Saito, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2020, Supply
     Chain Disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, forthcoming.
Chaney, Thomas, 2008, Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of
     International Trade, American Economic Review 98, 1707­1721.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Laurent Gobillon, 2015, The Empirics of Agglomeration
    Economies, in: Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5A,
    Gilles Duranton, Vernon Henderson, and William Strange (eds.). Amsterdam:
    North-Holland.
Davis, Morris, and François Ortalo-Magné, 2011, Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents,
      Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 248­261.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, 2002, Technology, Geography, and Trade,
     Econometrica 70, 1741­1779.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Sebastian Sotelo, 2012, International Trade: Linking
     Micro and Macro, NBER Working Paper 17864.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, 2010, What Causes Industry
      Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns, American Economic
      Review 100, 1195­1213.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, and Cecile Gaubert, 2020, Optimal Spatial Policies, Geography, and
      Sorting, Quarterly Journal of Economics 135, 959­1036.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2011, The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations, Econometrica 79,
     733­772.
Gaubert, Cecile, 2018, Firm Sorting and Agglomeration, American Economic Review 108,
     3117­3153.
Gaubert, Cecile, and Oleg Itskhoki, 2021, Granular Competitive Advantage, Journal of
     Political Economy 129, 871­939.


                                           29
Gaubert, Cecile, Patrick Kline, and Danny Yagan, 2020, Place-Based Redistribution, mimeo,
     UC Berkeley.
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger Mueller, 2019, Firms' Internal Networks and Local Economic
     Shocks, American Economic Review 109, 3617­3649.
Glaeser, Edward, and Joshua Gottlieb, 2008, The Economics of Place-Making Policies,
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 155­239.
Greenstone, Michael, and Enrico Moretti, 2003, Bidding for Industrial Plants: Does Winning
     a 'Million Dollar Plant' Increase Welfare? NBER Working Paper 9844.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti, 2010, Identifying
     Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant
     Openings, Journal of Political Economy 118, 536­598.
Hampel, Frank, Elvezio Ronchetti, Peter Rousseeuw, and Werner Stahel, 2011. Robust
    Statistics: The Approach Based on In uence Functions. New York: John Wiley &
    Sons.
Hornbeck, Richard, and Enrico Moretti, 2020, Estimating Who Bene ts From Productivity
     Growth: Local and Distant E ects of City TFP Shocks on Wages, Rents, and Inequality,
     mimeo, University of Chicago.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti, 2014a, People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple
      Welfare Economics of Local Economic Development Programs, Annual Review of
      Economics 6, 629­662.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti, 2014b, Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
      Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley
      Authority, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 275­331.
Krugman, Paul, 1980, Scale Economies, Product Di erentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,
     American Economic Review 70, 950­959.
Lind, Nelson, and Natalia Ramondo, 2021, Trade with Correlation, mimeo, Emory
      University.
Long, John, and Charles Plosser, 1983, Real Business Cycles, Journal of Political Economy
     91, 39­69.
Lucas, Robert, and Benjamin Moll, 2014, Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time,
      Journal of Political Economy 122, 1­51.
Markusen, James, 1984, Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from Trade,
     Journal of International Economics 16, 205­226.
Marshall, Alfred, 1890. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan.
McFadden, Daniel, 1978, Modelling the Choice of Residential Location, in: Spatial
    Interaction Theory and Planning Models, Anders Karlqvist, Lars Lundqvist, Folke
    Snickars, and Jörgen Weibull (eds.). Amsterdam: North-Holland.

                                           30
Melitz, Mark, 2003, The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
      Industry Productivity, Econometrica 71, 1695­1725.
Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2018, Commuting,
     Migration, and Local Employment Elasticities, American Economic Review 108,
     3855­3890.
Moretti, Enrico, 2010, Local Labor Markets, in: Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B,
     Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Neumark, David, and Helen Simpson, 2015, Place-Based Policies, in: Handbook of Regional
    and Urban Economics, Volume 5B, Gilles Duranton, Vernon Henderson, and William
    Strange (eds.). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Perla, Jesse, and Christopher Tonetti, 2014, Equilibrium Imitation and Growth, Journal of
      Political Economy 122, 52­76.
Redding, Stephen, 2016, Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare, Journal of International
     Economics 101, 148­167.
Redding, Stephen, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2017, Quantitative Spatial Economics,
     Annual Review of Economics 9, 21­58.
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, 2004, Evidence on the Nature and Sources of
     Agglomeration Economies, in: Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume
     4, Vernon Henderson and Jacques-François Thisse (eds.). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, 2020, How Close Is Close? The Spatial Reach of
     Agglomeration Economies, Journal of Economic Perspectives 34, 27­49.
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Felipe Schwartzman, 2020, Cognitive
      Hubs and Spatial Redistribution, mimeo, Princeton University.
Story, Louise, 2012, As Companies Seek Tax Deals, Governments Pay High Price, New York
      Times, December 1.




                                           31
                         Figure 1: Spatial Allocation of MC Plants
This gure shows the distribution of MC plants across counties. Counties are sorted into deciles
based on their population in 1987 Census data. The gray bars depict the share of MC plants, relative
to all MC plants in the economy, associated with a given decile in the 1987 CMF. The blue bars depict
the corresponding shares in the model.




                                                 32
                        Figure 2: Increase in Knowledge Sharing
This gure shows changes in average real wages and employment at the county level from a 1%
increase in . Counties are sorted into percentiles based on their population in 1987 Census data.


                           Panel A: Changes in average real wages




                               Panel B: Changes in employment




                                               33
       Figure 3: Propagation and Ampli cation of Local Productivity Shocks
This gure shows changes in average worker-level utility at the county level from a 4% increase in
productivity in one state. All 50 states are independently shocked; the gure shows averages across
all 50 experiments. Counties are sorted into percentiles based on their population in 1987 Census
data. Panel A considers an economy without knowledge sharing between plants. Panel B considers
an economy with knowledge sharing between plants.


                              Panel A: Without knowledge sharing




                                Panel B: With knowledge sharing




                                               34
                                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Panel A provides plant-level statistics for the local spillover sample consisting of 157,400 plant-year
observations. Panel B provides plant-level statistics for the global spillover sample consisting of
422,500 plant-year observations. Panel C provides rm-level statistics for the parent rms associated
with the plants in Panel B. Column (4) reports p-values of the di erence between columns (2) and (3).
Wages are in $1,000. All statistics are from the year before the MDP opening. Standard deviations
are in parentheses. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998.



                                     (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)


                   Panel A:          All         Winner         Loser      p-value
                                                                            (2)-(3)

                   Employees        141.7         146.3         139.8       0.377
                                   (571.4)       (589.3)       (562.8)
                   Wages            39.5          41.5          38.7        0.454
                                   (852.7)       (877.2)       (763.9)
                   TFP              0.002         0.003         0.001       0.672
                                   (0.586)       (0.610)       (0.551)


                   Panel B:          All         Treated       Control     p-value
                                                                            (2)-(3)

                   Employees        268.2         272.6         266.3       0.482
                                   (846.7)       (903.4)       (821.8)
                   Wages            35.9          34.3          36.5        0.535
                                   (202.2)       (311.5)       (162.9)
                   TFP              0.016         0.017         0.016       0.903
                                   (0.640)       (0.653)       (0.637)


                   Panel C :         All         Treated       Control     p-value
                                                                            (2)-(3)

                   Employees        1,988         1,968         1,997       0.834
                                   (6,702)       (6,862)       (6,548)
                   Plants             7.4           7.3           7.5       0.661
                                    (10.9)        (10.6)        (11.0)
                   Counties           5.4           5.3           5.5       0.532
                                     (7.7)         (7.2)         (7.8)
                   States             2.7           2.6           2.8       0.448
                                     (2.8)         (2.6)         (2.9)


                                                  35
                            Table 2: Local Productivity Spillover
The dependent variable is TFP at the plant level. MDP is an indicator for the winner county that is
one from the year of the MDP opening onward. In column (2), (< 50 miles), (50 to 100 miles), and
(100 to 250 miles) are indicators for whether a plant lies within 50 miles, between 50 and 100 miles,
and between 100 and 250 miles, respectively, of the MDP. Observations are weighted by plant-level
employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period
is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                             TFP

                                                      (1)              (2)

                    MDP                            0.040**
                                                   (0.016)
                    MDP × (<50 miles)                               0.043***
                                                                     (0.015)
                    MDP × (50 to 100 miles)                          0.027*
                                                                     (0.014)
                    MDP × (>100 miles)                                0.011
                                                                     (0.010)
                    Plant FE                          Yes              Yes
                    Industry × year FE                Yes              Yes
                    Case FE                           Yes              Yes
                    R-squared                        0.88              0.86
                    Observations                   157,000          2,209,000




                                                 36
                           Table 3: Global Productivity Spillover
The dependent variable is TFP at the plant level. MDP is an indicator for whether the plant's parent
  rm has a plant in the winner county before and after the MDP opening. The indicator is one from
the year of the MDP opening onward. All samples are restricted to plants of MC rms outside the
winner or runner-up counties. Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard
errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998. *,
**, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                               TFP

                                             (1)                (2)               (3)

       MDP                                 0.018**            0.020**           0.018**
                                           (0.007)            (0.008)           (0.008)
       Plant FE                              Yes               Yes                Yes
       Industry × county × year FE           No                Yes                Yes
       Industry × year FE                    Yes                -                  -
       Case FE                               Yes                -                 Yes

       Countrol group                    Plants of           Plants of         Plants of
                                      runner-up rms         MC rms         runner-up rms
                                                         in same county    in same county
       R-squared                             0.87              0.86              0.88
       Observations                       1,407,000         1,046,000           423,000




                                                   37
                                                     Table 4: Distance to MDP
This table presents variants of the regression in column (3) of Table 3 in which treated plants in close proximity to the MDP are excluded
from the sample. Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level.
The sample period is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                                                  TFP

                                     Excluding plants   Excluding plants   Excluding plants    Excluding plants   Excluding plants
                                       within 100         within 250         within 500         in MDP state      in MDP Census
                                      miles of MDP       miles of MDP       miles of MDP                              division
                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)

       MDP                                0.018**            0.017**            0.018**             0.018**            0.018**
                                          (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.008)             (0.008)            (0.008)
       Plant FE                             Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
       Industry × county × year FE          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
       Case FE                              Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
       R-squared                            0.88               0.88               0.89               0.88              0.88
       Observations                       402,000            365,000            286,000            395,000            345,000




                                                                     38
                                       Table 5: Industries, R&D Flows, and Patent Citations
This table presents variants of the regression in column (3) of Table 3. In columns (1) and (2), both terms in equation (1) are interacted with a
dummy variable indicating whether the treated plant is in the same 4-digit SIC code industry as eiher the rm's plant in the winner county
("winner plant") or the MDP. In columns (3) to (6), both terms in equation (1) are interacted with measures of either mutual R&D ows or
mutual patent citations between the industry of the treated plant and either the industry of the rm's plant in the winner county or the
industry of the MDP. Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year
level. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                                                          TFP

                                                   Same industry                    Mutual R&D ows                   Mutual patent citations

                                             (1)                   (2)              (3)               (4)                 (5)            (6)

  MDP                                      0.017**            0.017**            0.014*             0.015*              0.013*         0.013*
                                           (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.008)             (0.008)        (0.007)
  MDP × "winner plant" industry            0.011**                               0.581**                                0.324*
                                           (0.005)                               (0.240)                                (0.168)
  MDP × MDP industry                                          0.012**                              0.533**                            0.356**
                                                              (0.005)                              (0.263)                            (0.175)
  Plant FE                                   Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes           Yes
  Industry × county × year FE                Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes           Yes
  Case FE                                    Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                  Yes           Yes
  R-squared                                0.88                0.88                0.88             0.88                 0.88          0.88
  Observations                            423,000            423,000             423,000           423,000              423,000       423,000




                                                                         39
                    Table 6: Local Employment and Wage Spillovers
This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 2 in which the dependent variable is either
plant-level employment or plant-level wages. Observations are weighted by plant-level employment.
Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period is from 1977 to
1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                           Employment                            Wages

                                     (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)

   MDP                             0.035***                              0.037**
                                    (0.013)                              (0.016)
   MDP × (< 50 miles)                                0.037***                             0.039**
                                                      (0.013)                             (0.017)
   MDP × (50 to 100 miles)                           0.021**                               0.015
                                                      (0.010)                             (0.014)
   MDP × (100 to 250 miles)                            0.005                               0.004
                                                      (0.006)                             (0.010)
   Plant FE                          Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
   Industry × year FE                Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
   Case FE                           Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
   R-squared                         0.97               0.96              0.80              0.75
   Observations                    157,000           2,209,000           157,000         2,209,000




                                                40
                                       Table 7: Global Employment and Wage Spillovers
This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 3 in which the dependent variable is either plant-level employment or plant-level
wages. Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample
period is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                  Employment                                               Wages

                                     (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)              (5)              (6)

  MDP                              0.017***         0.017**           0.016**              0.001            0.003            0.002
                                    (0.006)         (0.007)           (0.007)             (0.004)          (0.005)          (0.004)
  Plant FE                           Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes              Yes
  Industry × county × year FE        No               Yes               Yes                No                Yes              Yes
  Industry × year FE                 Yes               -                 -                 Yes                -                -
  Case FE                            Yes               -                Yes                Yes                -               Yes

  Control group                    Plants of        Plants of        Plants of          Plants of          Plants of        Plants of
                                runner-up rms      MC rms        runner-up rms       runner-up rms        MC rms        runner-up rms
                                                in same county   in same county                        in same county   in same county
  R-squared                          0.98             0.96            0.98                  0.58             0.62             0.58
  Observations                    1,407,000        1,046,000         423,000             1,407,000        1,046,000         423,000




                                                                   41
                               Table 8: Estimation Results
Panel A shows the parameter estimates along with the standard errors. Panel B shows the model
moments along with the reduced-form estimates. Targeted refers to moments that are targeted in
the estimation.


                                 Panel A: Parameter Estimates

                                             Estimate     Standard error

                                              0.039             0.008
                                               0.94             0.293
                                               0.61             0.333
                                              0.013             0.004



                          Panel B: Model Moments vs. Data Moments

                                                  Data          Model

                      Targeted
                      TFP (local)                  0.04          0.04
                      TFP (global)                0.018         0.018
                      Employment (global)         0.016         0.016
                      Wages (global)              0.002         0.002
                      Non-targeted
                      Employment (local)          0.035         0.034
                      Wages (local)               0.037         0.027




                                             42
                            Table 9: Worker-Level Heterogeneity
This table shows changes in worker-level utility (in %) from a 4% increase in productivity in one state
for i) workers in the shocked state, ii) workers in other states at plants that are not connected to the
shocked state, and iii) workers in other states at plants that are connected to the shocked state. All
50 states are independently shocked; the table reports averages across all 50 experiments.


                                                Without          With
                                               knowledge       knowledge
                                                sharing         sharing

                           Shocked                 1.19            1.22
                           Non-connected          0.029           0.056
                           Connected              0.028            0.30




                                                  43
SPACE




        Propagation and Ampli cation of
          Local Productivity Spillovers

    Xavier Giroud   Simone Lenzu   Quinn Maingi   Holger Mueller



                      Online Appendix
A     Additional Figures and Tables

                       Figure A.1: Geography of Economic Activity
In Panel A, counties are sorted into deciles based on the number of plants in the 1987 County Business
Patterns (CBP). The map is based on CBP data due to Census Bureau disclosure requirements. In
Panel B, counties are sorted into deciles based on the number of plants in the model. A darker color
indicates more plants. Counties with no available data in the 1987 CBP are shown in white.


                                           Panel A: Data




                                          Panel B: Model




                                                 A.1
                           Table A.1: Treatment E ect Dynamics
Columns (1) and (2) present variants of the regressions in column (1) of Table 2 (local productivity
spillover) and column (3) of Table 3 (global productivity spillover), respectively, where Post is
replaced with event-year dummies. MDP(0) denotes the year of the MDP opening. The base year is
  = -5. Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered
at the county and year level. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                                   TFP

                                                          (1)              (2)

                     MDP(-4)                             -0.004           0.001
                                                         (0.024)         (0.013)
                     MDP(-3)                              0.006           0.004
                                                         (0.024)         (0.011)
                     MDP(-2)                             -0.005          -0.003
                                                         (0.021)         (0.010)
                     MDP(-1)                              0.002           0.001
                                                         (0.020)         (0.009)
                     MDP(0)                               0.017           0.006
                                                         (0.018)         (0.008)
                     MDP(1)                             0.038**          0.015*
                                                         (0.018)         (0.008)
                     MDP(2)                             0.041**          0.019*
                                                         (0.020)         (0.010)
                     MDP(3)                             0.049***         0.022**
                                                         (0.022)         (0.010)
                     MDP(4)                             0.050**          0.024**
                                                         (0.023)         (0.011)
                     MDP(5)                             0.048**          0.023**
                                                         (0.022)         (0.011)
                     Plant FE                             Yes             Yes
                     Industry × year FE                   Yes              -
                     Industry × county × year FE           -              Yes
                     Case FE                              Yes             Yes
                     R-squared                            0.88             0.88
                     Observations                       157,000          423,000




                                                  A.2
           Table A.2: Input-Output Linkages (Local Productivity Spillover)
This table presents variants of the regression in column (1) of Table 2 in which both terms in
equation (1) are interacted with measures of either input ows or output ows between the industry
of the incumbent plant and the industry of the MDP. The measures of input and output ows are
Input  max{Input  , Input  } and Output  max{Output  , Output  } at the 3-digit SIC code
level from Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010), where Input  (Output  ) is the share of industry i's
inputs (outputs) that come from (are sold to) industry j . Observations are weighted by plant-level
employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period
is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                            TFP

                                               Input ows          Output ows
                                                      (1)             (2)

                     MDP                          0.037**           0.038**
                                                  (0.017)           (0.016)
                     MDP × MDP industry            0.476             0.339
                                                  (0.520)           (0.476)
                     Plant FE                         Yes            Yes
                     Industry × year FE               Yes            Yes
                     Case FE                          Yes            Yes
                     R-squared                     0.88               0.88
                     Observations                157,000            157,000




                                                A.3
          Table A.3: Input-Output Linkages (Global Productivity Spillover)
This table presents variants of the regression in column (3) of Table 3 in which both terms in equation
(1) are interacted with measures of either input ows or output ows between the industry of the
treated plant and either the industry of the rm's plant in the winner county ("winner plant")
or the industry of the MDP. The measures of input and output ows are described in Table A.2.
Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the
county and year level. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                      TFP

                                                  Input ows                       Output ows

                                            (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)

 MDP                                     0.016**           0.017**              0.017**       0.017**
                                         (0.008)           (0.008)              (0.008)       (0.008)
 MDP × "winner plant" industry            0.242                                  0.161
                                         (0.291)                                (0.234)
 MDP × MDP industry                                          0.194                              0.138
                                                            (0.276)                            (0.250)
 Plant FE                                  Yes                Yes                 Yes           Yes
 Industry × county × year FE               Yes                Yes                 Yes           Yes
 Case FE                                   Yes                Yes                 Yes           Yes
 R-squared                                0.88               0.88                 0.88          0.88
 Observations                            423,000           423,000              423,000       423,000




                                                   A.4
            Table A.4: Financial Constraints (Local Productivity Spillover)
This table presents variants of the regression in column (1) of Table 2 in which both terms in equation
(1) are interacted with either the KZ-index of Kaplan and Zingales (1997) or the SA-index of Hadlock
and Pierce (2010). Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double
clustered at the county and year level. The sample is restricted to rms that have a match in
Compustat. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                            TFP

                                                KZ-index          SA-index
                                                    (1)               (2)

                       MDP                       0.041***          0.040***
                                                  (0.018)           (0.017)
                       MDP × FC                   -0.001            -0.001
                                                  (0.002)           (0.004)
                       Plant FE                    Yes               Yes
                       Industry × year FE          Yes               Yes
                       Case FE                     Yes               Yes
                       R-squared                   0.89              0.89
                       Observations               42,000            42,000




                                                 A.5
           Table A.5: Financial Constraints (Global Productivity Spillover)
This table presents variants of the regression in column (3) of Table 3 in which both terms in equation
(1) are interacted with either the KZ-index of Kaplan and Zingales (1997) or the SA-index of Hadlock
and Pierce (2010). Observations are weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double
clustered at the county and year level. The sample is restricted to rms that have a match in
Compustat. The sample period is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                                  TFP

                                                       KZ-index         SA-index
                                                          (1)              (2)

                  MDP                                   0.018**         0.019**
                                                        (0.008)         (0.009)
                  MDP × FC                              -0.000          -0.001
                                                        (0.002)         (0.002)
                  Plant FE                               Yes              Yes
                  Industry × county × year FE            Yes              Yes
                  Case FE                                Yes              Yes
                  R-squared                              0.90             0.90
                  Observations                         130,000          130,000




                                                 A.6
                Table A.6: Industries, R&D Flows, and Patent Citations
                             (Local Productivity Spillover)
This table presents variants of the regression in column (1) of Table 2. In column (1), both terms
in equation (1) are interacted with a dummy variable indicating whether the incumbent plant is in
the same 4-digit SIC code industry as the MDP. In columns (2) and (3), both terms in equation (1)
are interacted with measures of either mutual R&D ows or mutual patent citations between the
industry of the incumbent plant and the industry of the MDP. The measures of mutual R&D ows
and mutual patent citations are described in Section 2.5. Observations are weighted by plant-level
employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period
is from 1977 to 1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                             TFP

                                            Same         Mutual R&D    Mutual patent
                                          industry           ows         citations
                                             (1)             (2)             (3)

              MDP                          0.039**         0.034**         0.028*
                                           (0.017)         (0.017)         (0.016)
              MDP × MDP industry           0.032**         0.997**         0.723**
                                           (0.015)         (0.401)         (0.334)
              Plant FE                       Yes            Yes             Yes
              Industry × year FE             Yes            Yes             Yes
              Case FE                        Yes            Yes             Yes
              R-squared                      0.88           0.88           0.88
              Observations                 157,000         157,000        157,000




                                                   A.7
                                 Table A.7: Distance to MDP (Global Employment Spillover)
This table presents variants of the regressions in Table 4 in which the dependent variable is plant-level employment. Observations are
weighted by plant-level employment. Standard errors are double clustered at the county and year level. The sample period is from 1977 to
1998. *, **, and *** denotes signi cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


                                                                            Employment

                                     Excluding plants   Excluding plants   Excluding plants   Excluding plants   Excluding plants
                                       within 100         within 250         within 500        in MDP state      in MDP Census
                                      miles of MDP       miles of MDP       miles of MDP                             division
                                           (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)

       MDP                               0.017**            0.016**            0.016**            0.016**            0.017**
                                         (0.007)            (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.008)
       Plant FE                            Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
       Industry × county × year FE         Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
       Case FE                             Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
       R-squared                           0.98               0.98               0.98               0.98              0.98
       Observations                      402,000            365,000            286,000            395,000            345,000




                                                                    A.8
B       Model Appendix
B.1      Derivations
B.1.1    Consumer Problem

In this section, we derive the labor supply functions and equilibrium utility implied by the
solution to the consumer's problem. Equation (3) implies that the CDF of indirect utility is
given by:

                                                                                                                              1-   
                                                                      1                               1-       - 1-
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                     1-
    P                 1-
                                   ,    =           -                                    1-
                                                                                                                                        .    (A.1)
         =1 
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                   

Using the notation of Lind and Ramondo (2021), the multivariate Fréchet CDF in equation
(A.1) is generated by the Archimedean copula:
                                                                                    1-
                                                                           1
                                                                          1-
                                         : 
                                                        =                                    ,
                                                                  


with scale parameters       =          1-           . By Lemma A.4 in Lind and Ramondo (2021),
average equilibrium utility is given by:
                                                                                    1

                                  ¯ =       -1
                                                                     1-
                                                                                         .
                                                    

      Moreover, by Lemma A.5 (part 1) in Lind and Ramondo (2021), (supply-side) plant
labor shares are given by:

                                                                      1                                    -         1
                                                                     1-                          1-                 1-                       1-
                                                                                     1-                                                 1-

        = P { chooses plant in location } =                                                                                                       .
    ¯                                                                                                                    1-
                                                                                                                                   1-
                                                                                                               1-




This implies across-location labor shares are given by:

                                                                               1-
                                P { chooses } =                                                  ,
                           ¯                                                        
                                                                                    1-
                                                                                    

and within-location (supply-side) labor shares are given by:


                                                     A.9
                                                                                           1-

                         = P { chooses | chooses n} =                                                .
                                                                                                1-
                                                                                   : E


B.1.2   Plant Problem

In this section, we provide the solution to the plant's problem. For formulae provided in this
                                                              ¯
section, assume plants are ordered in descending order by        (e.g., = 1 corresponds to the
most e cient plant) for all references to plant identity. Let        | | denote the number of
plants in location .

Distribution of Productivity and E ciency Wages. Let             be the random variable
corresponding to rm 's idiosyncratic productivity draw         ( ) . Since 1 is Pareto
distributed with scale parameter ¯1 and shape parameter , the CDF of 1 is given by:

                                                                           -
                                       1   ( )=1   > ¯1    1- ¯                    .

The random variable ¯         :=       corresponds to rm 's idiosyncratic e ciency wages. Its
CDF is given by:
                                                                           -
                                                                   ¯
                                   ¯       ( )=1>         1-                           ,                     (A.2)
                                                    ¯


with corresponding density:
                                                                               -
                                                           - -1        ¯
                                   ¯       ( )=1>                                  .                         (A.3)
                                                    ¯


The random variable ¯ := min ¯ represents (equilibrium) region-level idiosyncratic
e ciency wages. Its CDF is given by:

                                   ¯   ( ) =1-              1-         ¯   ( ) ,                             (A.4)

with corresponding density:
                                                                                                     -
                                                                                            ¯
                   ¯   ( )=         :                      -1
                                                                    : 
                                                                                                         .   (A.5)
                                                    ¯                          ¯



Output Shares. We derive within-market plant-level output shares as an intermediate
quantity that is useful for both productivity and labor shares. Output shares are given by:


                                                    A.10
                     = P { produces } = P ¯ = ¯
                                           
                     P        ¯  < ¯    =     ¯ ( )                                                           1-          ¯   ( )              .
                                                                         0


Plugging in equations (A.2) and (A.3) and solving the integral gives:

                                            ¯                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                     ¯M
                             1                                                 1         M
                         =                                     -                                                                          .                    (A.6)
                                                    ¯                       M (M - 1)  M                                  ¯
                                       =1                          M=    +1            =1


Realized Productivity and Inverse Productivity.                                                       For realized productivity, we have
the following expression:

              ^ =E                  ( )             produces
                                                                             
                                                                                  1
                 E                    ¯ = ¯                =                              ¯   ( )                 1-          ¯   ( )              .
                             ¯                                           0

Plugging in equations (A.2), (A.3), and (A.6), and solving the integral gives:

                                       ¯            +1                                                                                             M +1
                                                                                                                                      ¯M
                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                              M
       ^ =                                                 -
                         +1                     ¯                            (M + 1) ((M - 1) + 1)  M                                                  ¯
                                       =1                      M = +1                                                                     =1
                                                                                                           ¯ M M +1
                                 +1                           ( +1)                                          M
                                 +1   -         M = +1 (M +1) ((M-1) +1)                          ¯        +1       ¯
                                                                                                              M= +1
          =          ¯                                                                        ¯M M
                                                                                                                                      .                        (A.7)
               +1
                                           1                       1                           M
                                                -        M = +1 M (M-1)               ¯                       ¯
              =E [   ]                                                                        M
                                                                                              =        +1


                                                                              ¯
                                                                   =RS ,
                                                                                          



This gives the exact form of RS                             in equation (17). Let z                                  represent realized inverse
productivity:
                                                                                      
                     1                                               1
     z E                         produces                      =                              ¯       ( )             1-          ¯       ( )              .   (A.8)
                     ( )                                                          0




                                                                      A.11
Plugging in equations (A.2) and (A.3) and solving the integral gives:

                                  ¯                -1                                                               M -1
                                                                                                              ¯M
          1                                                                            2
                                                                                                               M
  z =                                                   -                                                                   .       (A.9)
                      -1                       ¯                       (M - 1) ((M - 1) - 1)  M                     ¯
                                  =1                         M = +1                                            =1


Labor Demand. Our production technology implies that plant-level labor ( ) per unit of
 nal goods produced in location ( ) is = z . Summing over all plants   gives:


                                                                   =           z .
                                                                        


This implies that within-location (demand-side) labor shares are given by:

                                                                                   z
                                                            = LD =                         .                                    (A.10)
                                                                                       z
With some manipulation, plugging in equation (A.8) gives:
                             ¯            -1
                                                                                                       M -1             -
                                                                     ( -1)                     ¯M                   ¯
                  1
                                      ¯            -    M = +1 (M -1) ((M-1) -1)
                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                              =1
                             =1
                                                                                                   M

  LD                                                                                                                                 .
                                 ¯ K K -1
                                                                                                            M -1                -
                                                                          ( K-1)                       ¯M               ¯
              K
                         1         K
                                     ¯                  -     M =K+1 (M -1) ((M-1) -1)
                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                   =1
                         K       K=1
                                                                                                        M

                                                                                                                                (A.11)
This provides the exact form of LD in equation (16).

County-Level E ciency Wages.                                  Equilibrium county-level e ciency wages are given
by the following expression:

                                                                               ¯
                                                                       -1
                                                               ¯
                  
    E ¯       =              ¯    ( )              =                               ¯       -                                         Z.
                  0                                     =1                                     (       - 1) ( ( - 1) - 1)
                                                                                                                                (A.12)
This gives the exact form of Z in equation (19).




                                                                       A.12
B.2     Proofs
B.2.1       Uniqueness of the Equilibrium

In this section, we provide the proof of Proposition 1. We prove two intermediate claims
before proving the proposition.
Claim 1. For each market , given dispersion in productivity scale parameters, captured by
  -      , there exists unique within-county labor shares and relative wages ,       that
                                                                                                                                
satisfy equations (14) and (16).

Proof. The within-location labor market equilibrium is characterized by setting
within-location labor supply (equation (14)) equal to within-location labor demand
(equation (16)):


                          {       }   : E     :=           {      }             -             {         }           = 0.         (A.13)

If equation (A.13) characterizes an excess demand system with the gross substitution
property, equilibrium labor shares and relative wages are unique. This requires four
properties: (i)      is continuous, (ii)    is homogeneous of degree zero, (iii)          = 0,
and (iv)       exhibits gross substitution in wages.
       It is straightforward to show that labor demand is continuous by plugging equation
(A.8) into equation (A.10) and applying the dominated convergence theorem; by inspection
of equation (14), labor supply is clearly continuous. Thus, property (i) holds. Properties (ii)
and (iii) follows immediately by inspection of equations (14) and (A.11).33 We show that
property (iv) holds for each of supply and demand. For labor supply, using the labor supply
function in equation (14) we have:

                                         1-                                1-       1-   -1
                                                                  -                 M
                                                   =                                        2
                                                                                                  < 0,
                              M               1-       1-                           1-
                                      
                                                                           

                                         1-                                                             1-
                                                                      1-   -1        \{ }
                                                   =                                                         2
                                                                                                                 > 0.
                                              1-       1-                                          1-
                                      
                                                                                         

  33 Note   that labor demand is also homogeneous of degree zero in { ¯ }                                ; this property ensures that the
                                                                                                   
within-location equilibrium depends only on            -          .
                                                               




                                                               A.13
                                                   
For labor demand, de ne                     :=     0
                                                             1
                                                                      ¯       ( )                 1-            ¯       ( )          . From equations
                                                   
(A.8) and (A.10), we have LD                =                . It is straightforward to show:
                                                    


                                                 
                                                             =                            ,


                               1
                          =        ( - 1)               -                     1-              ¯                             <              ,
                                                                                                       ¯
                  LD                    LD
which implies                 < 0 and            > 0    \ { }.


Claim 2. For each market , there exist unique functions                                                ,  : R++  R++ such that,
          
              that satisfy equation (A.13), the following holds: (1)                                                            =              -        ,
                                                                                                                                                   
                      -       -1
and (2)      =                          -           .
                                                
                                                                                                                            1-
                                                                                                                1-
Proof. We can re-write equation (13) as                           =                                                                 . By Claim 1,  , ,

we can express the unique relative wage                               = ~                     -                     for some unique function
                                                                                                       
~ : R++  R++ . Thus:
                                                                                                           1-

                                                                                                  1-
                                    =                    ~                -                                         .                              (A.14)
                                                                                      
                                                 


                                                             =:               -
                                                                                      



Similarly, we can re-write e ciency wages (equation (A.12)) as:


                                                    -1                            -


          -
                                    -                             ~       {       
                                                                                  -   } 
                 -1
   =                                                                                                            -                                       .
                              ~                                                   (       )                             (       - 1) ( ( - 1) - 1)
                                                             
                                                                                      -
                      =1            -                             
                                                                          ~       {   
                                                                                      -   } 


                                                                      =:              -
                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                   (A.15)

                                                             A.14
Using the results in Claims 1 and 2, we proceed with the proof of Proposition 1.


Proposition 1.               Given parameter values { , , , , , , } and fundamentals
                                                                                    - -1
                                                                 1+    +( -1)
{H , B, K , E,  }, if - -1 +       < 0 and 1+ (1- )- - -1  [-1, 1] , the equilibrium of
the model exists and is unique (up to a normalization in wages).

Proof. Equations (10), (12), (15), and (A.14) imply:
                                                        1
                     -1                                                - -1     1      1-
           = ¯ ¯ - (    ) (1 - )             ( -1)
                                                                                                       -         .   (A.16)
                                                                                                             

                              =: ~                                                              =:



Let        :=   -1                   . Setting equation (A.16) equal to equation (8) and plugging in
                       -      
equations (18) and (A.15) gives:
                                         - -1
                        1-     ( 1- )                            -1     1-      ( -1) 1-             -1 1-
                                                =           ~                                                .       (A.17)
                                                    

Plugging equations (18), (A.15), and (A.16) into equation (11) gives:
                                                                                    - -1
                             1+ ( 1- )                  -1            1+( -1)               -1 1-      1-
                                         =          ~                                                        .       (A.18)
                                             

Equations (A.17) and (A.18) are isomorphic to (a discretized version of) equations (10) and
(11), respectively, in Allen and Arkolakis (2014).34 We conclude the proof by applying
Theorem 1, Remarks 2 and 3, from Allen, Arkolakis, and Li (2020). First, employing the
notation from Remark 3 gives:

                                                        1-            ( 1 - ) - -1
                                     -K =                                          ,
                                                                       1 + (1 - )

                                                1-                 ( - 1)
                                     B=                                                     .
                                                             1 + ( - 1) -              -1

  34 Theisomorphism holds under the following parameter restrictions (with the left-hand side representing
Allen and Arkolakis (2014, AA) and the right-hand side representing our setup): (1)   = , (2)     = - -1 ,
and (3)    = . Under these restrictions, given the same wage normalization and inputs, both models generate
the same equilibrium labor allocations and wages, {L, W }.

                                                                A.15
         - -1
When            +    0, this yields the elasticity matrix:
                                                        - -1                            - -1
                                                           -1                      (       + )      
                                                 - -1                          - -1
                                                      -( 1+ ( 1- ))                   -( 1+ ( 1- )) 
                A = B ( - K)      -1
                                           
                                          =    ( -1) ( - -1 + )                       -1-
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                       ,
                                                 - -1                          -   -1               
                                                      -( 1+ ( 1- ))                   -( 1+ ( 1- )) 


where |·| denotes element-wise absolute value operator. The eigenvalues of A are                               =
                        - -1                             - -1
           1+ +( -1)                      1+ +( -1)
1 and =               - -1 . Thus if            - -1  [-1, 1] , (A) = 1. Finally, since the
           1+ ( 1- )-                     1+ ( 1- )-
substituted system is a constant elasticity system, by Remark 2 of Allen, Arkolakis, and Li
(2020), if (A) = 1, the equilibrium is unique (up to a normalization in wages).


B.2.2   Uniqueness of the Inversion

In this section, we provide the proof of Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. Given parameter values { , , , , , , }, fundamentals {H , E,  }, and
observed data {L, W }, if      < 1, there exist unique (up to a normalization) unobserved
fundamentals {B, K } and plant-level distributions of employment and wages {l, w } that
rationalize the data as an equilibrium outcome of the model.

We break the proof into three sub-claims.
Claim 3. Given parameter values { , , , , , , }, fundamentals {E,  }, and observed data
{L, W }, there exists a unique (up to a normalization) set of county-level e ciency wages
      
         that is consistent with an equilibrium of the model.

Proof. Plugging equations (8) and (18) into equation (11) gives:

                                                                                   1-          
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                     
                         :=       -                                        1
                                                                                                  = 0.     (A.19)
                                       
                                                                     1-   1-                   
                                                  
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                                                               

If equation (A.19) characterizes an excess demand system with the gross substitution
property, the set of     that solve it are unique (up to a normalization). This requires four
properties: (i)   is continuous, (ii)    is homogenous of degree zero, (iii)         = 0, and
(iv) exhibits gross substitution. Properties (i) and (ii) follow immediately from inspection.




                                                  A.16
Property (iii) follows from:
                                                                                                     1-
                                                                               
                                      =                     -                                        1-
                                                                                                              = 0.
                                                                                                  

                                                                                         =1

To see that Property (iv) holds, note that, for                                 :

                                                                                              1-                     
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                          -   1-
                                                                                                                     
                    = ( - 1)                                                           2
                                                                                                                        > 0.
                                   
                                                                              1-      1-                             
                                                      
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     
Since        is homogenous of degree zero, by Euler's homogenous function theorem, we have
W            = 0. This immediately implies     < 0.


Claim 4. Given parameter values { , , , , , , }, fundamentals {E }, observed data {L, W },
and e ciency wages         
                              that satisfy equation (A.19), if < 1, there exists a unique set
of knowledge K that is consistent with equation (A.12) and that pins down the plant-level
distributions of employment and wages {l, w }.

Proof. This proof is based on the proof technique for the main theorem in Allen, Arkolakis,
and Li (2020). Plugging equation (5) into equation (A.12) for all locations gives the system
of equations:

                                                                                              1-
                    -1    -                      -              -                                                   -
        =                                 -                                                          -                           .
                              =1                                       -              
                                                                                                          (   - 1) ( ( - 1) - 1)
                                                                                                                               (A.20)
                                      -1         -
Let     :=      ,    :=                              , and ~           :=           . Let:


                                                                               1-
                              -               -                        ~                                   -
               Q :=                                                                                                     .
                          -
                                                     -
                                                                              [~ ]   -
                                                                                              (      - 1) ( ( - 1) - 1)


By Claim 1, ~ is pinned down by                             -              . Denote the LHS of the equation as a function
                                                                    




                                                                       A.17
 . This gives the system:


                                               (y) =            +                    Q (y) .                                                             (A.21)
                                                                              


For brevity, we suppress dependence of Q on y in future expressions. We have:

                                                      -          ~                                       -                   ~
                              Q     (   - 1)       
                                                          -      
                                                                        -                             
                                                                                                             -               
           =                                                                                                                                 .           (A.22)
                                                                        Q

We can show that   0. First, note that the denominator is always positive, so the sign
of the derivative is determined by the sign of the numerator. De ne:

                                                              1 E      \{ }               ~
                                               U , :=                         -               ,
                                                               E -1                       

                               -1
                  -                                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                                                                     M -1
                                                                                                                                     (   -   )
                  ~                                                                               2                                      ~
                                           -                                                                                                 M
I :=                                                +                                                                                                                   .
                      (       )          ( - 1) - 1                    ( M - 1) ( (M - 1) - 1)                                                   (           )
               
                          -
                          ~
                                                              M = +1                                                                 M               ~
                                                                                                                                                      -




Note that the numerator of equation (A.22) is equal to                                                U , I . First, we show that
                                                                                                                                                     LD
U ,  0. Consider the case where   E \ { }. It is straightforward to show that                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                    ~
0, which implies                    
                                         0. Next, consider the case where   E \ { }. Suppose that
   ~           1 E    \{ }
       >                      . This implies, in response to small shocks, that labor demanded by plant
               | E | -1
                                                                                                                                 ~                   1  E        \{ }
{ , } decreases, but labor supplied to plant { , } increases . Thus,                    .                                                    
                                                                               | E | -1                                          

Next, it is straightforward to show that I < -   z      -1 - < 0 for (almost) all .

Combined, U ,  0 and I ,  0 implies that the numerator of equation (A.22) is less than
or equal to zero, and thus   0 for any , .
       Next, we characterize                          
                                                           ^ ) . After some manipulation of equation (A.22), we
                                                          (y
get:

                                                                                 -                                  -
                                               Q          (    - 1)           
                                                                                      -                          
                          -                                                                                                 0.
                                                                              Q


                                                                 A.18
                                                                             ~                        ~   1  E \{ }
Using the chain rule, we can re-write wage responses as                      
                                                                                     =                ¯    |E |-1 .
                    ~                                                            ~                    ~      ¯
By Claim 1,                = 0. Applying again the chain rule,                       =                ¯          =
         ~                    ~
         ¯                    ¯   = 0. Altogether, it can be shown that:

                                           -                  ^ )  0.
                                                             (y
                                                          

Finally, we move on to prove the result. By the mean value theorem,  {y, y }  R2  ++ ,  
                     ^ = y + ( 1 - ) y and (ii) ( y ) - ( y ) =  ( y
[0, 1] such that (i) y                                                 ^ ) ( y - y ) . This
implies:

             |   (y) -      ( y )|  -          -              ^)  -
                                                             (y          max         -               ^)
                                                                                                    (y
                                                                                                 
                                                                      

                                  = - max      -                   ^ )  max
                                                                  (y                     -   .             (A.23)
                                                                          
                                                       


Recall that R ,  is a complete metric space. Equation (A.23) shows that, if < 1, the
function is a contraction mapping. Uniquess of K follows from the Banach Fixed Point
Theorem. Finally, by Claim 1, K pins down {l, w }.


Claim 5. Given parameter values { , , , , , , }, fundamentals {H , E,  }, observed data
{L, W }, (recovered) e ciency wages         
                                               , and (recovered) plant-level distributions of
employment and wages {l, w }, there exists a unique (up to a normalization) set of amenity
scale parameters B such that the observed data are an equilibrium of the model.

Proof. The proof is identical to the proof of Proposition 3 in Redding (2016).


C      Estimation Appendix
The parameter vector estimate ^ minimizes the loss function ( m - m ( )) G ( m - m ( )),
where m denotes data moments and m ( ) denotes model-based moments. We obtain
m ( ) by estimating plant-level di erence-in-di erences regressions using a data set with
"pre-" and "post-shock" observations. Given a guess of the model parameters , we
construct this data set in two steps:

    1. Pre-Shock Equilibrium and Recovery of Fundamentals: We generate a plant-level
       data set that corresponds to the pre-shock equilibrium of the model. To this end,
       we invert the equilibrium conditions of the model and use the recursive structure

                                                      A.19
      from the proof of Proposition 2. We rst recover the set of county-level e ciency
      wages that satis es equation (A.19) (see Claim 3 in Appendix B.2). Second, we
      implement the contraction mapping that recovers the set of county-level knowledge
      K ( ) , described in equation (A.21) (see Claim 4). By Claim 1, K ( ) pins down
      within-county labor shares and relative wages, l ( ) and w ( ) . Third, we recover
      the set of amenity scale parameters B ( ) that satisfy equation (12) (see Claim
      5). By Proposition 2, the recovered county-level characteristics and within-county
      distributions are unique up to a normalization.35

   2. Post-Shock Equilibrium. We shock the economy with 47 independent local
      productivity shocks that resemble the MDP openings, as described in Section 4.3.
      For each MDP case , we use the model's recursive structure to recover wages and
      employment for the post-shock equilibrium, {L ( ), W ( ), l ( ), w ( )}. First,
      given K ( ) , we recompute plants' productivity scale parameters using equation (5).
      Second, we recover within-county labor shares and relative wages, l ( ) and w ( ) ,
      using the recursive structure of equation (A.13) (see Claim 1 in Appendix B.2). Third,
      we use equations (A.14) and (A.15) to solve for the exogenous amenity wage and
      e ciency wage "slopes"                  -         ,        -              (see Claim 2). Finally,
                                                                             
      we iterate over post-shock equilibrium county-level wages and employment, W ( )
      and L ( ) , until we nd the values that simultaneously satisfy equations (A.17) and
      (A.18) for each MDP case .


References
Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis, 2014, Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1085­1140.
Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Xiangliang Li, 2020, On the Equilibrium Properties of
      Network Models with Heterogeneous Agents, mimeo, Dartmouth College.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, 2010, What Causes Industry
      Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns, American Economic
      Review 100, 1195­1213.
Hadlock, Charles, and Joshua Pierce, 2010, New Evidence on Measuring Financial
     Constraints: Moving Beyond the KZ Index, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1909­1940.
  35 We   normalize e ciency wages and and amenity scale parameters such that their geometric mean is one.




                                                   A.20
Kaplan, Steven, and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide
     Useful Measures of Financing Constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112,
     169­215.
Lind, Nelson, and Natalia Ramondo, 2021, Trade with Correlation, mimeo, Emory
      University.
Redding, Stephen, 2016, Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare, Journal of International
     Economics 101, 148­167.




                                          A.21
