                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE REAL EXPLANATION OF NOMINAL BOND-STOCK PUZZLES

                                      Mikhail Chernov
                                      Lars A. Lochstoer
                                        Dongho Song

                                     Working Paper 29085
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29085


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank John Campbell, Valentin Haddad, Tyler Muir, Stavros Panageas, and Stan Zin for
comments on earlier drafts, as well as participants in the seminar at University of Hong Kong,
UCLA, and USC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mikhail Chernov, Lars A. Lochstoer, and Dongho Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Real Explanation of Nominal Bond-Stock Puzzles
Mikhail Chernov, Lars A. Lochstoer, and Dongho Song
NBER Working Paper No. 29085
July 2021
JEL No. E32,E43,E44,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We present evidence that the mix of transitory and permanent shocks to consumption is changing
over time. We study the implications of this finding for asset prices. The uncovered dynamics of
consumption implies modestly upward sloping real bond and equity curves, upward sloping
nominal yield curve, and sign-switching correlation between equities and bonds consistent with
the stylized facts. This is achieved without relying on the nominal channel too much. That is, as
in the data, the variation of inflation in the model is under 40% as a fraction of variation in
nominal yields.

Mikhail Chernov                                 Dongho Song
Anderson School of Management                   Johns Hopkins University
University of California, Los Angeles           Carey Business School
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417                 100 International Drive
Los Angeles, CA 90095                           Baltimore, MD 21202
and CEPR                                        dongho.song@jhu.edu
and also NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu

Lars A. Lochstoer
University of California, Los Angeles
lars.lochstoer@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

In this paper we propose a model of macroeconomic fluctuations. The novelty of
the model is that it allows for changes in the relative contribution of permanent and
transitory shocks to aggregate consumption. We find empirical support for such a
specification and study implications of this evidence for asset prices. We show that
the model goes a long way towards capturing the changing stock-bond correlation,
real and nominal bond yield curves, as well as the equity yield curve.

The nature of macroeconomic fluctuations has preoccupied macroeconomists since at
least Hayek (1933) and, more recently, Lucas (1977). While the starting point was
that departures from the trend are of transitory nature, the literature has gradually
shifted towards recognition that there are shocks to the trend itself, aka permanent
shocks (Campbell and Mankew, 1987, Cochrane, 1988, among many others). Alvarez
and Jermann (2005) demonstrate that asset prices are particularly sensitive to the
differences in these perspectives on the macroeconomic dynamics.

The asset-pricing literature has primarily focused on the other end of the spectrum,
that is, models where permanent shocks to consumption are the dominant driving
force (e.g., Bansal and Yaron, 2004, Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). This permanent
shock paradigm is experiencing difficulty matching some key asset-pricing facts, such
as small positive slopes of the real yield curve and the equity yield curve, as well as
the changing sign of the real equity-bond covariance.

We model the consumption level as the sum of two components that we label perma-
nent and transitory, respectively. Regime-changing volatility of the shocks to these
components leads to changes in the dominance of one of them. If the permanent com-
ponent dominates, the economy behaves similar to workhorse asset-pricing models and
features positive covariance between realized and expected consumption growth. In

                                          1
contrast, if the transitory component dominates, that covariance becomes negative.

When the model is confronted with data on consumption only, the preferred speci-
fication features three regimes. The changes between two of these regimes occur at
a very low frequency. The "transitory" regime has prevailed throughout the early
part of our sample, up until about 1995. The "permanent" regime has appeared
sporadically in the early sample, primarily at the peak of expansions, and prevails
in the post-1995 period. The third regime captures persistent disaster state, but its
persistence and magnitude are modest relative to what is usually entertained in the
disaster literature (Barro, 2006, Wachter, 2013).

We explore asset pricing implications of these dynamics in two steps. First, we
assume a representative agent with Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences and explore
assets whose price can be computed from consumption alone: real bond yields and
the consumption claim. In the later "permanent" regime, negative shocks to the
macroeconomy tends to be followed by lower than average growth (positive conditional
covariance between realized and expected consumption growth), making real bonds
hedges. The real yield curve is therefore downward-sloping in this regime. In the
earlier "transitory" regime, however, negative shocks tend to be followed by higher
than average growth (negative conditional covariance between realized and expected
consumption growth), which makes real bonds risky. The disaster regime is even
more strongly affected by such transitory shocks as crisis periods are followed by a
recovery. The term structures in these states are flat and upward-sloping, respectively.
The real curve averaged across the regimes is nearly flat with slightly positive slope.
Because real bonds transition from being risky to becoming hedges, the model implied
consumption claim - real bond correlation switches sign as well. In the sample this
correlation switched from positive to negative around 1995.

Second, we link the model's implications to observable asset prices, namely, aggre-

                                           2
gate equity and nominal bonds. Doing so requires specification and calibration of
cash flows, dividends and inflation, respectively. Because our focus is on the role of
consumption dynamics for asset pricing, we posit cash flows dynamics that are simple
and in line with the literature. We show that the model is capable of generating re-
alistic baseline asset-pricing moments, including risk premiums, return volatility, and
predictability of both equity and bond excess returns. Also, the estimated consump-
tion combined with calibrated cash flows are consistent with the nominal bond (e.g.,
Bansal and Shaliastovich, 2013, Piazzesi and Schneider, 2006) and equity yield curves
(e.g., van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen, 2012, Giglio, Kelly, and Kozak, 2020).

Furthermore, the results obtained using consumption dynamics alone help us capture
evidence emphasized in the recent literature. Because the model generates sign-
switching correlations between the consumption claim and real bond returns, it con-
tinues doing so for the equity claim and nominal bonds. That is, the model generates
this pattern via the real channel, as emphasized by Campbell, Shiller, and Viceira
(2009), Duffee (2018a), and Liu (2020). Further, because the real bond curve is flat,
the model does not require a lot of variation in inflation relative to overall variation
in nominal yields to match the nominal bond curve. Thereby, our model is capa-
ble of addressing the Duffee (2018b) critique of the current mainstream asset-pricing
models.

Campbell (1986) studies theoretically joint modeling of bonds and stocks allowing
for both transitory and permanent effects in consumption. Existing empirical work
typically addresses a subset of these asset-pricing moments. Campbell, Pfluger, and
Viceira (2020), David and Veronesi (2013), and Fang, Liu, and Roussanov (2021)
focus on stock-bond correlations. Song (2017) additionally focuses on the nominal
yield curve vs consumption-inflation correlation. These papers rely on the nomi-
nal component as the key channel, which Duffee (2018a,b) argues is counter-factual.
Gomez-Cram and Yaron (2021) specifically target that critique. They achieve success

                                           3
in matching the nominal and real yield curves via preferences that combine Epstein-
Zin utility with shocks to the time preference parameter. They do not discuss joint
comovement between bonds and stocks.

Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2010) and Hassler and Marfe (2016) advocate permanent,
transitory, and disaster components albeit in a functional form that is different from
ours. In particular, the composition of permanent and transitory shocks is time-
invariant. Research questions are different as well. The former paper focuses on the
single-horizon equity premium and interest rate. The latter focuses exclusively on the
term structure of dividend strips.

In contemporaneous work, Jones and Pyun (2021) extend the Bansal and Yaron
(2004) model with exogenously specified time-varying covariance between realized and
expected consumption growth. The time-varying mix of the permanent and transitory
components, which we advocate and explicitly model, is implicit in their specification
and is referred to as time-varying consumption growth persistence. The authors
primarily focus on the stock-bond covariance and on the leverage effect for equities.
Implementation relies on calibration rather than on estimation of the consumption
dynamics.

Nakamura, Steinsson, Barro, and Ursua (2013) and Nakamura, Sergeyev, and Steins-
son (2017) estimate consumption dynamics using a cross-section of countries and a
long sample. They focus on estimating consumption disasters, typically associated
with wars, and time-variation in the conditional mean and its volatility. They do not
allow for time-variation in the relative magnitude of permanent and transitory shocks
as is our focus.

No-arbitrage models of stock-bond comovement are represented by Backus, Boyarchenko,
and Chernov (2018), Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2017), Koijen, Lustig, and
Nieuwerburgh (2017), and Lettau and Wachter (2011).

                                          4
2     Model

We start by presenting initial regression-based evidence about changing properties of
consumption. Next, we use the evidence as a motivation for the posited consumption
dynamics. We describe how we estimate the model. We conclude by presenting and
discussing the implications of the estimated dynamics.



2.1    Preliminary evidence

The correlation between stock market and nominal Treasury bond returns changed
sign around 1998, from positive before 1998 to negative from 1998 and onwards (e.g.,
Baele, Bekaert, and Inghelbrecht, 2010, Campbell, Shiller, and Viceira, 2009). A
real explanation of this phenomenon suggests consumption dynamics are different in
the two periods. We show that the autocorrelation of consumption growth indeed is
significantly and economically different across these periods. According to our inter-
pretation, this evidence arises from the changing mix of permanent versus transitory
shocks to the economy.

Specifically, consider the regression:


          ct+1 = 0 + 1 1t<1998 + 0 ct + 1 × (1t<1998 × ct ) +            t+1 ,       (1)


where ct is the change in log consumption growth, and 1t<1998 equals one if observa-
tion t is in the pre-1998 sample and zero otherwise. If 1 is significantly different from
zero, there is different autocorrelation in the period before 1998 versus that after.

We use the real-time data series on real personal consumption expenditures (PCE)
from 1947:Q2 to 2020:Q4, which are available from the Federal Reserve Bank of


                                           5
Philadelphia. We use real-time consumption data to best align them with investors'
information set at the time they set asset prices. PCE offers the longest span of such
data.1

In our first set of regressions, we use data up until 2019:Q4 so the Covid period
is excluded from the sample. A simple regression is not well-suited to handle the
extreme movements in consumption growth occurring during that period. We also
consider regressions where we exclude all NBER recession periods to check that the
results are not due to the lower frequency of recessions in the later sample. When we
do that, we ensure that the right hand side in the regression (observation t) is always
the previous quarter relative to t + 1 whether a NBER recession or not. Using NBER
dates introduces a look-ahead bias, so the nature of these regressions is illustrative.

Table 1 shows the estimated coefficients. The results with and without NBER reces-
sions are qualitatively similar. Our discussion focuses on the latter (right side of the
Table). The column labeled (1) shows that 0 = 0.25 and 1 = -0.39, significant
at the 5% and 1% level, respectively. Thus, the autocorrelation coefficient in the
pre-1998 period is -0.14 (0 + 1 = 0.25 - 0.39), while in the later period it is 0.25
(0 ). The significance of 1 means this difference is statistically significant, and the
economic magnitude is substantial.

The intercept is also statistically different across the two periods, as one would expect
given that the slope is significantly different. In order to ensure that this intercept
change does not reflect significantly different means of consumption growth, we also
run a regression where we impose that the unconditional mean is the same across the
two periods. In particular, we demean the consumption growth data we use in the
regression across the whole sample and run the regression (1) setting 1 = 0. The
   1
    As a robustness check, we develop the evidence using quarterly revised real per capita nondurable
and services consumption. The results are similar. See Appendix A.



                                                 6
results are reported in Table 1 in the column labeled (2), which shows that the effect
is slightly stronger in this case.

In this preliminary analysis, we made two short-cuts. First, we imposed the break-
point as 1998, motivated by the evidence on the stock-bond correlation. Second, we
excluded the Covid crisis as well as business cycle downturns in general. In the sequel,
we present our model of consumption dynamics and estimate it, including the timing
of different regimes and accounting for crisis periods. The conclusion remains the
same.



2.2       Consumption dynamics

We model aggregate log consumption as the sum of a deterministic trend and two
persistent components, cp,t and c,t , which we label permanent and transitory, respec-
tively:


                                     ct = µc t + cp,t + c,t ,                       (2)


implying the following growth rate


                              ct+1 = µc + cp,t+1 + c,t+1 .                          (3)


We model the permanent and transitory components as follows:


                               cp,t+1 = p cp,t +           p,t+1 ,                  (4)

                                 c,t+1 =  c,t +          ,t+1 ,



where     j,t+1   are mean-zero shocks and j  {p,  }. Thus, the permanent component
contains a unit root, while the transitory component does not. This specification

                                                7
is motivated by the preliminary evidence. Also, in general equilibrium models with
production, (e.g., Blanchard, L'Huillier, and Lorenzoni, 2013, and Kaltenbrunner and
Lochstoer, 2010), a combination of permanent and transitory shocks to productivity
leads to endogenous consumption dynamics similar to those specified above.

The permanent component cp,t contains both permanent and transitory elements. To
see this, consider the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition of cp,t :

                        1     1                   1      1      1
             cp,t =               ·   p,t   +                -      ·                       p,t ,         (5)
                      1 - p 1 - L               1 - L 1 - p L 1 - p

where L denotes the lag operator. The first element represents the permanent effect
on consumption, while the second is transitory, which disappears if p = 0.

For simplicity, we set  = p =  and note that


             cp,t+1 + ( - 1)c,t+1  xt+1 = xt +                               p,t+1    + ( - 1)   ,t+1 .   (6)


We can then conveniently express consumption growth as


                              ct+1 = µc + xt +                   p,t+1   +   ,t+1 .                       (7)


We allow the shocks to have time-varying volatility to capture any time-variation in
the relative magnitude of the two consumption components. In particular, we assume
               2
j,t+1    N (0, j (St+1 )), where St+1 is a discrete Markov state variable that takes on
N values St+1  {1, ..., N }. Agents observe the current regime St+1 and make forecast
of future regime based on the transition matrix below
                                                                             
                                                p11        ...     p1N
                                                 .                  .
                                                                        
                                  P=
                                                 .         ...      .   
                                                                                                          (8)
                                                 .                  . 
                                                                        
                                                pN 1       ...     pN N


                                                       8
         N
where    i=1   pji = 1.



2.3     Estimation

Our preferred model features three different Markov states. That is the most par-
simonious specification where the first two states capture economic phenomena that
are more slowly moving than business cycles. The remaining third state captures
business cycle downturns (combined, for parsimony, with potential disasters in the
economy).

We estimate the model via maximum likelihood. See Appendix B for the regime-
switching state-space representation as well as the evaluation of the likelihood func-
tion. Regimes are labeled by imposing that


                                    (1) <  (2) <  (3).                             (9)


Also, to ensure that the third regime is associated with the worst states, we assume


                                 p (3) > max{p (1), p (2)}.                      (10)



In order to reduce the number of parameters to estimate, we impose that


                      var(xt+1 |xt , St+1 = 1) = var(xt+1 |xt , St+1 = 2).


Restricting expected consumption growth to be homoscedastic across regimes 1 and
2 means that these regimes are identified by the relative fraction of permanent versus
transitory shocks, which is the economic effect we are focusing on in this paper, as
opposed to the Great Moderation or business cycle variation in overall volatility. The


                                               9
restriction implies that

                                                      2
                            2         1-
                                       2
                      p (1) = p (2) +                      (2)2 -  (1)2 .                     (11)
                                       


Restrictions (9)-(11) together imply that the 1st (3rd) regime has the smallest (largest)
conditional variance for realized consumption growth. Given this, we follow Sims,
Waggoner, and Zha (2008) and reduce the number of parameters further by assum-
ing that the economy cannot move between regimes 1 and 3 directly, but has to go
through the intermediate volatility regime 2. This assumption implies that:


                                           p1,3 = p3,1 = 0.                                   (12)



2.4     Evidence

Table 2 reports estimated parameters of consumption dynamics and Figure 1 displays
the probabilities of the regimes.2 The first regime, when compared to the second
regime, features slightly higher volatility of the permanent shock (0.09% vs 0.08%
per quarter) and lower volatility of the transitory shock (0.30% vs 0.73%). The third
regime is a high volatility regime with the values of 0.12% for the permanent shock
and 7.35% for the transitory one. Overall, our estimation implies that shocks to the
transitory consumption component are the biggest drivers of short-run consumption
volatility, but the first regime has the relatively highest proportion of permanent
shocks. This is very different from the long-run risk literature, which relies on shocks
to the permanent consumption component. The second regime prevails up to the
mid-1990s with a few exceptions occurring usually at expansion peaks. After the
   2
     We also estimate the model using quarterly revised real per capita nondurable and services
consumption. The regimes and their intuition are very similar, though volatility is somewhat lower.
See Appendix A.


                                                 10
mid-1990s, the first regime dominates with the exception of the 2008 crisis.

The third regime occurs at various points throughout the sample and is capable of gen-
erating much more adverse events than the other two regimes. This regime captures
bad states of the economy that are associated with particularly volatile transitory
shocks, and we therefore label it as a disaster regime. In our model this regime is
distinct from regular recessions, including the Great Recession, which are driven rel-
atively more by the permanent component of ct . That is reflected in xt becoming low
and remaining so for an extended period. See the last panel of Figure 1. In contrast,
disasters are associated with a high conditional mean of consumption growth. That
is because the disaster shocks are transitory and the level of consumption therefore
reverts to the trend relatively quickly. These episodes occur during the Korean war,
oil shocks, the 1981 monetary recession, and the COVID crisis.

The persistence of expected consumption growth has a coefficient of  = 0.941 with
a wide 90% confidence interval. This value is similar to the classic Bansal and Yaron
(2004) x's persistence of 0.9793 = 0.938. Unlike in the Bansal and Yaron (2004) model,
the correlation between shocks to expected and realized consumption is non-zero and
time-varying. That reflects the relative magnitude of the permanent and transitory
components.

The expected duration of regime j is roughly 1/(1 - pjj ) (e.g., Kim and Nelson, 1999).
Thus, the expected duration of the first two regimes is 10 and 5 years, respectively,
compared to less than a year for the third regime. These values highlight that the
low-frequency shifts in the economy are captured in the first two regimes.




                                          11
2.5    Discussion

Our model contributes to the existing literature by documenting that a mix of tran-
sitory and permanent shocks to aggregate consumption is changing over time. That
potentially explains disagreement in the earlier literature that reached different con-
clusions using classical time-series methods: a specific sample could have tilted anal-
yses towards one of the configurations. Next, this finding raises questions of how that
matters and why that happens.

As regards the first question, Cochrane (1988) points out that "... the size or exis-
tence of a random walk component in GNP cannot directly distinguish broad classes
of economic theories of the business cycle ...". Yet, Alvarez and Jermann (2004, 2005)
forcefully demonstrate that asset prices are informative about the marginal rate of
substitution and macroeconomic fluctuations. Therefore, it is natural to take explo-
ration of the consumption dynamics that we have uncovered to asset-pricing data.
Specifically, we evaluate if one can make progress on capturing the most recent puzzles
that pertain to the interaction between stocks and bonds.

As regards the second question, Kaltenbrunner and Lochstoer (2010) show that the
permanent or transitory components arise in general equilibrium with production
depending on the nature of productivity shocks. Specifically, a positive permanent
shock to the level of productivity leads to dynamics that are similar to the permanent
consumption component we specify exogenously here with p > 0. Indeed, in response
to this shock investors initially increase investment to bring the capital stock to its
new optimal long-run level, which in turn temporarily depresses consumption before
it converges to its new optimal level. In contrast a transitory shock to productivity
leads to a transitory shock in consumption, similar to the transitory consumption
component we specify exogenously here. Both specifications of productivity can ac-
count for the standard macroeconomic moments, but have markedly different effects

                                          12
on asset prices.




3     Basic asset-pricing implications

The next natural step is to investigate implications of the estimated consumption dy-
namics with time-varying volatility of the transitory and permanent components. In
this section we consider asset-pricing implications. We start by developing intuition,
and then discuss applications to the bond and stock markets.



3.1    Intuition

It is useful to consider

                                              2                 2
                   Cov (ct+1 , xt+1 |St+1 ) = p (St+1 ) - (1 - )  (St+1 ).              (13)


The covariance is clearly time-varying and could even switch signs because  < 1.
This property of consumption growth has dramatic implications for the dynamics of
asset prices within the model, such as the real term structure of interest rates. To see
that we follow Piazzesi (2014) and consider (log) risk premium on a two-period real
bond in the case of log preferences and constant shock volatilities:

      (1)    (2)    (1)  1        (1)                   (1)
Et ([qt+1 - qt ] + qt ) + V art (qt+1 ) = Covt (ct+1 , qt+1 ) = -Covt (ct+1 , xt+1 ),
                         2

        (n)
where qt      denotes a time t log price of a real bond maturing in n periods. See
Appendix C for all the derivations pertaining to log preferences.

If ct+1 = cp,t+1 , consumption growth is positively serially correlated. Thus, states


                                             13
with low growth have low growth expectations resulting in a high bond price. Bonds
act as hedges to equity, and the short rate is procyclical.

If ct+1 = c,t+1 consumption growth is negatively serially correlated. Thus, states
with low growth have high growth expectations resulting in a low bond price. Bonds
are no longer hedges to equity, and the short rate is countercyclical.

In our model, covariance in (13) can be negative for sufficiently large values of
 (St+1 ). That would result in consumption dynamics that are closer to the transitory
component. Thus, regimes control which effects dominates.

Let's introduce the relative contribution of permanent and transitory components to
shocks to expected consumption growth explicitly via

                                                2
                                         (1 - )
                                     =        2
                                                  .
                                            p

                                                         c
Further, let's use a consumption claim with a log price qt as a metaphor for a stock.
Then the discussion above can be extended and summarized in terms of the sign of
the covariance between returns on a real bond and a stock:

                             (n-1)      (n)  c       c
                sign Covt (qt+1      - qt , qt +1 - qt ) = sign[ - 1].            (14)



Three special cases are of particular interest. First, consider p =  in Equation (4).
Non-zero p , which reflects the transitory element in cp,t per Equation (5), is crucial
for the mechanism advocated in this paper. If p = 0 then  = , and the bond-stock
covariance is positive. Second, if  = 0, we have the permanent component only,
like in Bansal and Yaron (2004),  = 0, and the bond-stock covariance is negative.
Third, Blanchard, L'Huillier, and Lorenzoni (2013) explicitly assume this channel for
switching signs away in a single-regime setting by requiring , p and  to be such


                                              14
that the covariance in Equation (13) is equal to zero, or, equivalently,  = 1. As a
result, the univariate process for ct is a random walk. That property, again, shuts
down the mechanism that we are exploring in this paper.



3.2      Real bonds and consumption claim

Full analysis of stocks and bonds requires additional assumptions about cash flows
(dividends and inflation). Before we proceed with this task, we investigate the proper-
ties of consumption dynamics itself through the lens of asset pricing. To that end we
assume workhorse preferences of a representative agent and, building on the discussion
in the previous section, apply them to valuation of real bonds and the consumption
claim.

Specifically, we consider an Epstein and Zin (1989) representative agent. The indirect
utility, Ut , takes the form

                                   (1- )/             -   1/ /(1- )
                Ut = max (1 -  )Ct          +  Et Ut1
                                                    +1                ,
                       Ct



where Ct denotes consumption,  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion,  =
(1 -  )/(1 -  -1 ) with  denoting the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and 
is the time discount factor. The associated log stochastic discount factor (marginal
rate of substitution) is

                                       
                       mt+1 =  ln  -    ct+1 + ( - 1)rc,t+1 ,
                                       

where zc,t is the log price to consumption ratio and rc,t+1 is the log return on the
consumption claim. Appendix D derives bond and consumption claim prices implied
by the consumption dynamics and these preferences.


                                            15
We set  = 0.999 to match the low level of real bonds in the data (close to zero for the
short-rate). We analyze the asset pricing moments implied from the consumption-
only estimation, which in practice means less risk than in models that use financial
asset data for estimation. As a result, we set risk aversion to  = 20 to generate
quantitatively meaningful asset pricing moments. Lastly, we assume that  = 1.5
implying that the agent prefers an early resolution of uncertainty.

Figure 2 displays theoretical model implications by regime. The "permanent" regime
1 features a correlation between the consumption claim and a 5-year real bond of
-0.66, while the "transitory" regime 2 implies a correlation of 0.51. The real yield
curve in regime 1 is downward-sloping, consistent with the intuition that bonds are
hedges in this state.

In regime 2, the yield curve is nearly flat. That shape reflects two countervailing
forces. On the one hand, the positive bond-consumption claim correlation indicates
bonds are risky. On the other hand, bonds hedge transitions to regime 3. This regime
features a strong precautionary savings motive due to high consumption volatility and
thus lower yields.

The disaster regime is dominated by the transitory component (the consumption
claim-bond correlation is 0.96) and, therefore, features an upward-sloping yield curve,
consistent with the correlations between expected and realized consumption given in
Table 3.

The lower panel of Figure 2 displays time series of the model implied consumption
claim-bond correlation. The correlation averages 0.5 until 1992. Then it starts de-
clining and by 1996 it averages -0.6. The occasional spikes up match up with regime
3. Spikes down correspond to switches from regime 2 to regime 1 throughout the
sample. Thus, consistent with the analysis in Campbell, Shiller, and Viceira (2009),
Duffee (2018a), and Liu (2020), the correlation's behavior is primarily driven by the

                                          16
real side of the economy. The first two regimes in our model that emphasize transi-
tory vs permanent component of consumption, respectively, are responsible for this
result.




4     Extended asset-pricing implications

The key objective of this section is to evaluate implications of consumption dynamics
for observed asset prices. However observable prices depend, besides consumption and
preferences, on cash flows (dividends and inflation). While there are many plausible
specifications of inflation and dividends, the debate about the "best" specification
continues unabated. Thus, instead of an extensive discussion, we assume something
relatively simple in line with the literature (traditional conditional mean comple-
mented with exposures to the consumption shocks).

Further, because of our main focus, we do not want to estimate cash flow growth
and consumption growth jointly so that the inferred consumption dynamics are not
affected by the choice or properties of the other series. Thus, we calibrate cash flow
dynamics to illustrate the pricing implications. The model generates realistic slopes of
the real and nominal yield curves, as well as the equity forward curve, with reasonable
dividend growth and inflation dynamics and without sacrificing the Duffee (2018b)
moment, which is the contribution of inflation to the overall variation in nominal
yields, and the observed stock-bond correlation.



4.1       Cash flows

In a pure-exchange endowment economy such as ours cash flows have to be speci-
fied exogenously. For our purposes, we have to specify two types: aggregate stock

                                          17
dividends and inflation. Inflation can be viewed as a cash flow to a nominal bond.

Following Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012) and Schorfheide, Song, and Yaron (2018),
dividend growth has levered exposures to both xt and shocks as follows


                  dt+1 = µd + xt + d,p                p,t+1   + d,      ,t+1   +   d,t+1 .      (15)

                                                                                 2
Idiosyncratic shocks to dividends are captured by                 d,t+1    N (0, d ).

Inflation dynamics are assumed to follow


              t+1 = µ +  (t - µ ) + ,p                   p,t+1   + ,       ,t+1    +   ,t+1 .   (16)

                                                                               2
Idiosyncratic shocks to inflation are captured by                ,t+1    N (0,   ).

In order to appreciate the effect of inflation on the bond-stock covariance, we can
extend the simple log-preference example in Equation (14) to the case of a nominal
                  $,(n)
bond with price qt        :

                              $,(n-1)      $,(n)      c       c
              sign Covt (qt+1           - qt       , qt +1 - qt ) = sign[ - 1],                 (17)


where explicit expression for  is provided in Appendix C.2.  reflects the sign of
consumption-inflation covariance. If ,p < 0 and , < 0 that covariance is negative
and  > 1, and vice versa.  = 1 corresponds to no inflation risk.

The previous literature emphasizes the importance of switching covariance between
inflation and consumption growth for explaining the pattern in stock-bond covariance,
that is, it entertains a fixed  and time-varying  (e.g., Campbell, Pfluger, and Viceira,
2020, David and Veronesi, 2013, Song, 2017). Equation (17) demonstrates that as
long as  varies around the value of 1/, the sign of covariance between the nominal
bond returns and consumption claim returns would be switching signs even if  itself

                                                    18
varies around the value of 1. Thus, if we add time-varying  to our setup, our model
has the potential of generating richer dynamics and implications.



4.2    Data

We choose the following set of data to evaluate the pricing implications of our
model. First, we rely on the value-weighted with- and without-dividend annual re-
turns of the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) stock market indexes
(NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA) to construct nominal dividend growth series fol-
lowing Hodrick (1992). We take the CPI inflation rates from the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis to convert nominal dividend growth into real terms. We compute
sample averages, standard deviations, and first-order autocorrelations of real dividend
growth and inflation series and compare with the model-implied counterparts.

Second, we collect the zero-coupon Treasury (1971:Q1 to 2020:Q4) from Gurkaynak,
Sack, and Wright (2007) and TIPS (1999:Q1 to 2020:Q4) from Gurkaynak, Sack, and
Wright (2010). Only maturities that are higher than two years are available for TIPS.
We discard the initial four years and rely on the post-2003 TIPS data to alleviate any
concern regarding the credibility of the TIPS data. We concatenate the TIPS data
with the estimated real rates provided by Chernov and Mueller (2012) (1971:Q3 to
2002:Q4) for selective maturities to obtain long-sample averages of the real bond term
structure. Also, we compute rolling correlation estimates between daily stock market
returns and nominal bond returns of maturity five years over the rolling windows of
five years (1963:Q1 to 2020:Q4).

Third, we consider two sets of equity strip yield data, one is the synthetic equity strip
yield data provided by Giglio, Kelly, and Kozak (2020) available from 1975:Q4 to
2020:Q3 and the other is the traded equity strip yield data from Bansal, Miller, Song,


                                           19
and Yaron (2020) available from 2005:Q1 to 2016:Q4.3 We take the sample average
of the equity strip yield data.

Lastly, we take the inflation risk variation ratio estimates provided by Duffee (2018b),
which are available for the maturities of 1, 5, and 10 years, respectively. We take the
average of various different values of estimates in his Tables 1-3.



4.3       Calibration

We set the sensitivity of expected dividends to expected consumption growth to 4, as
is common in the literature. The short-term dividend exposures to permanent and
transitory shocks are both set to 8 to match the equity premium, while the mean
dividend growth rate is set to be consistent with its empirical counterpart as well as
a roughly flat dividend claim term structure, as in the data.

In the case of inflation, a positive inflation risk premium obtains if the loadings on
inflation shocks, ,p and , , are negative, as in Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013) and
Piazzesi and Schneider (2006). We let the exposure of inflation to transitory shocks
be more negative than the exposure to permanent shocks so that the slope of the
nominal yield curve is sufficiently upward-sloping, while at the same time requiring
the 10-year Duffee (2018b) moment, that is contribution of inflation to the nominal
yield variation, not to exceed 40%. The mean and autocorrelation parameters are set
as close as possible to their sample counterparts, while again respecting the restriction
implied by the Duffee (2018b) moment as well as the sample mean of the nominal
short-term interest rate.

Table 4 summarizes the calibrated parameters. Table 5 provides how the calibrated
cash flow processes (inflation and dividends) relate to the data. Generally speaking,
  3
      We thank Serhiy Kozak for providing data.

                                                  20
we find that the sample averages, standard deviations, and first-order autocorrelations
computed from the calibrated series are close to their data counterparts. That is not
entirely surprising given that we also targeted these moments in the calibration. Still,
it is reassuring that the model is capable of meeting the targets.



4.4     Evidence

Figure 3 reports two versions of model implied stock-bond correlation (real and nom-
inal) against the sample values of the stock-nominal bond correlation. The sample
estimate is the last five years' realized correlation between stock and nominal bond
returns. The evidence is in line with the consumption claim - real bond correlation
reported earlier, and the model matches the broad magnitudes quite well.

In particular, as in the data, the stock-nominal bond correlation is mainly positive
until the late 1990s, when it switches sign and becomes negative. This is driven by
the real side of the economy and the consumption dynamics transitioning from regime
2, which is dominated by the transitory consumption component, to regime 1, which
features a relatively higher magnitude of the permanent component. The latter makes
bonds hedges, which is why the correlation turns negative.4 Campbell, Pfluger, and
Viceira (2020), David and Veronesi (2013), Song (2017) emphasizes the importance
of switching covariance between inflation and consumption growth for explaining the
pattern in stock-bond covariance. The effect is actually present in our model as well
due to the changing volatility of transitory and permanent components that inflation
loads on, but unlike in these papers the effect is minor relative to that coming from
the real side of the economy.
   4
     Consistent with the model, the empirical stock-bond correlation increases in regime 3 as well.
That said, the realized correlation does not respond nearly as much as the conditional correlation in
the model as it is constructed as a five-year backward-looking moving average, whereas the model
numbers are the conditional forward-looking quarterly correlations.


                                                 21
Figure 4 compares baseline summary statistics about bonds and equity in our model
and in the data. Also, we use extant models as a reference. There are many asset-
pricing models that focus on matching different dimensions of asset price data. Thus,
a benchmark can be selected in a number of ways. We decided to focus on models that
feature (i) long-run risk because their functional form is in the same family; and (ii)
an Epstein and Zin (1989) representative agent as is the case for our computations.
In this context, Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013) is a classic reference for bonds.
However, the equity pricing implications of that model are not explored. Thus, we
select Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012) as a reference model for equity pricing. Neither
of these models is capable of generating the changing relation between stocks and
bonds.

The top left plot in Figure 4 shows the unconditional real yield curve, which in
the data is slightly upward-sloping. In the model, the unconditional yield curve is
approximately flat. That is consistent with the yield curves in each regime shown
in Figure 2 in combination with the relative rarity of regime 3, which has a strongly
upward-sloping curve. While the model cannot quite match the unconditional slope
in the data, it is progress relative to the strongly downward-sloping curve in the
benchmark model.

Importantly, even a flat real curve makes it much easier to generate a realistic nominal
yield curve while satisfying the Duffee (2018b) moment, that is, the contribution of
inflation to the overall variation in nominal yields. Indeed, that is what we observe in
the panels on the right of Figure 4. The top right plot shows that the model generates
a nominal bond yield curve that is upward-sloping and consistent with the data, while
the bottom right shows that the model's implication for nominal bond's inflation risk
is in line with the data. In contrast, the reference model generates a steeper nominal
curve than the one observed in the data and the contribution of inflation to yield
variation is close to 100%, which is strongly counter-factual.

                                          22
The bottom left plot of Figure 4 shows the model's implications for forward equity
yields. The evidence about the shape of this curve has been the subject of some
controversy in the literature, but the most recent evidence, both data and model-
based, is pointing towards mildly upward-sloping curve (Bansal, Miller, Song, and
Yaron, 2020 and Giglio, Kelly, and Kozak, 2020). In our model the curve is upward-
sloping as well, but more flat. The relatively large magnitude of transitory shocks
make longer-horizon equity relatively less risky than in the Bansal and Yaron (2004)
model (see also Belo, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein, 2015 for a similar effect coming
from leverage). In fact, the reference model features a too steeply upward-sloping
equity yield curve.

Figure 5 parses the real bond and forward equity yield curves by regimes and compares
to the data. We see that qualitatively the model captures forward equity yields
well also across regimes, with a strongly downward-sloping curve in regime 3. The
difference between the curves across regimes 1 and 2 is smaller in the model than in
the data. For real yields, the data features slightly upward-sloping curves in both
regime 1 and 2, whereas the model curves are either slightly downward-sloping or
flat. Quantitatively, however, the model is relatively close to the data. Regime 3 has
an upward-sloping curve both in the model and the data. Overall, the model does a
substantially better job than the reference models of matching these term structures.

Table 6 shows that the model also does a good job accounting for the standard uncon-
ditional moments of equity returns, such as the equity risk premium and volatility,
which are computed by averaging over a simulation of length 100,000. In particu-
lar, equity returns are substantially more volatile than dividend growth. In fact, the
price-dividend ratio is volatile and persistent, as in the data. The final rows of the
table shows that the price-dividend ratio in the model indeed is negatively related to
future excess market returns, as is widely documented in prior studies (e.g., Cochrane,
1994). Thus, the risk premium in the model is counter-cyclical as in the data.

                                          23
The model also accounts for the failure of the expectations hypothesis for nominal
bonds (Campbell and Shiller, 1991). In particular, Figure 6 gives the slope coefficient
and R2 of regressions of annual excess bond returns on the lagged spread between the
log yield of 10- and 1-yr nominal bonds. The coefficients are positive and increasing
with bond maturity and quite similar to the data. The same is the case for the re-
gression R2 . The time-variation in conditional risk premiums is quantitatively mainly
driven by the disaster regime 3, which features high conditional risk premiums.




5    Conclusion

Financial assets exhibit high single-horizon risk premiums, and modest term struc-
tures of these premiums (e.g., Backus, Chernov, and Zin, 2014). The term structure
evidence suggests that persistence of the conditional moments of consumption and
dividend growth cannot be as high as usually calibrated in the literature, at least
without offsetting effects that render the pricing kernel less autocorrelated. We use
consumption data to estimate a model of consumption dynamics that allows for time-
varying conditional volatility of permanent and transitory shocks to the economy.
We find that disasters are driven mainly by transitory shocks, while there are low
frequency regimes that determine whether permanent or transitory shocks drive ex-
pected consumption growth. The permanent component of consumption dominates
in the sample from the late 1990s and on, with the exception of the global financial
and Covid crises.

This model can account for flat or modestly upward-sloping term structures of real
and nominal bonds, as well as zero-coupon dividend claims, as observed in the data,
along with the change in the stock-bond correlation that occurred in the late 1990s.
Risk premiums in this model are driven by a bad state that we associate with disasters.


                                          24
The model differs from existing models in the literature in that there are no highly
persistent components that generate substantial risk. Risks come mainly from the
relatively short-lived regime 3. In this regime, real bonds are risky as transitory
shocks dominate the economy, which allows us to account for the Duffee (2018b)
moment. Existing models struggle with capturing this behavior of equity and bonds
in one unifying framework.

While our model does surprisingly well at matching a wide set of moments existing
models cannot jointly match, our calibration also exposes shortcomings. For instance,
the unconditional real-term structure is not sufficiently upward-sloping relative to the
data, and the difference between the forward equity yield curves in regimes 1 and 2 are
not as wide as in the data. That suggests that further extensions of our framework to
other forms of preferences or more sophisticated cash flow dynamics may be a fruitful
avenue of research.




                                          25
References
Alvarez, Fernando, and Urban Jermann, 2004, Using asset prices to measure the cost
  of business cycles, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1223­1256.

          , 2005, Using asset prices to measure the persistence of the marginal utility
  of wealth, Econometrica 73, 1977­2016.

Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Stanley Zin, 2014, Sources of entropy in repre-
  sentative agent models, Journal of Finance 69, 51­99.

Backus, David K., Nina Boyarchenko, and Mikhail Chernov, 2018, Term structures
  of asset prices and returns, Journal of Financial Economics 129, 1­23.

Baele, Lieven, Geert Bekaert, and Koen Inghelbrecht, 2010, The Determinants of
  Stock and Bond Return Comovements, The Review of Financial Studies 23, 2374­
  2428.

Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2010, Long run risks, the macroeconomy,
  and asset prices, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 100, 542­
  546.

          , 2012, An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks model for asset prices,
  Critical Finance Review 1, 183­221.

Bansal, Ravi, Shane Miller, Dongho Song, and Amir Yaron, 2020, The term structure
  of equity risk premia, Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming.

Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2013, A long-run risks explanation of pre-
  dictability puzzles in bond and currency markets, Review of Financial Studies 26,
  1­33.




                                           26
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution
  of asset pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481­1509.

Bansal, Ravi, and H. Zhou, 2002, Term structure of interest rates with regime shifts,
  Journal of Finance 57, 1997­2043.

Barro, Robert, 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 121, 823­867.

Belo, Frederico, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2015, Dividend
  dynamics and the term structure of dividend strips, The Journal of Finance 70,
  1115­1160.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Jean-Paul L'Huillier, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2013, News, noise,
  and fluctuations: An empirical exploration, American Economic Review 103, 3045­
  3070.

Campbell, John, 1986, Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 785­803.

          , and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: a consumption-based ex-
  planation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107,
  205­251.

Campbell, John, and Gregory Mankew, 1987, Are output fluctuations transitory?,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 857­880.

Campbell, John, Carolin Pfluger, and Luis Viceira, 2020, Macroeconomic drivers of
  bond and equity risks, Journal of Political Economy 128, 3148­3185.

Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1991, Yield spreads and interest rate movements:
  A bird's eye view, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495­514.


                                         27
        , and Luis Viceira, 2009, Understanding inflation-indexed bond markets,
  Brookings Papers about Economic Activity pp. 79­120.

Campbell, John, Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira, 2017, Inflation bets or deflation
  hedges? the changing risks of nominal bonds, Critical Finance Review 6, 263­301.

Chernov, Mikhail, and Philippe Mueller, 2012, The term structure of inflation expec-
  tations, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 367­394.

Cochrane, John, 1988, How big is the random walk in GNP?, Journal of Political
  Economy 96, 893­920.

Cochrane, John H., 1994, Permanent and transitory components of gnp and stock
  prices, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 241­265.

David, Alexander, and Pietro Veronesi, 2013, What ties return volatilities to price
  valuations and fundamentals?, Journal of Political Economy 121, 682­746.

Duffee, Greg, 2018a, Expected inflation, real rates, and stock-bond comovement,
  working paper.

Duffee, Gregory R., 2018b, Expected inflation and other determinants of treasury
  yields, Journal of Finance 73, 2139­2180.

Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, risk aversion, and the
  temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns: a theoretical framework,
  Econometrica 57, 937­969.

Fang, Xiang, Yang Liu, and Nikolai Roussanov, 2021, Getting to the core: Inflation
  risks within and across asset classes, working paper.

Giglio, Stefano, Bryan Kelly, and Serhiy Kozak, 2020, Equity term structures without
  dividend strips data, Manuscript.

                                         28
Gomez-Cram, Roberto, and Amir Yaron, 2021, How important are inflation expecta-
  tions for the nominal yield curve?, Review of Financial Studies 34, 985­1045.

Gurkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright, 2007, The U.S. Treasury yield
  curve: 1961 to the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291­2304.

Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2010, The tips yield
  curve and inflation compensation, Americal Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  2, 70­92.

Hassler, Michael, and Roberto Marfe, 2016, Disaster recovery and the term structure
  of dividend strips, Journal of Financial Economics 122, 116­134.

Hayek, Friedrich, 1933, Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle (Jonathan Cape: Lon-
  don, UK).

Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative
  procedures for inference and measurement, The Review of Financial Studies 5,
  357?386.

Jones, Christopher, and Sungjune Pyun, 2021, Asset prices and time-varying persis-
  tence of consumption growth, Manuscript.

Kaltenbrunner, Georg, and Lars Lochstoer, 2010, Long-run risk through consumption
  smoothing, Review of Financial Studies 23, 3141 ­ 3189.

Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles Nelson, 1999, State space models with regime switching
  (MIT Press).

Koijen, Ralph, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2017, The cross-section
  and time series of stock and bond returns, Journal of Monetary Economics 88,
  50­69.


                                        29
Lettau, Martin, and Jessica Wachter, 2011, The term structures of equity and interest
  rates, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 90­113.

Liu, Yunting, 2020, Productivity risk and the dynamics of stock and bond returns,
  working paper.

Lucas, Robert, 1977, Understanding business cycles, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  on Public Policy 5, 7­29.

Nakamura, Emi, Dmitriy Sergeyev, and Jon Steinsson, 2017, Growth-rate and uncer-
  tainty shocks in consumption: Cross-country evidence, American Economic Jour-
  nal: Macroeconomics 9, 1­39.

Nakamura, Emi, Jon Steinsson, Robert Barro, and Jose Ursua, 2013, Crises and
  recoveries in an empirical model of consumption disasters, American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 5, 35­74.

Piazzesi, Monika, 2014, "Monetary policy drivers of bond and equity risks" by John
  Campbell, Carolin Pfluger and Luis Viceira, Discussion at NBER Asset Pricing
  Meeting during Summer Institute.

       , and Martin Schneider, 2006, Equilibrium yield curves, in Daron Acemoglu,
  Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, ed.: NBER Macroeconomics Annual (MIT
  Press: Cambridge MA).

Schorfheide, Frank, Dongho Song, and Amir Yaron, 2018, Identifying long-run risks:
  A bayesian mixed-frequency approach, Econometrica 86, 617­654.

Sims, Christopher, Daniel Waggoner, and Tao Zha, 2008, Methods for inference in
  large multiple-equation Markov-switching models, Journal of Econometrics 146,
  255­274.



                                         30
Song, Dongho, 2017, Bond market exposures to macroeconomic and monetary policy
  risks, Review of Financial Studies 20, 2761­2817.

van Binsbergen, Jules, Michael Brandt, and Ralph Koijen, 2012, On the timing and
  pricing of dividends, American Economic Review 102, 1596­1618.

Wachter, Jessica, 2013, Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock
  market volatility?, The Journal of Finance 68, 987­1035.




                                          31
                                 Figure 1: Estimated states



    1

   0.5

    0
         1950      1960        1970        1980        1990         2000        2010        2020

    1

   0.5

    0
         1950      1960        1970        1980        1990         2000        2010        2020

    1

   0.5

    0
         1950      1960        1970        1980        1990         2000        2010        2020

    2
    0
   -2
         1950      1960        1970        1980        1990         2000        2010        2020


N otes: The plots show the filtering probabilities of each regime and expected consumption growth
through the sample, along with 95% confidence bands. The grey bars represent NBER recessions.
The first regime is the "permanent" regime, the second regime is the "transitory" regime, and the
third regime is the "disaster" regime. The data frequency is quarterly and the sample is 1947:Q2-
2020:Q4.




                                               32
               Figure 2: Model-implied asset pricing conditional moments


    Real bond-consumption claim correlation                           Real bond yields
   1                                                    2

  0.5
                                                        0
   0
                                                        -2
 -0.5

   -1                                                   -4
          2       4        6        8       10                  2      4        6          8     10


               Implied time-series of real bond-consumption claim correlation
   1

  0.5

   0

 -0.5

   -1
        1950       1960         1970        1980         1990         2000          2010       2020

N otes: The top left plot shows the conditional correlation by regime between returns to real bonds
and the consumption claim. The top left shows the real term structure of yields in each regime. In
the top plots, all values are reported setting xt = 0. The bottom plot shows the time-series of the
conditional correlation between returns to the consumption claim and the 5-year real zero-coupon
bond. Grey bars represent NBER recessions.




                                                 33
                 Figure 3: Model-implied stock-bond return correlation

   1


 0.5


   0


 -0.5


  -1
        1950      1960         1970         1980        1990         2000         2010        2020


N otes: We compute rolling correlation estimates between market returns and nominal bond returns
of 5-year maturity over the rolling windows of five years (Data - nominal bond). We compare
with our model-implied correlation between market returns and returns of 5-year maturity for both
nominal bond (Model - nominal bond) and real bond (Model - real bond), respectively.




                                               34
                  Figure 4: Model-implied asset pricing sample moments


    2.5
                                                           8
      2                                                    7

    1.5                                                    6
                                                           5
            2        4       6        8       10                 2        4       6        8       10


      2
                                                        100
      0
                                                          50
     -2
                                                           0
            2        4       6        8       10                 2        4       6        8       10


N otes:0 The top plots show average real and nominal yield8 curves. We compute the sample averages
of the zero-coupon Treasury (1971:Q1 to 2020:Q4) from6Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) and
TIPS (1999:Q1 to 2020:Q4) from Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2010), respectively. For the TIPS,
    -0.2 higher than two years are available. We discard
maturities                                                4 the initial four years and rely on the post-
2003 TIPS data to alleviate any concern regarding the credibility of the TIPS data. We concatenate
the TIPS data with the estimated real rates provided by   2 Chernov and Mueller (2012) (1971:Q3 to
    -0.4 for selective maturities to obtain long-sample averages of the real bond term structure.
2002:Q4)
                                                          0
Red triangles represent the average yield curves in the Bansal    and Shaliastovich (2013) model. In
the bottom 2left plot,
                     4 we show
                             6 sample8 average
                                             10 the synthetic 2           4
                                                                 equity strip      6 data 8
                                                                                yield              10by
                                                                                            provided
Giglio, Kelly, and Kozak (2020) from 1975:Q4 to 2020:Q3. The pattern is similar if we use the
traded equity strip yield data from Bansal, Miller, Song, and Yaron (2020) which are available from
2005:Q1 to 2016:Q4. Finally, in the bottom right plot we show the inflation risk variation ratio
estimates provided by Duffee (2018b), which are available for the maturities of 1, 5, and 10 years,
respectively. We take the average of various different values of estimates in his Tables 1-3. Inflation
variation ratio is computed in (A-81). Red circles represent implications of the Bansal, Kiku, and
Yaron (2012) model.




                                                   35
 Figure 5: Model-implied asset pricing conditional moments with data comparison




       2                                             2


       0                                             0


      -2                                             -2

            2       4      6       8      10              2      4       6      8      10


     30                                             30

     20                                             20

     10                                             10

       0                                             0

     -10                                            -10
            2       4      6       8      10              2      4       6      8      10

N otes: The data for the left plots in this figure are described in the legend for Figure 4. The
averages are calculated for each regime by taking the average of the product of the yield and the
respective regime's filtering probabilities and plotted with 95% confidence bands. The model-based
yields displayed in the right plots are given for each regime assuming xt = 0.




                                               36
                         Figure 6: Excess bond return predictability




N otes: Excess nominal bond return is defined as the one-year holding period nominal bond return
in excess of nominal one-year interest rate. We regress excess nominal bond returns of maturities
2 to 9 years on the nominal bond yield spread between maturities 10-year and 1-year, respectively.
The left plot shows the slope coefficients from these regressions, while the right plot shows the R2 's.
Model moments are averaged over a simulation of length 100,000.




                                                  37
              Table 1: Consumption autocorrelation before and after 1998

                            Full sample               Sample excluding recessions
                      (1)                 (2)            (1)             (2)

         0         0.0039             0.0001            0.0058              0.0002
                  (0.0011)           (0.0005)          (0.0008)            (0.0005)

         1         0.0040                               0.0053
                  (0.0014)                             (0.0014)

         0         0.4424             0.4560            0.2463              0.3460
                  (0.1288)           (0.1317)          (0.1035)            (0.1014)

         1       -0.4411            -0.4541           -0.3898             -0.4848
                 (0.1605)           (0.1608)          (0.1585)            (0.1481)

         R2         0.0203            0.0191            0.0397              0.0286


N otes: The table shows the regression estimates from the regression in Equation (1). On the right
side, business cycle downturns are excluded from the sample as explained in the main text. COVID
period is excluded from all regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The 0
estimate gives the autocorrelation coefficient in the post-1998 sample, while the 1 estimate gives
the difference between the autocorrelation in the pre- vs. post-1998 samples. The specification in
the column labeled (1) estimates the full regression, while the specification in the column labeled
(2) is run using demeaned consumption growth and setting 1 = 0, as explained in the main text.
One asterisk denotes significance at the 10% level, two at the 5% level, and three at the 1% level.
The data is real-time quarterly real PCE data, from 1947:Q2 to 2019:Q4.




                                                38
                      Table 2: Estimated parameters of consumption

                                         MLE                     [5%,              95%]
                                    Consumption growth, c
                     µc                  0.0076                  [0.0056,     0.0094]
                                         0.9414                  [0.8486,     0.9879]
                     p (1)               0.0009                  [0.0008,     0.0019]
                     p (2)               0.0008                  [0.0004,     0.0019]
                     p (3)               0.0012                  [0.0009,     0.0065]
                      (1)                0.0030                  [0.0025,     0.0036]
                      (2)                0.0073                  [0.0050,     0.0108]
                      (3)                0.0735                  [0.0509,     0.1289]
                                   Transition probabilities, P
                                                                                   
                               0.9747            0.0253                 0
                             [0.9213,0.9922]   [0.0078,0.0787]       [-,-]         
                               0.0156            0.9515            0.0300          
                          
                             [0.0024,0.0558]   [0.8983,0.9778]   [0.0128,0.0642]   
                                                                                   
                                   0             0.3079            0.6921
                                 [-,-]         [0.2244,0.3861]   [0.6139,0.7756]


N otes: The table gives the maximum likelihood estimates (MLE) for the parameters governing
the consumption process, along with the 5% and 95% confidence bands. The data frequency is
quarterly. The estimated transition probability matrix gives the 5% and 95% confidence bands in
brackets underneath the MLE. We order the regimes according to the transitory shock volatilities,
and restrict the off-diagonal corner elements in the transition probability matrix to equal zero. The
sample is 1947:Q2-2020:Q4.




      Table 3: Correlation between realized and expected consumption growth

                                                          St = 1            St = 2        St = 3
           Corr(ct+1 , xt+1 |St+1 , xt )                   0.10              -0.42        -0.98

N otes: The table reports the conditional correlation between shocks to realized and expected con-
sumption growth within the model for each regime. The sample is 1947:Q2-2020:Q4.




                                                    39
                                Table 4: Calibrated parameters

                          Dividend growth                Inflation
                          µd     0.003                 µ          0.0085
                                 4.0                              0.9985
                          d,p    8.0                   ,p        -0.01
                          d,     8.0                   ,         -0.04
                          d      0.0                              0.0

N otes: We report the calibrated quarterly frequency parameter values for dividend growth and
inflation.




                    Table 5: Dividend growth and inflation moments

                  Dividend growth                        Data              Model
                  Mean (%)                               2.61              1.43
                  Standard deviation (%)                 13.02             11.98
                  Autocorrelation                        -0.26             0.03
                  Inflation                              Data              Model
                  Mean (%)                                2.52             3.03
                  Standard deviation (%)                  2.13             1.54
                  Autocorrelation                         0.69             0.89

N otes: Both data and model-implied dividend growth and inflation are aggregated to annual fre-
quency. Then, we compute the sample averages, standard deviations, and first-order autocorrelations
of annual dividend growth and inflation, respectively. The data sample ranges from 1947 to 2020.




                                                40
                             Table 6: Standard equity moments

                                                                               Data         Model
                             Equity premium                                    7.48         7.32
  Excess returns             Volatility                                        15.85        21.11
                             Sharpe ratio                                      0.47         0.35
                             Mean                                               3.49         3.07
  Log pd ratio               Volatility                                         0.43         0.19
                             AR(1) coefficient                                  0.97         0.92
                             1-year excess return on log pd ratio              -0.09         -0.13
  Predictability
                             R2 value                                          0.06          0.02

N otes: Excess stock return is defined as the one-quarter holding period stock return in excess of
one-quarter risk-free rate. All excess return moments are annualized. The equity premium is the
average sample return in the data and the unconditional average excess equity return in the model.
Volatility refers to the standard deviation of excess returns, while the Sharpe ratio is the ratio of
the mean excess return to its standard deviation. The log price-dividend (pd) ratio is calculated by
summing the dividends over the last year. In the predictability regression, we regress one-year excess
stock return on the lagged log pd-ratio and report the slope coefficient and the R2 . The sample is
1947:Q2-2020:Q4. Model moments are averaged over a simulation of length 100,000.




                                                 41
A       Robustness of estimation to alternative consump-
        tion data
Since our goal is to estimate the dynamics of consumption growth as perceived by investors, we use
real-time consumption data. However, historically, a number of papers use the ex post revised real
per capita nondurables + services consumption data from NIPA. In Table A-1 we show that there
is a significant change in the autocorrelation of consumption growth in 1998 also using these data
when estimating the regression in Equation (1). The results are similar to those obtained using the
real-time PCE dataset.

In Table A-2 we show the maximum likelihood estimates that obtain when using these data. This
alternative data yields similar overall dynamics. In particular, the first regime features relatively
more of the permanent component, regime 2 reflects a greater share of the transitory component,
and regime 3 is a disaster regime. Again, the shift between regime 1 and regime 2 happens in the
later 1990s, while regime 3 picks up disasters like the Covid-crisis (the filtering probabilities are not
shown). That said, the volatility coefficients are somewhat smaller relative to our main estimation
and the parameter and regime uncertainty is larger.



B       Estimation of the regime-switching model
Consider the state-space model

                             Yt      = D(St ) + Z (St )t + vt ,       vt  N (0, U )                      (A-1)
                             t       = T (St )t-1 + R(St ) t ,        t  N (0, (St )),

where t is the latent state. See Chapter 5 of Kim and Nelson (1999) for detailed descriptions.
      i           i
Given t -1|t-1 , Pt-1|t-1 , for i, j,  {1, ..., N },

Forecasting
               (i,j )                  i
             t|t-1        = T (St = j )t -1|t-1                                                          (A-2)
               (i,j )
             Pt|t-1       = T (St = j )Pti-1|t-1 T (St = j ) + R(St = j )(St = j )R(St = j )
               (i,j )                                        (i,j )
              et|t-1      = Yt - D(St = j ) - Z (St = j )t|t-1
               (i,j )                       (i,j )
             Ft|t-1       = Z (St = j )Pt|t-1 Z (St = j ) + U.


Updating
                                                                            -1
                 (i,j )           (i,j )     (i,j )                (i,j )         (i,j )
               t|t        = t|t-1 + Pt|t-1 Z (St = j )            Ft|t-1         et|t-1                  (A-3)
                                                                            -1
                 (i,j )           (i,j )     (i,j )                (i,j )                      (i,j )
              Pt|t        = Pt|t-1 - Pt|t-1 Z (St = j )           Ft|t-1           Z (St = j )Pt|t-1 .



                                                       42
Each iteration of the Kalman filter produces an N -fold increase in the number of cases to consider.
It is necessary to introduce some approximations to make the above Kalman filter operable. The
key is to collapse terms in the right way at the right time. Therefore, it remains to reduce the N × N
              (i,j ) (i,j )                  j      j
posteriors t|t , Pt|t into N posteriors t     |t , Pt|t . Note that

                                                N
                                                i=1   P r(St-1 = i, St = j |Yt )E t |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt
    E t |St = j, Yt               =                                                                                                                           (A-4)
                                                                     P r(St = j |Yt )
                                           N
                                                     (i,j )                                                             (i,j )       P r(St-1 = i, St = j |Yt )
                                  =              t            E t |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt ,                         t              =
                                           i=1
                                                                                                                                          P r(St = j |Yt )
                                           N
                        j                            (i,j ) (i,j )
                        t |t      =              t         t|t .
                                           i=1

The variance of t conditional on St = j, Yt could be derived in the following way:
                                                                        N
       j          j                                                              (i,j )          j          j
E (t - t |t )(t - t|t ) |St = j, Yt                                 =         t           E (t - t |t )(t - t|t ) |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt (
                                                                                                                                        .A-5)
                                                                        i=1

Note that

                j         j
         E (t - t|t )(t - t|t ) |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt                                                                                                         (A-6)

                                 (i,j )
                                 j               (i,j )j                               (i,j )        (i,j )
            = E (t - t|t + t|t - t|t )(t - t|t + t|t - t|t ) |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt

                                 (i,j )                   (i,j )                                                 j           j       (i,j )          (i,j )
            = E (t - t|t )(t - t|t ) |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt                                                    + (t|t - t|t )(t|t - t|t )

                                       (i,j )             j                                     (i,j )
              + 2E (t - t|t )|St = j, St-1 = i, Yt (t|t - t |t ) .


Hence,
              N
                      (i,j )
Ptj|t   =           t                 j
                               E (t - t          j
                                        |t )(t - t|t ) |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt                                                                                       (A-7)
              i=1
              N
                      (i,j )                         (i,j )                   (i,j )                                                j           (i,j )
                                                                                                                                                j              (i,j )
        =           t           E (t - t|t )(t - t|t ) |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt                                                     + (t|t - t|t )(t|t - t|t )
              i=1
                    N
                           (i,j )                          (i,j )            j                                 (i,j )
              +2          t         E (t - t|t )|St = j, St-1 = i, Yt (t|t - t |t )
                    i=1
                                                                        =0
              N
                      (i,j )                          (i,j )                  (i,j )
                                                                                j            j                                                 (i,j )          (i,j )
        =           t           E (t - t|t )(t - t|t ) |St = j, St-1 = i, Yt + (t |t - t|t )(t|t - t|t )
              i=1
                                                                                 (i,j )
                                                                            =Pt|t

              N
                      (i,j )      (i,j )      j            j       (i,j )                   (i,j )
        =           t           Pt|t       + (t |t - t|t )(t|t - t|t ) .
              i=1



                                                                                          43
Merging
                           N
          j                i=1   P r(St-1 = i, St = j |Yt ) (i,j )
          t|t     =                                         t|t                                                               (A-8)
                                   P r(St = j |Yt )
                           N
                                 P r(St-1 = i, St = j |Yt )  (i,j )       (i,j )       (i,j )
          Ptj|t   =        i=1
                                                            Pt|t + tj
                                                                     |t - t|t
                                                                                 j
                                                                                 t|t - t|t                         .
                                   P r(St = j |Yt )


Finally, the likelihood density of observation Yt is given by,

Likelihood
                      N   N
  l(Yt |Y1:t-1 ) =              f (Yt |St-1 = i, St = j, Y1:t-1 )P r(St-1 = i, St = j |Yt-1 )                                 (A-9)
                     j =1 i=1
                                                                       1
                                                                      -2                                      -1
                                                -n           (i,j )                  1 (i,j )        (i,j )         (i,j )
  f (Yt |St-1 = i, St = j, Y1:t-1 ) = (2 )       2    det   Ft|t-1         exp -       e            Ft|t-1         et|t-1      .
                                                                                     2 t|t-1



C       An illustration with log utility preferences
For ease of illustration, we assume homoscedasticity
                                                                                        2
                           ct+1 = µc + xt +           p,t+1   +   ,t+1 ,     p    N (0, p ),                                 (A-10)
                                                                                             2
                              xt+1 = xt +  p,t+1 + ( - 1) ,t+1 ,                       N (0,   ),
                              t+1 = µ +  (t - µ ) + ,p p,t+1 + ,                        ,t+1 ,

and consider log utility preference implying the following log stochastic discount factor

                                                mt+1 = ln  - ct+1 .                                                          (A-11)

In this environment, the unexpected component of the return on consumption claim is

                                       rc,t+1 - Et rc,t+1 = ct+1 - Et ct+1                                                   (A-12)

because the log price to consumption ratio is constant.



C.1      Covariance between returns on a real bond and a stock

The n-maturity log real bond price is
                                                  (n)
                                                 qt     = qn,0 + qn,1 xt                                                     (A-13)

and the return on the n-maturity real bond is
                                                              (n-1)        (n)
                                               rn,t+1  qt+1           - qt .                                                 (A-14)


                                                              44
We can deduce that its unexpected component is

                               rn,t+1 - Et rn,t+1 = qn-1,1 xt+1 - Et xt+1 .                          (A-15)

From (A-12) and (A-15), we can express the sign of the conditional covariance as

                   sign covt (rn,t+1 , rc,t+1 ) = sign qn-1,1 · sign covt (ct+1 , xt+1 ) ,           (A-16)
                                                   = -sign covt (ct+1 , xt+1 ) ,
                                                   = sign( - 1),

where the relative contribution of permanent and transitory components is introduced via
                                                              2
                                                        1 -  
                                                   =        · 2.                                     (A-17)
                                                             p



C.2      Covariance between returns on a nominal bond and a
         stock

The n-maturity log nominal bond price is
                                          $,(n)      $      $         $
                                         qt       = qn,0 + qn,1 xt + qn,2 t .                        (A-18)

From the Euler equation
                                $,(n)                                      $,(n-1)
                              qt        = ln Et exp(mt+1 - t+1 + qt+1                ) ,             (A-19)

we can solve for

                         $               1 - n-1              $                 1 - n
                                                                                      -1
                        qn -1,1 = -              ,           qn -1,2 = -                 .           (A-20)
                                           1-                                    1 - 

The unexpected component of the return on the n-maturity nominal bond is
                 $            $        $                       $
                rn,t +1 - Et rn,t+1 = qn-1,1 xt+1 - Et xt+1 + qn-1,2 t+1 - Et t+1 .                  (A-21)

From (A-12), (A-20), and (A-21), we can express the conditional covariance as
                   $                    $                            $
            covt (rn,t +1 , rc,t+1 ) = qn-1,1 covt (ct+1 , xt+1 ) + qn-1,2 covt (ct+1 , t+1 )        (A-22)
                                                                                             1-n-1
                                        1 -   2
                                                              2                             1-  
                                            · 2 - 1 - ,p + , ·   ·                             n-1
                                             p                p2
                                                                                            1-1-
                                                      1-n-1
                                                             
                                                                       
                                                                     1-
                                    1 - , · [ 1- ] ·               1-n-1        
                                                                     1-
                                                                                 ·  - 1.
                                                                                
                                                                   n-1
                                                                1-
                                                                 1-
                                                                                
                                       1 + ,p ·                1-n-1
                                                                 1-




                                                          45
For ease of expression, we define
                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                     1-n
                                  1 - , · [ 1-  ] · (,  )                                             1-
                                                                                                        

        (, , ,p ; ,  ) =                                             ,       (,  ) =                1-n-1
                                                                                                                      (A-23)
                                     1 + ,p · (,  )                                                   1-

to show that the sign of the conditional covariance is
                               $
                   sign covt (rn,t +1 , rc,t+1 ) = sign (, , ,p ; ,  ) ·  - 1 .                                       (A-24)

Two remarks can be made. First, when inflation has no exposures to consumption shocks, i.e.,
,p = , = 0, then (A-24) is identical to (A-16) as (, = 0, ,p = 0; ,  ) = 1. Second, we
find that j  {p,  },

                                            (, , ,p ; ,  )
                                                           < 0.                                                       (A-25)
                                              ,j

Thus, holding  constant, (A-24) is a decreasing function of ,j .



D      Model solution with recursive preferences
This section provides approximate analytical solutions for the equilibrium asset prices.



D.1      Exogenous dynamics

The joint dynamics of consumption and dividend growth, and inflation are

  ct+1 = µc + xt +    p,t+1   +   ,t+1 ,                                                                              (A-26)
                                                                                                             2
  dt+1 = µd + xt + d,p (St+1 )        p,t+1   + d, (St+1 )        ,t+1   +   d,t+1 ,       d,t+1       N (0, d )
                                                                                                                      2
    t+1 = µ +  (t - µ ) + ,p (St+1 )                p,t+1   + , (St+1 )      ,t+1      +   ,t+1 ,       ,t+1    N (0,   )
      xt = xt-1 +     p,t+1   + ( - 1)     ,t+1 ,         ,t+1    N (0,  (St+1 )2 ),           p,t+1     N (0, p (St+1 )2 )

and the transition matrix is given by
                                                                          
                                       p11          p12     1 - p11 - p12
                                  P =  p21          p22     1 - p21 - p22  .                                          (A-27)
                                       p31          p32     1 - p31 - p32



D.2      Derivation of the approximate analytical solutions

The Euler equation for the economy is

                                     1 = Et [exp (mt+1 + rc,t+1 )]                                                    (A-28)


                                                            46
where the log stochastic discount factor is
                                                    
                               mt+1 =  ln  -         ct+1 + ( - 1)rc,t+1 ,                    (A-29)
                                                    
zc,t is the log price to consumption ratio and rc,t+1 is the log return on the consumption claim

                               rc,t+1        = 0,c + 1,c zc,t+1 - zc,t + ct+1 .               (A-30)

Derivation of (A-28) follows Bansal and Zhou (2002), which make repeated use of the law of iterated
expectations and log-linearization.

  1   = E E [exp (mt+1 + rc,t+1 ) | St+1 ] | St                                               (A-31)
           2
      =          Pij E exp (mt+1 + rc,t+1 ) | St+1 = j, St = i
          j =1
           2
                                                       1
  0   =        Pij E mt+1 + rc,t+1 | St+1 = j, St = i + V ar mt+1 + rc,t+1 | St+1 = j, St = i      .
          j =1
                                                       2

The first line uses the law of iterated expectations; the second line uses the definition of Markov
chain; and the third line relies on the log-normality assumption and applies log-linearization (i.e.,
exp(B ) - 1  B ).



D.3       Linearization parameters
           1-pl
Let p
    ¯j = 2- pl -pj . The linearization parameters are determined endogenously by the following system
of equations
                                                    2
                                        z
                                        ¯c     =          p
                                                          ¯j A0,c (j )                        (A-32)
                                                   j =1
                                                     exp(¯zc )
                                    1,c        =                                              (A-33)
                                                   1 + exp(¯ zc )
                                    0,c        =   log(1 + exp(¯  zc )) - 1,c z
                                                                              ¯c .            (A-34)

The solution is determined numerically by iteration until reaching a fixed point of z
                                                                                    ¯c .



D.4       Real consumption claim

Conjecture that the log price to consumption ratio follows

                                   zc,t (St ) = A0,c (St ) + A1,c (St )xt .                   (A-35)




                                                             47
From (A-26), (A-30), and (A-35), we can express the return on consumption claim by

     rc,t+1 = 0,c + 1,c A0,c (St+1 ) - A0,c (St ) + µc + (1,c A1,c (St+1 ) - A1,c (St ) + 1)xt        (A-36)
              + (1 + 1,c A1,c (St+1 )) p,t+1 + (1 + 1,c ( - 1)A1,c (St+1 )) ,t+1 .

Using (A-36), we can re-express the log SDF (A-29) by

      mt+1 =  ln  + ( - 1) 0,c - A0,c (St ) + 1,c A0,c (St+1 ) - µc                                   (A-37)
               + ( - 1)(1,c A1,c (St+1 ) - A1,c (St )) -  xt
               + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (St+1 ) -        p,t+1   + ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (St+1 ) -        ,t+1 .

The solutions for A0,c and A1,c that describe the dynamics of the price-consumption ratio are
determined from (A-31) which are
                                                                                1
                                                                         (1 -   )
                                                                                    
                           A1,c (1)
                                                                  -1            1
                           A1,c (2)  =           I3 - 1,c P              (1 -   )
                                                                                                      (A-38)
                           A1,c (3)                                             1
                                                                         (1 -   )


                                     
                                                              1            1                  2            
                                          ln  + 0,c + (1 -     )µc + 2 1 -  + 1,c A1,c (1)        p (1)2
                                                                                              2
                                                              +       1
                                                                2 1 -  + 1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1)      (1)2 
                                                                                                       
                                  
  A0,c (1)                                                                                    2
                                                                                                       
                                                              1            1
                               -1  ln  + 0,c + (1 -
                                  
                                                               )µc + 2 1 -  + 1,c A1,c (2)      p (2)2 
  A0,c (2)  =       I3 - 1,c P                                                                         .
                                                                                                       
                                 P                                                            2
  A0,c (3)                        
                                                              +       1
                                                                2 1 -  + 1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2)      (2)2  
                                                              1            1                  2
                                   ln  +  + (1 -
                                         0,c                   )µc + 2 1 -  + 1,c A1,c (3)      p (3)2 
                                                                                              2
                                                              +       1
                                                                2 1 -  + 1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3)      (3) 2

                                                                                                    (A-39)



D.5       Real bond prices

Conjecture that bn,t depends on the regime St and xt ,

                                   bn,t = bn,0 (St ) + bn,1 (St )xt .                                 (A-40)

Exploit the law of iterated expectations

                          bn,t = ln Et E [exp(mt+1 + bn-1,t+1 )|St+1 ]

and log-linearization to solve for bn,t
                    3
                                                        1
           bn,t         Pij E [mt+1 + bn-1,t+1 |St+1 ] + V ar[mt+1 + bn-1,t+1 |St+1 ] .               (A-41)
                   j =1
                                                        2




                                                     48
The solution to (A-40) is
                                                                                              
        bn,1 (1)          bn-1,1 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1)                ( - 1)A1,c (1) + 
       bn,1 (2)  = P  bn-1,1 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2)  -  ( - 1)A1,c (2) +                            (A-42)
        bn,1 (3)          bn-1,1 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3)                ( - 1)A1,c (3) + 
                                                                          
        bn,0 (1)         ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (1) - µc
       bn,0 (2)  =   ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (2) - µc 
        bn,0 (3)         ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (3) - µc
                                                             
                            bn-1,0 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (1)
                    + P  bn-1,0 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (2) 
                            bn-1,0 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (3)
                                                                          2 2
                                                                                  
                            1
                              (   - 1)  1,c A1,c (1) -  + bn - 1 , 1 (1)    p (1)
                           2                                              2 2
                    + P 1   2 ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) -  + bn-1,1 (2) p (2) 
                                                                                  
                            1                                             2 2
                              ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3) -  + bn-1,1 (3) p            (3)
                           2                                                          2 2
                                                                                               
                            1
                            2 ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1) -  + bn-1,1 (1)( - 1)  (1)
                           1                                                          2 2
                    + P 2     ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2) -  + bn-1,1 (2)( - 1)               (2) 
                                                                                               
                            1                                                         2  2
                            2 ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3) -  + bn-1,1 (3)( - 1)  (3)

with the initial condition b0,0 (i) = 0 and b0,1 (i) = 0 for i  {1, 2, 3} . The real yield of the maturity
                   r       1
n-period bond is yn,t = -n   bn,t .



D.6       Real bond risk premium

Define the one-period HPR of an n-maturity real bond in excess of a one-period risk-free rate as

   rxrb
     n,t+1 = bn-1,0 (St+1 ) - bn,0 (St ) + b1,0 (St ) + bn-1,1 (St+1 ) - bn,1 (St ) + b1,1 (St ) xt   (A-43)

              + bn-1,1 (St+1 )   p,t+1   + bn-1,1 (St+1 )( - 1)   ,t+1 .

The real bond risk premium is

- covt (mt+1 , rxrb
                 n,t+1 )                                                                   (A-44)
                                           2                                                      2
                                                                                                        
         bn-1,1 (1)(( - 1)1,c A1,c (1) -  )p (1) + bn-1,1 (1)( - 1)(( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1) -  )   (1)
                                           2                                                      2
 -P  bn-1,1 (2)(( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) -  )p     (2) + bn-1,1 (2)( - 1)(( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2) -  )   (2)  .
                                           2                                                      2
         bn-1,1 (3)(( - 1)1,c A1,c (3) -  )p (3) + bn-1,1 (3)( - 1)(( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3) -  )   (3)



D.7       Price to dividend ratio of zero coupon equity

Conjecture that the log price to dividend ratio of zero coupon equity zn,t depends on the regime St
and persistent component xt ,

                                    zn,t = zn,0 (St ) + zn,1 (St )xt .                                (A-45)



                                                      49
Exploit the law of iterated expectations

                                                                   Dt+1
                                  Zn,t   = Et E [Mt+1 Zn-1,t+1          |St+1 ]                  (A-46)
                                                                    Dt

Take log

                       zn,t       =   ln Et E [exp(mt+1 + zn-1,t+1 + dt+1 )|St+1 ]               (A-47)

and log-linearization to solve for zn,t
            3
                                                       1
  zn,t          Pij E [mt+1 + zn-1,t+1 + dt+1 |St+1 ] + V ar[mt+1 + zn-1,t+1 + dt+1 |St+1 ] .(A-48)
           j =1
                                                       2

The solution    is
                                                                                       
     zn,1 (1)          zn-1,1 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1)         ( - 1)A1,c (1) - ( -  )
   zn,1 (2)      = P  zn-1,1 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2)  -  ( - 1)A1,c (2) - ( -  )                (A-49)
     zn,1 (3)          zn-1,1 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3)         ( - 1)A1,c (3) - ( -  )
                                                                    
     zn,0 (1)         ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (1) - µc + µd
   zn,0 (2)      =   ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (2) - µc + µd 
     zn,0 (3)         ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (3) - µc + µd
                                                           2
                                                              
                         zn-1,0 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (1) + 2d
                                                            2 
                   + P  zn-1,0 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (2) + 
                                                            d
                                                           2
                                                              
                                                                   2
                                                                  d
                              zn-1,0 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (3) +   2
                                                                                 2 2
                                                                                         
                              1
                              2    zn-1,1 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1)  + d,p (1) -  p   (1)
                              1                                                  2 2
                     + P           zn-1,1 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2)  + d,p (2) -  p   (2) 
                                                                                         
                              2
                              1                                                  2 2
                              2    zn-1,1 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3)  + d,p (3) -  p (3)
                                                                                      2 2
                                                                                              
                              1
                              2    zn-1,1 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1) ( - 1) + d, (1) -      (1)
                              1                                                       2 2
                     + P           zn-1,1 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) ( - 1) + d, (2) -      (2) 
                                                                                              
                              2
                              1                                                       2 2
                              2    zn-1,1 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) ( - 1) + d, (2) -      (3)

with the initial condition z0,0 (i) = 0 and z0,1 (i) = 0 for i  {1, 2, 3} .



D.7.1       m-holding-period and hold-to-maturity expected return

The price of zero coupon equity is Pn,t = Zn,t Dt . Define the m-holding period return of the n-
maturity equity is
                                                    Zn-m,t+m Dt+m
                                         Rn,t+m =                 .                              (A-50)
                                                      Zn,t    Dt




                                                       50
The corresponding log expected return is defined by
                                                                                  m
                                            1
                           Et [rn,t+m ] =     Et zn-m,t+m - zn,t +     dt+i                                (A-51)
                                            m                      i=1

To compute the excess return, we subtract the real rate of the same maturity
                                                              r
                                              Et [rn,t+m ] - ym,t .                                        (A-52)


We consider two cases

    · m = n: This is the m-holding-period expected excess return of the n-maturity equity.
                                                                          m
                                                                  1
                                       Et [gd,t+m ]       =         Et          dt+i                       (A-53)
                                                                  m       i=1
                                                      1
                                              en,m,t    Et zn-m,t+m - zn,t
                                                          =
                                                     m
                                      Et [rn,t+m ] = en,m,t + Et [gd,t+m ]
                                                                     r
                                     Et [rxn,t+m ] = Et [rn,t+m ] - ym,t .

    · m = n: This is the hold-to-maturity expected excess return of the n-maturity equity. Define
                                                                              n
                                                                   1
                                            Et [gd,t+n ]      =      Et           dt+i                     (A-54)
                                                                   n       i=1
                                                          1
                                                   en,t     Et - zn,t
                                                              =
                                                          n
                                             Et [rt+n ] = en,t + Et [gd,t+n ]
                                                                        r
                                            Et [rxt+n ] = Et [rt+n ] - yn,t .

For illustrative purpose, we compute the one-period-HPR

 rn,t+1 = zn-1,0 (St+1 ) - zn,0 (St ) + µd + zn-1,1 (St+1 ) - zn,1 (St ) +  xt                             (A-55)

          + zn-1,1 (St+1 ) + d,p St+1 )            p,t+1   + zn-1,1 (St+1 )( - 1) + d, (St+1 )      ,t+1   +   d,t+1 ,

                    r
rxn,t+1 = rn,t+1 - y1 ,t

        = zn-1,0 (St+1 ) - zn,0 (St ) + µd + b1,0 (St ) + zn-1,1 (St+1 ) - zn,1 (St ) +  + b1,1 (St ) xt

          + zn-1,1 (St+1 ) + d,p (St+1 )            p,t+1     + zn-1,1 (St+1 )( - 1) + d, (St+1 )   ,t+1   +    d,t+1 .




                                                              51
The risk premium is
                                                                          2
                                                                                 
                              zn-1,1 (1) + d,p (1) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1) -  p  (1)
                                                                          2
-covt (mt+1 , rxn,t+1 )  -P  zn-1,1 (2) + d,p (2) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) -  p   (2)          (A-56)
                                                                          2
                              zn-1,1 (3) + d,p (3) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3) -  p  (3)
                                                                                      2
                                                                                            
                              zn-1,1 (1)( - 1) + d, (1) (( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1) -  )  (1)
                                                                                      2
                         - P  zn-1,1 (2)( - 1) + d, (2) (( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2) -  )  (2)  .
                                                                                      2
                              zn-1,1 (3)( - 1) + d, (3) (( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3) -  ) (3)



D.8      Market return and equity premium

We derive the market return via Campbell-Shiller approximation

rd,t+1 = 0,d + 1,d A0,d (St+1 ) - A0,d (St ) + µd + 1,d A1,d (St+1 ) - A1,d (St ) +  xt        (A-57)

        + 1,d A1,d (St+1 ) + d,p (St+1 )     p,t+1   + 1,d A1,d (St+1 )( - 1) + d, (St+1 )   ,t+1   +   d,t+1


where the log price-dividend ratio is given by

                                 zd,t = A0,d (St ) + A1,d (St )xt .                            (A-58)

We solve for the coefficients
                                                                                        
    A1,d (1)                           ( -  ) - ( - 1)A1,c (1)       ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1)
                                 -1
  A1,d (2)  = I3 - 1,d P               ( -  ) - ( - 1)A1,c (2)  + P  ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) 
    A1,d (3)                           ( -  ) - ( - 1)A1,c (3)       ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3)
                                                                                               (A-59)
             
  A0,d (1)
  A0,d (2)  = I3 - 1,d P -1
  A0,d (3)
                                                            1 2
                                                                                             
    0,d +  ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (1) + µd - µc + 2     d           ( - 1)1,c A0,c (1)
   0,d +  ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (2) + µd - µc + 1 d      2 
                                                                   + P  ( - 1)1,c A0,c (2) 
                                                            2
                                                            1 2
    0,d +  ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (3) + µd - µc + 2 d               ( - 1)1,c A0,c (3)
                                                          2 2
                                                                  
          ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1) + 1,d A1,d (1) + d,p (1) -  p (1)
  1                                                       2 2
 + P  ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) + 1,d A1,d (2) + d,p (2) -  p        (2) 
                                                                  
  2                                                       2 2
          ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3) + 1,d A1,d (3) + d,p (3) -  p    (3)
                                                                     2 2
                                                                             
          ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1) + 1,d ( - 1)A1,d (1) + d, (1) -       (1)
  1                                                                  2 2
 + P  ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2) + 1,d ( - 1)A1,d (2) + d, (2) -           (2)  .
                                                                             
  2                                                                  2 2
          ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3) + 1,d ( - 1)A1,d (3) + d, (3) -       (3)




                                                     52
                                          r     1
The market equity premium Et [rd,t+1 ] - y1,t + 2 Vt [rd,t+1 ] is

-Covt (rxd,t+1 , mt+1 )  -E [Cov (rxd,t+1 , mt+1 |St+1 )]                                        (A-60)
                                                                            2
                                                                                   
                               1,d A1,d (1) + d,p (1) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1) -  p (1)
                                                                            2
                        = -P  1,d A1,d (2) + d,p (2) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) -  p  (2) 
                                                                            2
                               1,d A1,d (3) + d,p (3) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3) -  p (3)
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                      
                               1,d A1,d (1)( - 1) + d, (1) ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1) -             (1)
                                                                                                2
                          - P  1,d A1,d (2)( - 1) + d, (2) ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2) -             (2)  .
                                                                                                2
                               1,d A1,d (3)( - 1) + d, (3) ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3) -             (3)



D.9       Real bond and stock return correlation

Define the one-period HPR of an n-maturity real bond as

                    rb
                   rn,t +1 = bn-1,0 (St+1 ) - bn,0 (St ) + bn-1,1 (St+1 ) - bn,1 (St ) xt        (A-61)

                            + bn-1,1 (St+1 )   p,t+1   + bn-1,1 (St+1 )( - 1)   ,t+1 .

The market return is

rd,t+1 = 0,d + 1,d A0,d (St+1 ) - A0,d (St ) + µd + 1,d A1,d (St+1 ) - A1,d (St ) +  xt          (A-62)

         + 1,d A1,d (St+1 ) + d,p (St+1 )      p,t+1   + 1,d A1,d (St+1 )( - 1) + d, (St+1 )   ,t+1   +   d,t+1 .


The conditional covariance between two returns is
                       rb                          rb
       Covt (rd,t+1 , rn,t +1 )  E [Cov (rd,t+1 , rn,t+1 |St+1 )]                              (A-63)
                                                                          2
                                                                                
                                       1,d A1,d (1) + d,p (1) bn-1,1 (1) p (1)
                                                                          2
                                = P  1,d A1,d (2) + d,p (2) bn-1,1 (2) p    (2) 
                                                                          2
                                       1,d A1,d (3) + d,p (3) bn-1,1 (3) p (3)
                                                                                      2
                                                                                            
                                         1,d A1,d (1)( - 1) + d, (1) bn-1,1 (1)( - 1)   (1)
                                                                                      2
                                  + P  1,d A1,d (2)( - 1) + d, (2) bn-1,1 (2)( - 1)     (2)  .
                                                                                      2
                                         1,d A1,d (3)( - 1) + d, (3) bn-1,1 (3)( - 1)   (3)

The conditional variance of bond return is
                                                              2 2                        2 2
                                                                                                  
                                                   bn-1,1 (1) p   (1) + bn-1,1 (1)( - 1)     (1)
           rb                  rb                             2 2                        2 2
   V art (rn,t +1 )  E [V ar (rn,t+1 |St+1 )] = P  bn-1,1 (2) p (2) + bn-1,1 (2)( - 1)  (2)  .
                                                                                                  
                                                              2 2                        2 2
                                                   bn-1,1 (3) p   (3) + bn-1,1 (3)( - 1)     (3)
                                                                                                 (A-64)




                                                       53
The conditional variance of market return is

V art (rd,t+1 )  E [V ar(rd,t+1 |St+1 )]                                                      (A-65)
                                             2 2                                   2 2
                                                                                                 
                                                                                               2
                       1,d A1,d (1) + d,p 1) p (1) + 1,d A1,d (1)( - 1) + d, (1)  (1) + d
                                              2 2                                   2 2        2 .
                = P  1,d A1,d (2) + d,p (2) p     (2) + 1,d A1,d (2)( - 1) + d, (2)     (2) + d
                    
                                                                                                 
                                              2 2                                   2 2        2
                       1,d A1,d (3) + d,p (3) p   (3) + 1,d A1,d (3)( - 1) + d, (3)     (3) + d


D.10        Nominal bonds
Conjecture that qn,t depends on the regime St , xt , and t

                              qn,t = qn,0 (St ) + qn,1 (St )xt + qn,2 (St )t .                         (A-66)

Exploit the law of iterated expectations

                        qn,t = ln Et E [exp(mt+1 - t+1 + qn-1,t+1 )|St+1 ]

and log-linearization to solve for qn,t
             2
                                                       1
    qn,t         Pij E [mt+1 - t+1 + qn-1,t+1 |St+1 ] + V ar[mt+1 - t+1 + qn-1,t+1 |St+1 ] . (A-67)
            j =1
                                                       2

The solution to (A-66) is
                                                                                  
        qn,1 (1)            qn-1,1 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1)     ( - 1)A1,c (1) + 
       qn,1 (2)  = P        qn-1,1 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2)  -  ( - 1)A1,c (2) +                       (A-68)
        qn,1 (3)            qn-1,1 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3)     ( - 1)A1,c (3) + 
                                             
        qn,2 (1)            (qn-1,2 (1) - 1)
       qn,2 (2)  = P        (qn-1,2 (2) - 1)  .
        qn,2 (3)            (qn-1,2 (3) - 1)

                                                           
 qn,0 (1)       ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (1)
 qn,0 (2)  =   ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (2)                                                           (A-69)
 qn,0 (3)       ln  + ( - 1)0,c - ( - 1)A0,c (3)
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                          
                   qn-1,0 (1) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (1) - µc + (qn-1,2 (1) - 1)µ (1 -  ) + 2                 (qn-1,2 (1) - 1)2
                                                                                                      2
             + P  qn-1,0 (2) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (2) - µc + (qn-1,2 (2) - 1)µ (1 -  ) + 2                  (qn-1,2 (2) - 1)2 
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                    
                   qn-1,0 (3) + ( - 1)1,c A0,c (3) - µc + (qn-1,2 (3) - 1)µ (1 -  ) + 2                 (qn-1,2 (3) - 1)2
                                                                                                2 2
                                                                                                          
                   1
                     (  -  1)  1,c A1 ,c (1) + qn - 1, 1 (1)  -  + ( q n - 1, 2 (1) - 1) ,p (1)    p (1)
                  2                                                                             2 2
             + P 1 2 ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) + qn-1,1 (2) -  + (qn-1,2 (2) - 1),p (2) p (2) 
                                                                                                          
                   1                                                                            2  2
                     ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3) + qn-1,1 (3) -  + (qn-1,2 (3) - 1),p (3) p                   (3)
                  2                                                                                           2 2
                                                                                                                       
                   1
                   2 ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1) + qn-1,1 (1)( - 1) -  + (qn-1,2 (1) - 1), (1)  (1)
                                                                                                              2 2
             + P 1 2 ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2) + qn-1,1 (2)( - 1) -  + (qn-1,2 (2) - 1), (2)  (2)
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                   1                                                                                          2 2
                   2 ( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3) + qn-1,1 (3)( - 1) -  + (qn-1,2 (3) - 1), (2)  (3)


                                                       54
with the initial condition q0,0 (i) = 0, q0,1 (i) = 0, and q0,2 (i) = 0 for i  {1, 2} . The real yield of the
                                       1
maturity n-period bond is yn,t = - n     qn,t .



D.11        Nominal bond risk premium

Define the one-period HPR of an n-maturity nominal bond in excess of a one-period nominal risk-free
rate as

             rxnb
               n,t+1 = qn-1,0 (St+1 ) - qn,0 (St ) + qn-1,2 (St+1 )µ (1 -  ) + q1,0 (St )             (A-70)

                        + qn-1,1 (St+1 ) - qn,1 (St ) + q1,1 (St ) xt

                        + qn-1,2 (St+1 ) - qn,2 (St ) + q1,2 (St ) t + qn-1,2 (St+1 )          ,t+1


                        + qn-1,1 (St+1 ) + qn-1,2 (St+1 ),p (St+1 )           p,t+1


                        + qn-1,1 (St+1 )( - 1) + qn-1,2 (St+1 ), (St+1 )              ,t+1 .


The nominal bond risk premium is
                                                                                   2
                                                                                          
                              qn-1,1 (1) + qn-1,2 (1),p (1) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (1) -  p  (1)
-covt (mt+1 , rxnb
                n,t+1 )  -P
                             qn-1,1 (2) + qn-1,2 (2),p (2) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (2) -  p 2
                                                                                     (2) 
                                                                                   2
                              qn-1,1 (3) + qn-1,2 (3),p (3) ( - 1)1,c A1,c (3) -  p (3)
                                                                                          (A-71)
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                       
                              qn-1,1 (1)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (1), (1) (( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (1) -  )    (1)
                                                                                                 2
                         - P  qn-1,1 (2)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (2), (2) (( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (2) -  )    (2)  .
                                                                                                 2
                              qn-1,1 (3)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (3), (3) (( - 1)1,c ( - 1)A1,c (3) -  )    (3)



D.12        Nominal bond and stock return correlation

Define the one-period HPR of an n-maturity nominal bond as

  nb
 rn,t +1 = qn-1,0 (St+1 ) - qn,0 (St ) + qn-1,2 (St+1 )µ (1 -  ) + qn-1,1 (St+1 ) - qn,1 (St ) xt (A-72)


          + qn-1,2 (St+1 ) - qn,2 (St ) t + qn-1,2 (St+1 )      ,t+1


          + qn-1,1 (St+1 ) + qn-1,2 (St+1 ),p (St+1 )        p,t+1


          + qn-1,1 (St+1 )( - 1) + qn-1,2 (St+1 ), (St+1 )           ,t+1 .




                                                     55
The market return is

rd,t+1 = 0,d + 1,d A0,d (St+1 ) - A0,d (St ) + µd + 1,d A1,d (St+1 ) - A1,d (St ) +  xt           (A-73)

        + 1,d A1,d (St+1 ) + d,p (St+1 )        p,t+1   + 1,d A1,d (St+1 )( - 1) + d, (St+1 )   ,t+1   +   d,t+1 .


The conditional covariance between two returns is
                nb                          nb
Covt (rd,t+1 , rn,t +1 )  E [Cov (rd,t+1 , rn,t+1 |St+1 )]                                    (A-74)
                                                                                      2
                                                                                            
                                1,d A1,d (1) + d,p (1) qn-1,1 (1) + qn-1,2 (1),p (1) p (1)
                                                                                      2
                         = P  1,d A1,d (2) + d,p (2) qn-1,1 (2) + qn-1,2 (2),p (2) p    (2) 
                                                                                      2
                                1,d A1,d (3) + d,p (3) qn-1,1 (3) + qn-1,2 (3),p (3) p (3)
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                        
                                  1,d A1,d (1)( - 1) + d, (1) qn-1,1 (1)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (1), (1)    (1)
                                                                                                  2
                           + P  1,d A1,d (2)( - 1) + d, (2) qn-1,1 (2)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (2), (2)      (2)  .
                                                                                                  2
                                  1,d A1,d (3)( - 1) + d, (3) qn-1,1 (3)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (3), (3)  (3)

The conditional variance of nominal bond return is
          nb                  nb
  V art (rn,t +1 )  E [V ar (rn,t+1 |St+1 )]                                                    (A-75)
                                             2 2                                          2 2
                                                                                                  
            qn-1,1 (1) + qn-1,2 (1),p (1) p (1) + qn-1,1 (1)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (1), (1)  (1)
                                             2 2                                          2 2
  = P  qn-1,1 (2) + qn-1,2 (2),p (2) p           (2) + qn-1,1 (2)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (2), (2)     (2)  .
                                                                                                  
                                             2 2                                          2 2
            qn-1,1 (3) + qn-1,2 (3),p (3) p      (3) + qn-1,1 (3)( - 1) + qn-1,2 (3), (3)     (3)

The conditional variance of market return is

V art (rd,t+1 )  E [V ar(rd,t+1 |St+1 )]                                                      (A-76)
                                             2 2                                   2 2
                                                                                                 
                                                                                               2
                       1,d A1,d (1) + d,p 1) p (1) + 1,d A1,d (1)( - 1) + d, (1)  (1) + d
                                              2 2                                   2 2        2 .
                = P  1,d A1,d (2) + d,p (2) p     (2) + 1,d A1,d (2)( - 1) + d, (2)     (2) + d
                    
                                                                                                 
                                              2 2                                   2 2        2
                       1,d A1,d (3) + d,p (3) p   (3) + 1,d A1,d (3)( - 1) + d, (3)     (3) + d



D.13       Inflation risks in nominal bond yields

We decompose shocks to nominal bond yields y,n,t into news about expected inflation ,n,t , news
about expected future real short rates y1 ,n,t , and expected excess returns x,n,t . A yield shock is
the sum of news

                                    y,n,t   =   ,n,t    +    y1 ,n,t   +   x,n,t                  (A-77)




                                                        56
where

                                      y,n,t    = yn,t - Et-1 (yn,t )                                              (A-78)
                                                                         n
                                                                    1
                                      ,n,t     = (Et - Et-1 )                    t+i
                                                                    n   i=1
                                                                         n
                                                                    1
                                     y1 ,n,t   = (Et - Et-1 )                    y1,t+i-1
                                                                    n   i=1
                                                                         n
                                                                    1
                                      x,n,t    = (Et - Et-1 )                    rxn-i+1,t+i
                                                                    n   i=1

                                                                1
denotes the news. For ease of exposition, denote yn,j (St ) = - n qn,j (St ) for j  {0, 1, 2}. We can
deduce that

 y,n,t   = (Et - Et-1 ) yn,0 (St ) + yn,2 (St )µ (1 -  ) + yn,1 (St )xt-1 + yn,2 (St ) t-1                        (A-79)

             + yn,1 (St ) + yn,2 (St ),p (St )      p,t   + yn,1 (St )( - 1) + yn,2 (St ), (St )        ,t   + yn,2 (St )   ,t

             1  (1 - n
                     )
,n,t     =             ,p (St )       p,t   + , (St )      ,t   +   ,t       .
             n 1 - 

For simplicity, we condition on xt-1 = 0 and t-1 = 0. Then,

V ar(    y,n,t |St-1 )                                                                                            (A-80)
                                      
     yn,0 (1)          yn,0 (1)  .2
     yn,0 (2)  - P  yn,0 (2) 
     yn,0 (3)          yn,0 (3)
                                2 2                                                            2 2
                                                                                                                      
      yn,1 (1) + yn,2 (1),p (1) p   (1) + yn,1 (1)( - 1) + yn,2 (1), (1)                         (1)   + (yn,2 (1) )2
                                2 2                                                            2 2
+ P  yn,1 (2) + yn,2 (2),p (2) p (2) + yn,1 (2)( - 1) + yn,2 (2), (2)                            (2)   + (yn,2 (2) )2 
                                                                                                                      
                                2 2                                                            2 2
      yn,1 (3) + yn,2 (3),p (3) p   (3) + yn,1 (3)( - 1) + yn,2 (3), (3)                         (3)   + (yn,2 (3) )2
V ar( ,n,t |St-1 )
      2           2
                    (1) + 2       2        2
                                             
       ,p (1)p             , (1) (1) +                                                 2
                                                           1  (1 - n
                                                                   )
= P  2            2        2
        ,p (2)p (2) + , (2) (2) + 
                                  2        2 
                                              ·
                                                           n 1 - 
       2,p   (3)  2
                  p (3) +  2
                           , (3)  2
                                    (3) +  2




A measure of inflation risk can be defined as
                                                          V ar(     ,n,t |St-1 )
                                               IRt-1                                   .                          (A-81)
                                                          V ar(     y,n,t |St-1 )




                                                             57
      Table A-1: Robustness: Consumption autocorrelations with revised data

                            Full sample               Sample excluding recessions
                      (1)                 (2)            (1)             (2)

         0         0.0012             0.0002            0.0022              0.0003
                  (0.0004)           (0.0003)          (0.0004)            (0.0003)

         1         0.0030                               0.0039
                  (0.0008)                             (0.0010)

         0         0.6308             0.6877            0.4884              0.6126
                  (0.0821)           (0.0868)          (0.0825)            (0.0918)

         1       -0.4337            -0.4855           -0.4461             -0.5573
                 (0.1212)           (0.1209)          (0.1415)            (0.1548)

         R2         0.1240            0.1171            0.1004              0.0809


N otes: The table shows the regression estimates from the regression in Equation (1). On the right
side, business cycle downturns are excluded from the sample as explained in the main text. COVID
period is excluded from all regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The 0
estimate gives the autocorrelation coefficient in the post-1998 sample, while the 1 estimate gives
the difference between the autocorrelation in the pre- vs. post-1998 samples. The specification in
the column labeled (1) estimates the full regression, while the specification in the column labeled
(2) is run using demeaned consumption growth and setting 1 = 0, as explained in the main text.
One asterisk denotes significance at the 10% level, two at the 5% level, and three at the 1% level.
The data is the revised real, per capita, nondurables+services consumption data from 1947:Q2 to
2019:Q4.




                                                58
Table A-2: Estimated parameters of NIPA revised nondurables+services consumption

                                         50%                     [5%,              95%]
                                    Consumption growth, c
                     µc                  0.0048                  [0.0037,     0.0058]
                                         0.8591                  [0.7537,     0.9226]
                     p (1)               0.0017                  [0.0012,     0.0025]
                     p (2)               0.0014                  [0.0008,     0.0019]
                     p (3)               0.0025                  [0.0016,     0.0038]
                      (1)                0.0017                  [0.0013,     0.0024]
                      (2)                0.0049                  [0.0041,     0.0071]
                      (3)                0.0690                  [0.0380,     0.0966]
                                   Transition probabilities, P
                                                                                   
                               0.9752            0.0248                 0
                             [0.9354,0.9954]   [0.0046,0.0646]       [-,-]         
                               0.0168            0.9630            0.0199          
                         
                             [0.0113,0.0179]   [0.9312,0.9881]   [0.0051,0.0486]   
                                                                                   
                                   0             0.4717            0.5293
                                 [-,-]         [0.3507,0.5928]   [0.4072,0.6493]


N otes: The table gives the maximum likelihood estimates (MLE) for the parameters governing the
consumption process using the NIPA revised, per capita, real nondurables+services consumption
data. The data frequency is quarterly. We order the regimes according to the transitory shock
volatilities, and restrict the off-diagonal corner elements in the transition probability matrix to
equal zero. The sample is 1947:Q2-2020:Q4.




                                                    59
