                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RESERVES WERE NOT SO AMPLE AFTER ALL

                                        Adam Copeland
                                         Darrell Duffie
                                          Yilin Yang

                                      Working Paper 29090
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29090


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




Copeland is at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Duffie is at Stanford University's
Graduate School of Business, the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, and the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Yang is in the Doctoral Program of Stanford Graduate
School of Business. We are grateful for conversations with Gara Afonso, Sriya Anbil, David
Andolfatto, Seth Carpenter, John Cochrane, Ricardo Correa, Lou Crandall, Wenxin Du, Bill
English, Egemen Eren, Andy Filardo, Peter Fisher, Andy Filardo, Michael Fleming, Scott
Freidenrich, Ken Garbade, Beth Hammack, Tom Harrop, Ben Hébert, Sebastian Infante, Peter
Ireland, Frank Keane, Narayana Kocherlakota, Don Kohn, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Gabriele
LaSpada, Jenn LeClair, Mickey Levy, Gordon Liao, Lorie Logan, Brian Madigan, Andrei
Magasiner, Antoine Martin, Jamie McAndrews, Al Moffitt, Jamie McAndrews, Bill Nelson, Peter
Nowicki, Patrick Parkinson, Monika Piazzesi, Simon Potter, Brian Sack, George Selgin, John
Taylor, Mike Verdeschi, Josh Younger, John Williams, Stephen Williamson, and Amy Wang.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Research assistance by Renhao Jiang is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Adam Copeland, Darrell Duffie, and Yilin Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reserves Were Not So Ample After All
Adam Copeland, Darrell Duffie, and Yilin Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 29090
July 2021
JEL No. G12,G2

                                          ABSTRACT

The Federal Reserve's "balance-sheet normalization," which reduced aggregate reserves between
2017 and September 2019, increased repo rate distortions, the severity of rate spikes, and intraday
payment timing stresses, culminating with a significant disruption in Treasury repo markets in
mid-September 2019. We show that repo rates rose above efficient-market levels when the total
reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve by the largest repo-active bank holding companies
declined and that repo rate spikes are strongly associated with delayed intraday payments of
reserves to these large bank holding companies. Intraday payment timing stresses are magnified
by early-morning settlement of Treasury security issuances. Substantially higher aggregate levels
of reserves than existed in the period leading up to September 2019 would likely have eliminated
most or all of these payment timing stresses and repo rate spikes.


Adam Copeland                                     Yilin Yang
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                  Stanford University
33 Liberty Street                                 davyang@stanford.edu
New York, NY 10045
adam.copeland@gmail.com

Darrell Duffie
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu
1         Introduction

We show how post-crisis liquidity regulations and the Federal Reserve's "balance-sheet nor-
malization" stressed the intraday management of reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve
(Fed) by large bank holding companies (BHCs) that are active in repo markets. This led to
spikes in Treasury repo rates during 2018-2019. After an especially large and prominently
reported1 disruption in repo markets during September 16-18, 2019, the Fed reversed its
balance-sheet normalization. Despite this change in policy, our analysis implies that the
reserve balances held at the Fed by the large BHCs that are active intermediaries in the
Treasury repo market were still not sufficiently large to avoid repo liquidity crunches until
the Fed created a large quantity of additional reserves in response to the Covid shock of
March 2020. Whether the Fed should aim, over the long run, for a small or large balance
sheet remains controversial.
        Before the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, a small aggregate supply of
federal reserve balances, typically under $50 billion, was sufficient for large U.S. banks to
manage trillions of dollars of daily payments and for wholesale overnight funding markets
to function efficiently. Banks liberally exploited daylight overdrafts of their federal reserve
accounts to manage their intraday payments. The Fed's crisis and post-crisis quantitative-
easing programs increased reserve balances to about $2.8 trillion in 2014. In late 2017,
the Fed activated its policy of balance sheet normalization, by which aggregate reserves
steadily declined, reaching about $1.4 trillion by September 2019, still far above pre-crisis
levels. As part of its post-crisis regulatory reform, however, the Fed also introduced a
battery of new liquidity requirements that provided incentives for large BHCs to maintain
substantial balances at the Fed and which strongly discouraged them from incurring daylight
    For examples of reporting, see "Fed Preps Second $75 Billion Blast With Repo Market Still On Edge,"
    1

Bloomberg, September 17, 2019; "Why the U.S. Repo Market Blew Up and How to Fix It," Bloomberg,
January 6, 2020; "Fed Plans Second Intervention to Ease Funding Squeeze," Financial Times, September
17, 2019; "New York Fed Examines Banks' Role in Money Market Turmoil," Financial Times, September
20, 2019; "Wall Street Is Buzzing About Repo Rates. Here's Why," New York Times, September 18, 2019;
"Fed Intervenes to Curb Soaring Short-Term Borrowing Costs,"Wall Street Journal, September 17, 2019.



                                                  1
overdrafts on their reserve accounts at the Fed. We find that as balance sheet normalization
reduced aggregate reserves, intraday payments to the large BHCs active in repo markets were
significantly delayed and these BHCs quoted inefficiently high rates for wholesale overnight
funding. These large BHCs avoided daylight overdrafts and the discount window, prioritizing
regulatory liquidity requirements by maintaining a significant cushion of reserve balances at
the Fed to manage intraday payments.
       In an efficient wholesale funding market, Treasury repo rates would be essentially equated
by arbitrage with the overnight interest rate offered by the Fed on balances held at the Fed
(IOR). This is so because Treasury repos and balances held at the Fed are nearly equivalent
risk-free overnight investments available to banks. From 2015 to 2020, however, we find that
the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), a broad measure of overnight Treasury repo
rates, was typically well above IOR whenever the total balances held at the Fed of the ten
largest repo-active BHCs was below roughly $580 billion.
       Low balances held at the Fed can lead to intraday cash hoarding by banks, raising
concerns over market liquidity and sometimes even threatening financial stability.2 Intraday
payment delays can be exacerbated by self-fulfilling expectations. That is, whenever a bank
believes that other banks will delay their payments because they have low balances, that bank
also has an increased incentive to delay payments in order to conserve intraday balances.
This feedback effect naturally leads to even higher jumps in repo rates (Yang, 2020).
       Intraday payment timing stresses are also exacerbated by issuances of Treasuries because
payments to the U.S. Treasury for these issuances must occur early in the day.3 That is,
Treasury issuances increase repo rates not only through the supply-of-reserves channel, but
also through the intraday payment timing channel. Issuances also place upward demand-side
pressure on repo rates because newly issued Treasury notes are particularly heavily financed
   2
     See Hamilton (1996), McAndrews and Potter (2002), Bech and Garratt (2003), Ashcraft and Duffie
(2007), Bech (2008), Ashcraft, McAndrews and Skeie (2011), Afonso, Kovner and Schoar (2011), Afonso and
Shin (2011), and Yang (2020).
   3
     See Pozsar (2019b). We checked this fact in conversations with multiple knowledgeable market partici-
pants and official-sector sources.



                                                    2
in the repo market.
   Substantially higher aggregate levels of reserves than existed in the period leading up
to September 2019 would likely have eliminated most of the upward impact of all of these
factors on the excess of Treasury repo rates over IOR and on intraday delays in payments to
the large repo-active BHCs. Truly ample levels of reserves, however, implies a large balance
sheet for the Federal Reserve, which is controversial and entails risks described in Section 8.
Alternative approaches to relieving these liquidity stresses would be a de-emphasis in BHC
regulation and supervision of the importance of maintaining positive intraday balances at
the Fed, a de-stigmatization of the use of the discount window and daylight overdrafts on
accounts at the Fed, or the introduction of a "standing repo facility," at which a broad set
of market participants could get repo financing directly from the Fed.
   Aside from the importance of ample reserves for the efficiency of money markets, Bush,
Kirk, Martin, Weed and Zobel (2019) explain that ample reserves support financial stability
because reserves have special intraday liquidity benefits above and beyond those of other
forms of high quality liquid assets. They point to the potential for one-day stressed outflows
of reserves from the largest systemically important banks to reach in excess of $900 billion.
   Commenting on the Fed's balance-sheet policy and its implications for the repo market
disruption of September 2019, Gagnon and Sack (2020) wrote: "The minimum level of
reserves is conceptually murky, impossible to estimate, and likely to vary over time. The
best approach is to steer well clear of it, especially since maintaining a higher level of reserves
as a buffer has no meaningful cost." Regarding the costs of maintaining a higher level of
reserves, however, the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting of November
2018 stated that

"Potential drawbacks of an abundant reserves regime included challenges in precisely deter-
mining the quantity of reserves necessary in such systems, the need to maintain relatively
sizable quantities of reserves and holdings of securities, and relatively large ongoing inter-
est expenses associated with the remuneration of reserves. Some noted that returning to a
regime of limited excess reserves could demonstrate the Federal Reserve's ability to fully un-
wind the policies used to respond to the crisis and might thereby increase public acceptance


                                                3
or effectiveness of such policies in the future."

Naturally, the FOMC's views on these costs and benefits have evolved over time.4 Section 8
summarizes policy tradeoffs associated with the ampleness of reserves.
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides more background
and discusses the relationship between our findings and prior research. Section 3 explains
our key data sources. Section 4 describes how new liquidity rules and supervision dampen
the incentives of large BHCs active in repo markets to provide liquidity to wholesale funding
markets whenever there is a nontrivial risk that their buffers of intraday reserve balances
may be depleted. Section 5 investigates the empirical relationships among Treasury repo
rate distortions, the reserve balances of the largest BHCs active in repo markets, delays in
the intraday payments to these large BHCs, and the reserve balances of other large banks.
Section 6 briefly considers the implications of regulatory capital requirements for funding
market stress. Section 7 examines the roles of the aggregate supply of Treasury bills and
the concentration of reserves among the largest BHCs. Section 8 offers concluding remarks
regarding key policy tradeoffs.



2         Background and related work

The spread between U.S. Treasury overnight repo rates and the interest rate paid by Federal
Reserve Banks on reserve balances (IOR) is a gauge of the sufficiency of reserve balances
of large BHCs active in repo markets to meet counterparty funding and other "reserve
draining" demands (Correa, Du and Liao, 2020), precautionary demands for reserves to
meet intraday payment obligations (Ashcraft, McAndrews and Skeie, 2011), and regulatory
liquidity requirements (Ihrig, 2019; d'Avernas and Vandeweyer, 2020). If the aggregate
supply of reserves is ample for these combined purposes, then arbitrage would keep Treasury
    4
    For example, consider the "Long-Run Monetary Policy Implementation Frameworks" discussion recorded
in the minutes of the FOMC meeting of January 2019.




                                                  4
repo rates near IOR and wholesale funding markets would remain relatively liquid.5
       The total quantity of reserves in the U.S. banking system has exceeded $1 trillion since
the 2008-2009 financial crisis and reached a peak of $2.8 trillion in 2014 as a result of the
Fed's quantitative easing programs. In late 2017, the Federal Open Market Committee be-
gan implementing its policy6 of "balance sheet normalization," by which the Fed planned to
reduce its assets and liabilities, including reserves, to the greatest extent consistent with "ef-
ficient and effective monetary policy." From late 2017, aggregate reserves declined, reaching
a low of $1.4 trillion in early September 2019.
       The Fed used Senior Financial Officer Surveys7 to help ascertain the demand for reserves,
asking banks about their "lowest comfortable level of reserves." In an April 2019 speech,
Logan (2019) reported that one estimate of the banking system's demand for reserves based
on the September 2018 and February 2019 responses ranged between $800 billion to $900
billion, well below the level of aggregate reserves supplied by the Fed at that time.8 Logan
(2019), however, noted that the aggregate amount of reserves needed to be supplied by the
Fed is likely to be higher than this estimated range in order to account for survey error,
changes in bank demand, and the possibility that there are frictions in the redistribution of
reserves. Given the survey results and a wide range of other information available at that
time, when reserves were around $1.6 trillion, it appeared that "reserves remain ample." Yet
our analysis shows that with the decline in reserves from 2017 to September 2019, the spread
between SOFR and IOR crept higher and occasionally spiked up, particularly on Treasury
issuance dates. Appendix Table 11 lists dates on which Treasury repo rates spiked relative
   5
      Banks can engage in repos directly or, if they are part of a BHC, through an affiliated broker-dealer.
   6
      See Board of Governors of the Federal Reseve System (2019) for an overview of the Fed's balance sheet
normalization policies.
    7
      According to the Federal Reserve Board's August 2019 Senior Financial Officer Survey, "satisfying
internal liquidity stress metrics, meeting routine intraday payment flows, and meeting potential deposit
outflows were "important or very important determinants" of the demands by banks of excess reserves. In a
related BIP survey, over three-quarters of the banks for which Reg YY liquidity buffer is applicable indicated
this regulation to be an important or very important consideration for the demand of reserves. For details
of this regulation, see Liquidity Stress Test Requirements.
    8
      See Keating, Martinez, Petit, Styczynski and Thorp (2019) for details behind this estimate. Andros,
Beall, Martinez, Rodrigues, Styczynski and Thorp (2019) estimate that aggregate demand for reserves falls
between $712 billion to $912 billion, after accounting for sampling and non-sampling error.


                                                      5
to IOR.
       Our study focuses on the 100 largest U.S. banks as ranked by reserve balances. We find
that the spread between SOFR and IOR is much more highly correlated with the sum of the
reserve balances associated with the ten largest BHCs that are active in repo markets than
with the balances of the other 90 large banks. Further, our analysis shows that the time by
which these large repo-active BHCs accounts receive half of their daily incoming payments
is a yet-more-powerful variable for explaining the spread between SOFR and IOR.
       In addition to explaining the empirical relationship between rates, reserve balances, and
the intraday timing of payments over our sample period of 2015 to 2020, our analysis also
provides insights into the extraordinary repo rate spikes of September 2019 and March 2020.
       On September 17, 2019, SOFR suddenly jumped above IOR by 315 basis points and
interdealer repo rates reached over 700 basis points above IOR during the course of the
day. The Fed reacted quickly9 by supplying a large amounts of reserves, driving SOFR-
IOR spreads back to moderately low levels. We document that on September 17 the total
balances of all banks in our sample reached a sample record low of $1.06 trillion and that
intraday payments of reserves to the ten repo-active banks were significantly delayed, a sign
of hoarding of reserves. Indeed, the time by which these ten banks had received half of their
daily incoming payments hit a sample record high, up to that date, of 151 minutes later than
the sample-period average of this daily half-received time.
       A similar pattern is observed on March 17, 2020, when SOFR again spiked above IOR
during the "dash for cash" induced by news of the Covid pandemic.10 The reserve balances of
the ten repo-active banks remained near their low September 2019 levels up until this event,
as shown in Figure 1, despite the aforementioned increase in aggregate reserves between
September 2019 and March 2020. Further, on March 17, the time by which half of daily
   9
    See Ihrig, Senyuz and Weinbach (2020).
  10
    SOFR exceeded IOR by 44 basis points on March 17, 2019. In mid-March 2020, as reported by Clark,
Martin and Wessel (2020), term repo rates also jumped significantly, particularly for terms extending beyond
the end of the quarter, because balance-sheet constraints of the dealer banks were sharply tightened by the
flood of demands for liquidity in the secondary market for Treasury securities, among other markets.



                                                     6
                                         350                                                            1300
                                                                                            SOFR - IOER
                                                                                            Balances    1200
                                         300
                                                                                                        1100




                                                                                                               Large dealer balances ($ billion)
            SOFR - IOER (basis points)
                                         250
                                                                                                        1000
                                         200
                                                                                                        900

                                         150                                                            800

                                                                                                        700
                                         100
                                                                                                        600
                                          50
                                                                                                        500
                                           0
                                                                                                        400

                                         -50                                                            300
              Au 19




              Fe 20




              Au 20
           01 l20 9




             01 020
              M 20
                         9




                         0
               Ja 9
                        9




               Ap 0

                        0

               Ju 0




                       20
                        9




                        9




                        0
                Ju 01




                      01




                      02
                       1
           01 201




            01 02

           01 202

                       2
                     01




                     01




                     02
                      0




           01 l20
                      0
                    20




                    20




                    20
                  n2
             01 un2




                  n2
                  b2
                  p2




                  p2
                    2
                  g2




                   2




                  g2
                Ju
                ec
                 ct




                 ar

                  r
                ay




                 ct
                ov
              Se




              Se
               O




               O
               J




              D




             M
              N



            01
            15




            01
            01




            01
           01
           01




           01




           01
           01




                                           Figure 1: Reserve balances and the spread of SOFR over IOR
Note: SOFR is the Secured Overnight Financing Rate. IOR is the interest rate paid on reserves. The reserve
balances of the large repo-active banks are shown in blue (right axis). The spread of SOFR from IOR is
shown in red (left axis). Sources: Fedwire Funds Service, FRBNY.


incoming payments to the largest repo-active BHCs had arrived reached the sample-record
high of 155 minutes later than average.
   Although the Covid-related shock was triggered by severe macroeconomic pandemic news
and is quite distinct in nature from the September 2019 disruption in repo markets, for both
of these events our analysis shows that the level of reserves held by the ten repo-active
BHCs, the timing of intraday payments that they receive, and SOFR-IOR spreads are all
near sample extremes. Leading up to these two quite different events, significantly higher
levels of reserve balances of the ten large repo active BHCs would have mitigated stresses on
funding markets and intra-day payment timing. Section 5 provides estimated relationships
among repo rates, reserve balances, and intraday payment timing over the sample period,
including a probit analysis of repo-spike events.
   Because the March 2020 Covid-crisis news also caused severe illiquidity in the secondary
market for Treasury securities, the Fed purchased enormous quantities of Treasuries and
Agencies, expanding the total supply of reserves from mid-March by about $1 trillion in


                                                                       7
just three weeks. As a by-product of this huge asset purchase program, the total reserve
balances of our sample of the ten largest repo-active BHCs increased dramatically, as shown
in Figure 1. With this and other aggressive actions by the Fed to restore market liquidity,11
dealer banks provided reserves much more elastically12 into the repo market and the spread
between SOFR and IOR essentially disappeared, as shown in Figure 1.
       The SOFR-IOR spread was actually negative during most of 2015-2017 because of the
large supply of federal reserve balances and the low outstanding amount of Treasury bills
during most of this period.13 Government money market funds substitute between Treasury
bills and Treasury repos, which places downward pressure on the spread between Treasury
repo rates and IOR when the outstanding supply of Treasury bills is low (Duffie and Krishna-
murthy, 2016). Money funds and most other investors cannot hold Federal reserves, whereas
banks are subject to significant capital requirements for reserves.14 So, when the supply
of reserve balances is sufficiently large relative to the supply of Treasury bills, SOFR-IOR
easily becomes negative. We explore this relationship in Section 7.
       Among the limits to arbitrage between Treasury repo rates and IOR are (i) search frictions
in funding markets (Afonso and Lagos, 2015), (ii) repo market segmentation (Han, 2020;
Avalos, Ehlers and Eren, 2019; Duffie and Krishnamurthy, 2016), (iii) the cost to banks of
  11
      The Fed also offered large amounts of repo funding to primary dealers and exempted reserves and
Treasuries from a capital regulation known as the Supplementary Leverage Ratio (SLR).
   12
      Lou Crandall, Wrightson Capital's money-market analyst, wrote, in the "Money Market Observer" of
July 27, 2020: "As discussed last week, the supply of bank funding available to the repo market became
much more elastic once the aggregate cash asset holdings of large domestic banks surged above $1.5 trillion
this spring. When reserve availability was merely adequate in Q4 2019 and Q1 2020, GC rates had to rise
significantly to induce large domestic banks to substitute RRPs for Fed balances in their HQLA portfolios.
From October of last year through April 2020, it took a 15 basis point widening in the Treasury GCF Repo
index relative to IOR to induce a $100 billion increase in large domestic bank RRP investments. Between
the last Wednesday in May and July 8, large domestic bank RRP positions increased by $271 billion while
the Treasury GCF Repo index widened by just three basis points, for a beta of just 1 basis point per $100
billion of repo funding provided by banks. We expect these relationships to be muddied to some extent
in late July and early August due to tax-season flows, but the basic point still stands: when reserves are
hyper-abundant, banks are likely to be willing to supply a large amount of cash to the repo market at only
a modest yield pick-up over IOR."
   13
      We are grateful to Lou Crandall for emphasizing this point in a private communication.
   14
      In the spring quarter of 2020, in stages, reserve balances were temporarily exempted from the Sup-
plementary Leverage Ratio. Reserve balances continue to contribute to certain other capital requirements
including those based on GSIB scores (Covas and Nelson, 2019).



                                                    8
mobilizing their repo trading operations (Avalos, Ehlers and Eren, 2019; Anbil, Anderson
and Senyuz, 2020b), (iv) capital regulations that raise bank shareholder costs for allocating
balance sheet space to repurchase agreements (Duffie, 2018; Correa, Du and Liao, 2020;
Afonso, Cipriani, Copeland, Kovner, La Spada and Martin, 2020), and (v) intraday payment
timing mismatches, which promote conservative payment timing that can ultimately lead to
the hoarding of reserves. When reserve balances are low enough, banks reach the self-
fulfilling expectation that payments from other banks will be delayed to later in the day
(Hamilton, 1996; McAndrews and Potter, 2002; Bech and Garratt, 2003; Ashcraft and Duffie,
2007; Bech, 2008; Ashcraft, McAndrews and Skeie, 2011; Afonso, Kovner and Schoar, 2011;
Afonso and Shin, 2011; Acharya and Merrouche, 2013; Yang, 2020). While we offer support
for the importance of all of these effects, our main marginal contribution is to estimate and
interpret key relationships among the total reserve balances of the largest dealer banks, the
total reserve balances of other large banks, intraday payment timing delays, and repo rate
distortions.
    The repo market phenomena addressed in this paper are best exemplified by the situation
in mid-September 2019, which is described in detail by Afonso, Cipriani, Copeland, Kovner,
La Spada and Martin (2020), Anbil, Anderson and Senyuz (2020a), Anbil, Anderson and
Senyuz (2020b), Ihrig, Senyuz and Weinbach (2020), and Correa, Du and Liao (2020), among
others. This was almost a perfect storm of supply and demand factors, beginning on the
supply side with the lowest level of reserve balances ever achieved during the Fed's balance
sheet normalization. Reserves had been depleted not only by the gradual process of balance-
sheet normalization, but also by a significant shift of reserves into the Treasury General
Account (TGA).15 The Treasury Department does not supply funding to wholesale money
markets, so the transfer of reserves from banks' Fed balances to the TGA reduces the supply
of cash available to the repo market and other funding markets (Correa, Du and Liao, 2020).
  15
     In May 2015, the Treasury changed its policy around the management of TGA, deciding to establish a
cash balance policy in which they hold sufficient cash for a week of outflows (Treasury Quarterly Refunding
Statement, May 2015).



                                                    9
This conversion of reserves into TGA balances was exacerbated on September 16, 2019 by
quarterly corporate tax payments due that day and by an issuance of $54 billion of Treasury
coupon securities, which was settled early that morning by a transfer of reserves to the TGA
from the accounts of banks which have dealers as clients. This was not an unusually large
Treasury settlement, but it came at a time of low balances held at the Fed by repo-active
BHCs.
       Meanwhile, as documented by Afonso, Cipriani, Copeland, Kovner, La Spada and Martin
(2020) and Anbil, Anderson and Senyuz (2020b), money market mutual funds had recently
reduced their use of "sponsored repo,"16 by which they had obtained repos that were cen-
trally cleared through sponsoring dealers, thus reducing the amount of balance sheet space
committed to repos by those dealers and, by extension, their BHC entity.17
       On the demand side of the repo market, large U.S. government fiscal deficits had caused
a significant secular increase in the outstanding stock of marketable Treasury securities,
which in turn increases the amount of Treasury securities for which dealers required repo
financing. In particular, the Treasury issuances on September 16 and 17, 2020, increased
the demand by dealers for repo financing. Further, a requirement that the Treasury is paid
for issuances early in the morning results in early-morning conversion of reserve balances to
TGA balances, reducing the supply of reserves available that day for any purpose, including
investment in repos and meeting intra-day payment needs. Newly issued Treasury coupon
securities, especially notes, are in high demand in the repo market (Fleming, Hrung and
Keane, 2010). Anbil, Anderson and Senyuz (2020b) show that demand for repo financing of
Treasuries in mid-September 2019 was highly inelastic.
       Our research is most closely related to the work of Correa, Du and Liao (2020), who also
examine, among other wholesale funding-market phenomena, how repo rate spreads respond
  16
    See also H¨user, Lepore and Veraart (2021)
  17
    As a result, if a BHC offsets a reduction in cash available via sponsored repos with an alternate source of
cash, then the BHC would face a heightened regulatory capital commitment because a nettable transaction
would be replaced by one that is not nettable. As a consequence, the reduced use of sponsored repo leading up
to mid-September 2019 could only be replaced by transactions that are more costly in terms of balance-sheet
space, as measured by the associated regulatory capital requirements.


                                                      10
to various funding-market pressures. In this respect, Correa, Du and Liao (2020) analyze
how daily changes in repo rate spreads respond to Treasury issuances, daily changes in TGA
balances, and daily changes in the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasuries and Agencies
in its System Open Market Account (SOMA), as reflected in their Table A5. By contrast,
we focus on relationships among the total balances held at the Fed by large repo-active
BHCs, the total balances held by other large banks, intraday payment delays to the largest
repo-active BHCs, and levels of repo rate spreads over IOR. Correa, Du and Liao (2020)
document the within-BHC flow of cash and securities, especially in response to repo rate
spikes. This flow of reserves and securities between the bank and broker-dealer entities of
the same BHC is an integral underlying assumption of our analysis. Our work is also related
to the work of Klingler and Syrstad (2021) which examines three alternative reference rate
spreads, i.e. SOFR spread, SONIA (the sterling overnight index average) spread and ESTR
(the euro short term rate ) spread, and their empirical relationships to quarter end reporting
dates, government debt outstanding and total bank reserves.
      Our work, like most of the research that we have cited, is relevant to the effectiveness
of monetary policy transmission, the stability of the payment system, and funding market
efficiency. Payment delays or a significant divergence between broad Treasury market repo
rates and IOR can raise concerns over all three objectives, signaling potentially serious
impediments to flows of funds between the central bank, key financial intermediaries, and
other wholesale money market participants.



3       Data: Sources and Description

Our empirical work uses two types of information about balances held at the Federal Reserve
Banks: daily opening balances held in individual accounts and the timing of cash transfers
between accounts within each day.18 The source of both of these types of information is
the Fedwire Funds Service (Fedwire), a utility offering real-time gross settlement services to
 18
      Our analysis is done at the master account level, which is the level at which the Fed tracks overdrafts.


                                                      11
financial institutions holding an account at a Federal Reserve Bank.
       There are over 6,000 accounts on Fedwire, the vast majority of which are managed by
small domestic banks whose actions have at most second-order effects on the U.S. repo
market. We therefore focus our attention on the largest 100 accounts managed by depository
institutions.19 We then identify ten of these accounts held by depository institutions owned
by BHCs that have a large presence in U.S. repo markets.20 Reflecting that the largest
dealers active in repo are associated with large bank holding companies, these ten accounts
hold relatively large balances, on average. Indeed, over 2018-19, the sum of the opening-
day balances of these ten accounts is about 40 percent of total opening-day balances of the
accounts of the 100 largest banks. For simplicity, we refer to these ten large repo-active
account holders as "the dealer banks." This terminology reflects the fact that the bank
entity of a bank holding company holds the Fedwire account, whereas the broker-dealer
entity of the BHC tends to be more active in repo markets.21 Given the requirement of data
confidentiality, we do not identify individual account holders.
       From the opening-day balances data for these 100 accounts, we produce two daily time
series: the sum of opening-day balances for the ten specified dealer banks accounts, and the
sum of the opening-day balances of the other large banks. The daily reserve balances time
series are shown in Figure 2, in blue and red, respectively, for our sample period of 2015
through late 2020. Our data capture a financial institution's account balance at the Federal
Reserve rather than the amount of "reserves" that it holds, as defined by regulation. For
the larger financial institutions on which we focus, this is not an important distinction.22
  19
      We consider the 100 largest accounts in terms of opening balances over 2018-19, excluding accounts held
by the U.S. Treasury, by financial utilities,and a BHC which provides repo clearing and settlement services
to most of the large broker-dealers.
   20
      We use confidential repo data to generate a ranking of gross repo activity at the parent company level.
Using this ranking we find that ten of the top eleven parent companies are associated with bank holding
companies with Fedwire accounts. We use this set of ten bank holding companies to define our repo-active
Fedwire accounts.
   21
      Broker-dealers are not eligible to hold accounts on Fedwire.
   22
      Indeed, we have checked and found that the opening-day balances of these accounts are quite close to
the amount of reserves reported in Call Reports (FR Y-9C). For smaller banks, however, there could be a
significant difference between balances held at the Fed and reserves. In the extreme, a small bank may enter
into a correspondent banking relationship with another (typically larger) bank and place their reserves at


                                                     12
                                                                                                       large dealer-banks
                                   3000                                                                other large banks
                                                                                                       other
   Reserve balances ($ billions)




                                   2000




                                   1000




                                     0
                                          07/2015 01/2016 07/2016 01/2017 07/2017 01/2018 07/2018 01/2019 07/2019 01/2020 07/2020



                                                              Figure 2: Reserve balances over time
Note: Large dealer banks are the total reserve balances of the ten large and repo-active account holders,
Other large banks are the total reserve balances of the other large account holders in our sample of 100
accounts, and Other is the remaining total reserve balances of all other financial institutions.
Source: Fedwire Funds Service, FRED (RESBALNS).


          As a point of reference, the total balances of the 100 accounts in our analysis are about 85
percent of total reserves held at Federal Reserve Banks over 2018-19. (The official calculation
of reserves of an institution also includes its vault cash, which of course plays no role in our
research.) The difference between the total system-wide reserve balances maintained at
Federal Reserve Banks and the total balances of the 100 sample accounts is indicated in
Figure 2 as "other."
          In addition to daily opening-balance information, we compute statistics regarding the
timing of payments sent over Fedwire within the day. Given our access to confidential
payments data on Fedwire, we observe every transfer of funds settled over Fedwire on a
given day. Focusing on the ten repo-active accounts described above, we can observe the
intraday flow of transfers received by these accounts as well as the flow of transfers sent
by these accounts. Using this information, for each given day in our sample, we compute
that bank. The result of such an arrangement could leave the small bank with a zero balance at the Fed
while still holding reserves.



                                                                                     13
when in the day 25%, 50%, and 75%, respectively, of the total value of transfers to these
ten accounts has been received. Likewise, we compute when in the day these respective
fractions of the total value of transfers have been sent by these ten accounts. For example,
on February 20, 2019, half of the total transfers to the ten dealer banks had been received
by 2:03 pm, and half of the total value sent by the ten dealer banks was sent by 12:54 pm.
These statistics are based on standard payment timing metrics used in previous research
on intraday payments, such as Armantier, McAndrews and Arnold (2008), McAndrews and
Kroeger (2016), and Copeland, Molloy and Tarascina (2019).
    Our main source of repo rates is SOFR, a volume-weighted median of overnight Treasury
repo transaction rates, reflecting the costs of funding for a broad range of repo market
participants. This measure is computed and published daily by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York (FRBNY). SOFR is based on a large sample, often in excess of $1 trillion during
our sample period, and is composed of data from tri-party repo (a dealer-to-client market
segment) and two interdealer repo services offered by FICC: the General Collateral Finance
Repo Service (GCF Repo® ), and Fixed Income Clearing Corporation Delivery-vs-Payment
Service (FICC DVP).23 For the portion of our sample period that precedes the availability of
official SOFR fixings, we use unofficial estimates of SOFR published by FRBNY.24 Because
SOFR is a mix of dealer-to-client and interdealer trades, we also use GCF Repo rates data
published by FICC when we want a measure of rates that reflects the costs of financing
Treasuries in interdealer markets.25
    Interdealer repo rates tend to be higher than tri-party repo rates and are more sensitive
to quarter-end capital requirements than are tri-party rates, as we discuss in Section 6.
  23
     GCF Repo® Service (hereinafter, "GCF Repo") is a registered service mark of the Fixed Income Clearing
Corporation.
  24
     These unofficial estimates and the SOFR reference rates can be found at https://apps.newyorkfed.
org/markets/autorates/SOFR
  25
     GCF Repo has by far the smallest volume when compared to tri-party repo and FICC DVP, as can
been seen from the published volumes on FRBNY's SOFR website. Given its relatively small size, there is
a concern that GCF Repo rates are not representative of interdealer rates. To check this, we compared the
GCF Repo rates to those provided by Tradition, an interdealer broker, and found the two sets of rates to be
highly similar.



                                                    14
                           200
                                 GCF-IOR (truncated)
                                 SOFR-IOR (truncated)


                           150
   Spread (basis points)




                           100




                            50




                             0


                                           Jul 2018     Jan 2019      Jul 2019   Jan 2020   Jul 2020
                                                                   Date


                                                 Figure 3: Repo rate benchmarks, spread to IOR
Note: SOFR is the secured overnight financing rate and IOR is interest on reserves. SOFR-IOR is shown
in blue. GCF Repo-IOR is shown in red. Both spread plots are truncated at 200 basis points for improved
visualization. Source: FRBNY and FICC.


Generally speaking, however, our results concerning the implications for repo rate spreads
of the ampleness of reserve balances do not depend importantly on which of these two
segments of the repo market is considered, as shown in a parallel set of results for other repo
benchmarks found in the Appendix. We focus primarily on the spread between SOFR and
IOR, which is illustrated in Figure 3 alongside the the spread between GCF Repo and IOR.
         In order to capture some of the intraday behavior of Treasury repo markets, we also use
intraday general-collateral repo rate transaction-level data provided to us by Tradition, an
interdealer broker, as captured by Tradition's brokering screen.26
         We obtained Treasury issuance and redemption data from the Treasury Department. Our
daily time series of Treasury bills outstanding was provided by Lou Crandall of Wrightson
Capital, who created this series from daily issuance and redemption data. We obtained
corporate tax payment data from The Daily Treasury Statement. Summary statistics of the
key variables used in our study are provided in Appendix Table 6.
  26
     For each transaction record, the fields includes whether the accepted rate is a bid or an ask, the size of
the trade, and the collateral type. The data span 1/4/2016 to 2/27/2020. There are 202,062 overnight trade
quotes with general Treasury collateral.


                                                                          15
4       Intraday stress on balances held at the Fed

A natural hypothesis is that when repo rates are above IOR, the repo-active dealer banks
allocate their reserve balances based on the tradeoff between (a) holding balances at the
Federal Reserve and (b) depleting these balances in order to obtain a higher rate of com-
pensation in the repo market. Balances at the Federal Reserve are compensated at IOR,
contribute to the option to make payments at any subsequent time during the day, and con-
tribute to meeting regulatory liquidity requirements and maintaining the bank's reputation
with regulatory supervisors for maintaining high levels of liquidity.
       Jamie Dimon, the Chairman and CEO of JP Morgan, famously27 commented on this
tradeoff during J.P. Morgan's third-quarter 2019 earnings call, when he responded to a
question28 about "everything that went on in the repo markets" during the September 2019
repo market disruption by saying

". . . we have a checking account at the Fed with a certain amount of cash in it. Last year
[2018] we had more cash than we needed for regulatory requirements. So when repo rates
went up, we went from the checking account, which was paying IOR into repo. Obviously
makes sense, you make more money. But now the cash in the account, which is still huge.
It's $120 billion in the morning and goes down to $60 billion during the course of the day and
back to $120 billion at the end of the day. That cash, we believe, is required under resolution
and recovery and liquidity stress testing. And therefore, we could not redeploy it into repo
market, which we would have been happy to do. And I think it's up to the regulators to decide
they want to recalibrate the kind of liquidity they expect us to keep in that account. Again, I
look at this as technical; a lot of reasons why those balances dropped to where they were. I
think a lot of banks were in the same position, by the way. But I think the real issue, when
you think about it, is what does that mean if we ever have bad markets? Because that's kind
of hitting the red line in the Fed checking account, you're also going to hit a red line in LCR,
like HQLA, which cannot redeployed either. So, to me, that will be the issue when the time
comes. And it's not about JPMorgan. JPMorgan will be fine in any event. It's about how
the regulators want to manage the system and who they want to intermediate when the time
comes."
  27
    Dimon's comments were covered by, for example, Bloomberg.
  28
    Glenn Schorr, analyst at Evercore, questioned Dimon as follows. "Curious your take on everything that
went on in the repo markets during the quarter, and I would love it if you could put it in the context of
maybe the fourth quarter of last year. If I remember correctly, you stepped in in the fourth quarter, saw
higher rates, threw money at it, made some more money, and it calmed the markets down. I'm curious
what's different this quarter that did not happen, and curious if you think we need changes in the structure
of the market to function better on a go-forward basis."



                                                    16
    Under post-crisis liquidity regulations and supervision, globally systemically important
bank holding companies (GSIBs) appeared to have become extremely averse to the risk that
their intraday reserve balances could approach zero, the "red line" described by Dimon.29
This conclusion is supported by our conversations with relevant senior managers at several
GSIBs. A daylight overdraft at a large systemically important bank would cause a loss
of reputation to the bank and thus to its line managers responsible for managing intraday
balances. Given the uncertain timing of incoming payments, it is natural for a large dealer
bank to be conservative when providing discretionary funding in the repo market by quoting
high repo rates whenever its balances are low and incoming payments could be delayed.30
    This is also what we find in the data. For example, the most powerful single explanatory
variable in our data for the SOFR-IOR spread is the time of day by which half of incoming
payments to the large repo-active dealer banks have been received. A delay of one standard
deviation (58 minutes) in this half-received payment time is predicted to increase SOFR-IOR
by more than 8 basis points, after controlling for quarter-end fixed effects, and is predicted
by the probit analysis (shown in the next section) to roughly double the likelihood of a
significant repo rate spike. (This relationship is even stronger in the GCF Repo market.)
Moreover, the most extreme distortions in repo rates in our sample occur on days with the
longest delays in these half-received payment times. We explore these relationships in more
detail in the next section.
    The most immediately relevant liquidity rules, tests, and supervision are summarized as
  29
     To a follow-up question, Dimon replied: "As I said, we have $120 billion in our checking account at the
Fed, and it goes down to $60 billion and then back to $120 billion during the average day. But we believe the
requirement under CLAR and resolution and recovery is that we need enough in that account, so if there's
extreme stress during the course of the day, it doesn't go below zero. If you go back to before the crisis,
you'd go below zero all the time during the day. So the question is, how hard is that as a red line? Was
the intent of regulators between CLAR and resolution to lock up that much of reserves in the account with
Fed? And that'll be up to regulators to decide. But right now, we have to meet those rules and we don't
want to violate anything we've told them we're going to do."
  30
     Small to medium size banks seem to still use daylight overdraft facility to make their payments whenever
total reserve balances are low. Indeed, as shown in Figure 9, peak system-wide overdrafts have remained
highly related to the opening-of-day reserve balances of the 100 largest banks during our post-2015 sample
period, with an R2 of 0.57 for this relationship. Figure 9 also shows that system-wide peak daylight overdrafts
achieved their record high level in the two-week maintenance window ending September 25, 2019. This is
also the two-week maintenance window in our sample that has the lowest average daily opening balances.


                                                      17
follows.

        The Fed's Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) supervises

         the intraday liquidity risk of large banks. In its May, 2019 Report on Supervisory
         Developments, the Federal Reserve Board stated: "In 2019, LISCC liquidity supervi-
         sion is focusing on the adequacy of a firm's cash-flow forecasting capabilities, practices
         for establishing liquidity risk limits, and measurement of intraday liquidity risk." Ihrig
         (2019) describes the associated Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR),
         including the CLAR stress test mentioned by Dimon.

        The Federal Reserve Board's Regulation YY, Enhanced Prudential Standards, includes

         rules covering intraday liquidity exposures.31 According to the Federal Reserve Board's
         August 2019 Senior Financial Officer Survey, "satisfying internal liquidity stress met-
         rics, meeting routine intraday payment flows, and meeting potential deposit outflows
         were important or very important determinants" of banks' holdings of excess reserves.
         In a related BIP survey, over three-quarters of the banks to which the Regulation YY
         liquidity buffer is applicable indicated this to be an "important" or "very important"
         consideration.

        Under the Dodd-Frank Act, the Fed and FDIC implemented failure planning require-

         ments for Resolution Liquidity Adequacy and Positioning (RLAP), which include the
         intraday "resolution" liquidity requirement mentioned by Dimon. The associated FDIC
         and Federal Reserve Board guidance states that banks must "ensure that liquidity is
         readily available to meet any deficits." "Additionally, the RLAP methodology should
  31
     The language for this rule in the Code of Federal Regulations includes: "If the bank holding company
is a global systemically important BHC, Category II bank holding company, or a Category III bank holding
company, these procedures must address how the management of the bank holding company will: (i) Monitor
and measure expected daily gross liquidity inflows and outflows; (ii) Manage and transfer collateral to obtain
intraday credit; (iii) Identify and prioritize time-specific obligations so that the bank holding company can
meet these obligations as expected and settle less critical obligations as soon as possible; (iv) Manage the
issuance of credit to customers where necessary; and (v) Consider the amounts of collateral and liquidity
needed to meet payment systems obligations when assessing the bank holding company's overall liquidity
needs."



                                                     18
         take into account (A) the daily contractual mismatches between inflows and outflows;
         (B) the daily flows from movement of cash and collateral for all inter-affiliate trans-
         actions; and (C) the daily stressed liquidity flows and trapped liquidity as a result of
         actions taken by clients, counterparties, key FMUs,32 and foreign supervisors, among
         others." Pozsar (2019a) outlines how RLAP impacts the intraday incentives for dealer
         banks to conserve reserve balances on days of Treasury issuances.

       Even in the post-2008 period, when system-wide reserves have been much higher than pre-
crisis, Copeland, Molloy and Tarascina (2019) and McAndrews and Kroeger (2016) showed a
strong relationship between intraday payment timing and system-wide total reserve balances.
Indeed, as shown in Figure 4, the half-received time of payments to the dealer banks is highly
related to the opening-of-day reserve balances of the other large banks in our sample. The
red dot in Figure 4 shows the sample's second latest time of day by which the ten dealer
banks had received 50% of their total daily payments, which occurred on September 17, 2019.
On that day, this half-received payment time was 151 minutes later than its sample average.
Likewise, September 17, 2019 was the day on which the spread between SOFR and IOR
achieved its record high. The only higher half-received payment time, at 155 minutes above
average, occurred on March 17, 2020, during the Covid pandemic shock, when SOFR-IOR
jumped to 44 basis points.
       In short, it seems that new liquidity regulations had the unintended consequence of dis-
couraging banks from providing liquidity to markets during stress periods, and have some-
times caused hoarding of reserve balances. While these adverse impacts of post-crisis financial
regulations were predicted by regulators, they were not forecasted to be significant (Com-
mittee on the Global Financial System and Markets Committee, 2015). Gorton and Muir
(2016) predicted that analogous inefficiencies would be caused by the liquidity coverage ratio
(LCR) rule, which also ties down a bank's high quality liquid assets, such as reserves, as
a liquidity backstop. Their analysis draws from the National Banking Era, when national
  32
    An FMU is a designated financial market utility, such as a designated payment system or a settlement
system.


                                                  19
                                                                                                                             q
                                            q
                                                                                                              q
                                                    q
                                                        q              q     q
                                                                             q
                                                                         q
   Time from sample mean (minutes)
                                                    q     q                                                                 q
                                                           qq          q
                                                        qq            q                                         q
                                                          q       q                                                                       q         q
                                                                          q           q                                   q
                                                                   q q
                                                               qq     qq q q             q                q q          q               q
                                                            qq                   q q q
                                      100           q
                                                            qq
                                                               q
                                                               q    q
                                                                    q
                                                                      q
                                                                       qq
                                                                     q q
                                                                q q q qq
                                                                        q
                                                                          qqq
                                                                          qq q
                                                                           q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q  q   q  q
                                                                                              qq        q
                                                                                                        q      q      q
                                                                                                                                                q

                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                  q         qq q
                                                                             q    q
                                                                                  q        q q q                                                                                                                  q
                                                                       qq
                                                q             qq      q qqqq
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq  q     qq
                                                                                     q     q
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                  q       q                                           q                                                      q
                                                            qq         q                qq q                  q      q
                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                      q            q          q q                         q            q
                                                            q       qq
                                                                     q
                                                                      q q
                                                                        qq q
                                                                           q q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                 qqq q q q     q       qqq  qq q qq             q                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                             q         qqqqqqq
                                                                             qq q           q q qq qq q
                                                                                                      qq q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                          qq   q q  qqq q qq qq                                                    q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                    q qq    qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q qqq
                                                                    q      qq  q                     q        qq
                                                                                                                      q q q              q              q                                                      q q         q                  q
                                                                   qq q q       q  q qq q           q
                                                                                                          q  q      qq      qq
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                            q  q
                                                                                                                                                                q q                     q  q q  qq      q               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                       q  q      q           q     q            q qq q q q                  q                                                       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                 q     qq q           qq q               q      q qq   q q q  q qq q             q q                                 q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq q q                  q                                           q
                                                                      qq q  qqq q q q q qq q                  q qqq q qqqq q        q q              qq q               qq        q q  q q            q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                        q
                                                                      q   q          qq q       q     q                 qq       q    q   q      q                                      q q q
                                                                               q q
                                                                               q    q  qq       qq                q
                                                                                                                 qqqq q  q                                          q                            qq              q           q                q
                                                                    q                      q    q qqq            qqqq q q q q
                                                                                                                                 q   qq q                         q             qq q         q q  q qq q q    q                                                     q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     q q
                                                                                          qq qq    qqq     q            q
                                                                                                                        q     qq
                                                                                                                                  q                  q            qq q                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q           q           q                            q
                                                                              q                 q qq                qqqq  q       qqqqq       q    q q  q
                                                                                                                                                        q                       q                                     q
                                                                             q q          q                 q     q                      q q          q   q
                                                                                                                                                          qqq                          q q             q
                                                                                    qqq      q q              q     q q q       q                            qq q q q q q                               q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                             q                                       qqq         q        qq    q q          qq           q q q qq
                                                                     q               qq     q                 q          q qq
                                                                                                                            q        q q q  q q           qqq qq   q q         q                               q                      q                            q
                                                                                               q                      qq               q q q q  q
                                                                                                                                                   qqq q               q    q       q                   q            q                     q                q      qq q
                                                                                                                      q                       q
                                                                                                                                              q     qq q q   qq  q                     q q              q q       q                                              q
                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    qqq        q q            q qq          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q qq q                              qq                              q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                        qq                    q  q         q q q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    q  q           q   q    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q       q      q                                 q
                                                                                                                                                       q           q      q q    q           q q          q            q                   q                  q          q
                                                                                                                                                   qq q        q                 qqq q qq                                                                                       q
                                        0                                              q
                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                            q qq

                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                            q qq q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                qq

                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                             qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                 qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                             qq q              q qq      q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq                 q  q     qq    q       q   q          q
                                                                                                                    q                                   q q q                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                   q qq    q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq q q q         q       q                           q      q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q      q
                                                                                                                                 q                        qq         q q q
                                                                                                                                                                         q             q q qq q  qq qq   q q     q             q          q                                q     q
                                                                                                                                                                q     q q q      q        q q q  qq qq     qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq             qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                               q         qq q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q qqqq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q                    q                              q
                                                                                                                                         q      q     q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                            q           qq q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq            q q q qq                   q       q          q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                     q               q                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                      q qq q     qqq qqqq q        q          q q q q                    q
                                                                                                                                              q       q       q      q     q q qq     q    q q qq q      qqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q           qq               q                            q
                                                                                                                                                                         q q             qqq   q        q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq             q q qq q             q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q     q
                                                                                                                                                q                               qq q         q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q             q             qq               q
                                                                                                                                                                              q         q qq  q    q q qq q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q  qqq     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q q qq q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q      qq       qq      q qqqqq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q             q q       q    q        q q  q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q       q   qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q    qq   q        q     q     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq             q             qq q q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q              qqq qq qq  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q           q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq q            qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q     q q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq      qq q                  q        q q q      q q  qqqqq     qq       q q qq         q     q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q         q q q         q    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q  qq qq q  q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q     qq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  qq                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                         qqq q q                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q         qq           qq q q  q qqq q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq qqq  q qqq q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q qqq      qqqq q qq q    q qq qq         q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q            q                               q   q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q       q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q  q qq q q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q  q     q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q          q                q q       q    q qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q    qq q q q  q    qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq   q qq   qq q        q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                             q          q  qqq        q    q   q q      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q         q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q          q q q qqq qq                qq q           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq                  qq q   q     qqq qq         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                      q            qq q q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq     qqq  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq                             q qq q                      q
                                     -100                                     q                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                 q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                            q




                                                                           800                                                     1000                                                      1200                                                     1400                                                      1600
                                                                                                             Other large bank balances ($ billions)

  Figure 4: Non-dealer bank reserve balances and the timing of payments to dealer banks
Note: Reserve balances are the total opening-of-day reserve balances of all accounts in our sample, except
for the ten dealer banks. The payment timing measure is the half-received time of payments to the dealer
banks. The solid line is the estimated linear relationship, which has an R2 of 0.69. The slope coefficient,
-0.209, is estimated with a standard error of 0.0037. The date corresponding to the red dot in the upper
left corner is September 17, 2019, when SOFR-IOR spiked to its sample-record high. Source: Fedwire Funds
Service.


banks ignored apparent arbitrages that would have required issuing new money because of
the distortionary effect of the requirement to back private money issuance one-for-one with
Treasuries.
          The new liquidity regulations may have an especially large impact in repo markets because
the majority of repo transactions are executed early in the business day. For example,
transaction level data from Tradition's repo platform demonstrate that a large fraction of
interdealer repo trades are conducted between 7:00am and 7:20am, Eastern time (Appendix
Figure 8). Based on the empirical evidence and the institutional facts that we have described,
when intermediating the Treasury repo market, the marginal value to a dealer bank of holding
balances at the Fed is sensitive to anticipated intraday payment stresses on these balances.
Figure 5 shows a strong relationship on stress days between Tradition repo rates spreads
over IOR at the opening of the day, during the key period between 7:00am and 7:20am, and
the half-received payment time on the same day for the ten repo-active dealer banks.


                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                 200   q
                                           Normal days
                                       q   Crunch days

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
Median payment time (minutes)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q       q                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq      q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q            q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q        q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                q                                                                                                                qq             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q      q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq           q q q             q q              q
                                 100                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q  q         q  q q         q             q
                                                                                                                                                       q                                        q      qq q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq q  qq  qqq          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q q q q                  q  q q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq                           q
                                                                                                                                                       q                                              q q  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq       q
                                                                                                                                                                     q        q                                  q q
                                                                                                                                    q                        q q q q qq      qq     qq q q q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q       q        q q
                                                                                                                                                    q                       q  qqq      qq q q    q qq     qq qq q qqq q qq   qq         q       q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q     qq     q           qq q  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q    q          qq q                  q
                                                                                                                            q           q              q q        q q     q q
                                                                                                                                                                              q      q q      q q            q                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                      q           q
                                                                                                                                                                         q q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q         q q                 q
                                                                q                                                                                            q          q qq                 q           qqq q                 q
                                                                                                                                                                               qq q q q                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                q q q qqq q      q              q qq
                                                                                                                                                           q       q       qq q       q      q q          q  qq q               q
                                                                                                    q                                                              q q q  q             q      qq          q
                                                                                                                                                          q                     qq q    qq          q q  q qq  q      qq
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                q      q                  q          q q   q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                            q                               qq                          qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                        q       qq
                                                                                                                             q                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                    q     q qq      q              qq
                                                                                            q                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                        q q  q          q             q                q q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                       q                     q
                                                                                                                                                                             q qq           q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q q q     q q q
                                                                                                                                            q                        q                 q             q q
                                                                                                                                                    q           q            q         q     q                     q     q
                                                                                                                                                              q             q        qq                  q q         q
                                                                    q                       q                       q
                                                                                                                                                         q        qq               q  q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                            q             qq              q                        qq qq                     q           q
                                                                                                                        q   q                                    q q
                                                                                                                                                                 q  q                    qq
                                                                                                                                        qq                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q                 q
                                                                                    q                                                                     q           q       q                             q
                                                                                        q                                                                q                 q      q
                                                                                                                    q                                       q                                        q
                                                                                q                                                               q               q
                                                                                                                                                                      q              q          q qq              q          q
                                                                                                                                    q               q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                            q                            q                                       q
                                                                                            q                   q                                     qq    q q
                                                   q                                                                                     qq
                                   0                                                                    q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                            q       qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                q q                                                   q q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                   q
                                                                        q                                                                                                        q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q                      q
                                                                                                                                                    q                                         q         q
                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                       q                                           q
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                         q                                                   q                   q
                                                                                            q                                               q               q      q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq                                                              q
                                                                                    q                                                       q                                                                                 q          q
                                                                                                                q                                         q                   q
                                       q                                                                    q
                                               q                                                                                                                          q             q
                                                                            q                                           q                                         q
                                                                                                        q                                           q             q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                    q                                                           q
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                              q




                                -100
                                                       0.0625                                                               1                                                                                     16                                                              256
                                                                            VWATR20min - IOR (basis points)

                                                         Figure 5: Interdealer repo rates and payments timing
Note: The repo rate spread shown in the value-weighted average of Treasury general collateral repo rates,
in excess of IOR, over the first 20 minutes of the day. Because of the log scale, we drop the observations
for which this rate spread is negative. "Crunch days" are those for which the rate spread is at least 15
basis points above the average rate spread over the previous 14 days. The solid line is the estimated linear
relationship between the two variables. Data sources: Fedwire Funds Service and Tradition.


                                 Stress on the intraday balances held by these dealer banks is also related to our finding
that dealer banks delay their outgoing payments to a much lesser extent than the delay
in their incoming payments, as we discuss in Section 5. This relationship holds in general
throughout our sample period, including days on which repo rates spiked. On the repo-
stress days of September 17, 2019 and March 17, 2020, for example, the delay in half-time
of payments received reached the highest two levels in the sample, 151 and 155 minutes
respectively, whereas the delays in half-sent time were only 6 and 54 minutes, respectively.
Contributing to the lower responsiveness of the timing of outgoing payments is the fact that
payments to the Treasury General Account for the settlement of Treasuries purchased at
auctions must be made early in the morning.
                                 Yang (2020) suggests an additional impact of payment timing stress on repo rates,
through the motive to hoard cash when a bank perceives that other banks may have low
opening balances at the Fed. This induces a self-fulfilling equilibrium expectation of later-
than-normal payments by multiple banks, inciting spikes in repo rates. Empirical work con-


                                                                                                                                                                                    21
sistent with the importance of cash hoarding in funding markets includes Hamilton (1996),
McAndrews and Potter (2002), Bech and Garratt (2003), Ashcraft and Duffie (2007), Bech
(2008), Ashcraft, McAndrews and Skeie (2011), Afonso, Kovner and Schoar (2011), and
Afonso and Shin (2011).
       Another factor that may contribute to a high shadow cost to dealer banks of providing
intraday funding with reserves is the risk that an intraday overdraft at the Fed is converted
into an overnight overdraft, requiring the dealer bank to use the Discount Window. Histor-
ically, it has been argued that banks are reluctant to use the Discount Window because of
concerns with stigma (Armantier, Ghysels, Sarkar and Shrader, 2015). The Federal Reserve
has taken steps to reduce this stigma (see, for example, a March 15, 2020 press release by the
Federal Reserve), but Covas and Nelson (2019) argue that stigma concerns remain and are
the main reason that funding market stresses are not mitigated by the drawing of reserves
from the Discount Window.



5        Liquidity stress and low Fed balances

In this section, we quantify key liquidity stresses associated with low levels of Fed balances.
The simplest important natural relationships that we find in the data are summarized as
follows33 .

    1. In aggregate, banks send payments later in the day when their Fed balances are lower
         (Table 1, column 1). But this relationship differs across types of banks. In a multi-
         variate regression of the half-received time of payments to dealer banks on (a) dealer
         bank balances and (b) other-large-bank balances, we find the anticipated negative
         loading on other-large-bank balances. But the estimated coefficient on dealer-bank
         balances is positive (Table 1, column 2). This may reflect the endogenous response
  33
    Our findings are robust to considering subsamples of the data, in particular the subsample of days on
which there is substantial Treasury issuance (i.e., Treasury bill issuance over 19 billion dollars), as well as
the subsample of days on which there is not substantial Treasury issuance (i.e., Treasury bill issuance is less
than 19 billion dollars and coupon issuance is less than 10 billion dollars).


                                                      22
       of dealer banks to the risk of intraday liquidity stress, thus increasing their balances
       in anticipation. The incoming payment delays can be substantial. For example, a
       one-standard-deviation reduction in other-large-bank opening balances ($231 billion)
       predicts a 57 minute delay in the dealer-bank half-received payment time (Table 1,
       column 2). The R2 for this relationship, after controlling for a quarter-end fixed effect,
       is 73%.

   2. Dealer banks likely increase their Fed balances when anticipating incoming payment
       delays because they plan to continue to send payments without significant delay. This
       may place pressure on their intraday liquidity. This interaction effect is shown graph-
       ically in Figure 6, where the half-sent time ranges from -50 to 50 minutes, whereas
       the half-received time ranges from -100 to 150 minutes. This effect is captured more
       systematically in a series of regressions showing that the half-received time is more
       sensitive to changes in reserves and repo rates than is the half-sent time. (Compare
       columns 2-4 with columns 6-8 of Table 1). Further, we estimate that a one-minute
       delay in the half-received time predicts only a 0.18 minute delay in the half-sent time
       (Table 1, column 9). Finally, reflecting both the need to send payments earlier to the
       TGA on issuance days and also the dominant role played by dealer banks in Treasury
       markets, net Treasury issuance has a large, negative, and significant relationship with
       the half-sent time. This is not the case for the half-received time.

   3. Each successive doubling of the difference between SOFR-IOR and its sample min-
       imum predicts a delay in the half-received time of dealer banks of approximately 43
       minutes, with an estimated standard error of 2 minutes (Table 1, column 3).34

   4. Treasury repo rates rise further above efficient-market levels (IOR) when dealer banks
       receive their payments later in the day. A one-standard-deviation delay in the half-
       received time of dealer bank payments (58 minutes) predicts an elevation of SOFR-IOR
  34
    This is calculated by scaling the regression coefficient by log (2), using the fact that the regressor is the
natural logarithm of the excess of SOFR-IOR over its sample minimum (minus 1 basis point).


                                                       23
       of 8.2 basis points, with a standard deviation of approximately 0.6 basis points, after
       controlling for quarter-end fixed effects (Table 2, column 3). The R2 for this relation-
       ship is 36%.

 5. Large spikes in repo rates are much more likely on days with large issuances of coupon
       Treasuries and on days with much longer than normal intraday delays in payments to
       the large repo-active dealer banks. For example, on September 17, 2019, SOFR-IOR
       spiked to 315 basis points and the half-received payment time for dealer banks was 151
       minutes above its sample average, a record high to that point of our sample period.
       Half-sent payment times were only delayed by 6 minutes.35 The estimated probit
       models shown in Table 3 and Appendix Table 5 indicate that a spike in repo rates is
       much more likely to occur on days that (a) have a significantly delayed half-received
       time of payment to the repo active dealer banks, (b) have large Treasury coupon
       security issuances, (c) have low dealer balances, (d) are quarter ends, and (e) have
       combinations of two or more of these effects.

 6. Treasury issuance settlements result in cash transfers from banks' accounts at the Fed
       to the TGA account, and moreover these transfers must occur near the beginning of the
       day, as we have verified from multiple authoritative sources. Issuance settlements also
       add to demands for financing in the repo market (Fleming, Hrung and Keane, 2010),
       both of which elevate repo-rate distortions. For example, after controlling for other
       key factors (Table 2, column 7), a typical $50 billion issuance of coupon Treasuries
       predicts an increase of SOFR-IOR by 3.45 basis points (with a standard error of
       about 0.6 basis points). The analogous prediction for the interdealer market (GCF
       Repo-IOR) is 5 basis points (Appendix Table 7, column 7). This issuance effect
       was previously reflected in the results of Correa, Du and Liao (2020), whose Table
       A5 shows that the amount of repo "lending" (reverse repurchases) conducted by U.S.
       globally systemically important banks (GSIBs) has risen significantly with increases in
35
     Note that this outlier scatter dot is not displayed in Figure 6.


                                                      24
                              80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
   SOFR-IOER (basis points)




                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                            q




                              40                                                                                                                                            q


                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                          q


                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                       q                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                 q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q       qq                                                                                                      q                                  q                       q
                                                                                                                                                  q                                             q          q                                                                                                                                               q    q                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                           q        q                                                                                                                                                                                         q    q
                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q       qq                                                                                                                                      q             q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q        q                q                                                                                                                                    qq                                q                                       q
                                                                                                                                    q                                                                      q           q                              q                                                                                                                                                       q                 q                      q       q
                                                                                                               q                                                q                                                          q                        q                                                                                    q                                                                             q                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                    q        q                                                                                                                  q           q                         q
                                                                                                                                                      q                                                         q                      q        q              q                   q                                                                                q qq                                      qq   q
                                                                                                                                                                                     qq                        qq q        q       q                q     q                                                                                                          q       q            qq      qq q                 q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                        q                                q                         q           q                                                                                                                                   q                                q                   q q
                                                                                                                   q                                                                         q q       q q q q     qq q         q                        q                 q                                                                                     q      qq    q q          q     q    q q                q        q                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q          q q q                 qq qq q    qqq q                                                                                                          q               q          q q q                    q q q q       q       q    q     q     q          q
                                                                                                                                             q              q                  q         qq q   qq q q           qq q      qq q q qq        qqq q q       q                                                                                        qq       q q         qq       q q q         qq         q qq   q q qq q   q qq q            q
                                                                                                           q                    q                   q         q              q           q          qqqq q qq      q q qq  q      qqq q        q qq q q                                q                                 q                                 q      q    q       q q q         qq qq   q     qqqqq q       qqq q q q q                   qq          qq         q
                                                                                                                   q                    q              q                         qq       q q               q qq   qqq    q q q       qq         q                         q                                         q                                          qq q q               q q  qqq    qqq q   qqqq         q     q q      q q           q
                                                                                                                                       q                 q        q q  q     q             q           qq     qq q  qq            q q     q      q   q                                                                                             q         qq         qq q       qqq    qq q q  q      qqq     q            q
                                                                                                                                                      q        q qq q         q     q q  q     qq qq q            qqqq q q          qq q q q    q      q                                                                                                 q      qqq               qqq q q qqqq qqq   q q q     q q     qqqq            q q      q



                               0                                        q
                                                                              q

                                                                                  q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                          q q
                                                                                              q

                                                                                               q
                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                     q     q
                                                                                                                            q



                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    q qqq q q


                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                      q



                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       q qq qq qqq
                                                                                                                                                        q qq
                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                           q q qq
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                              qq

                                                                                                                                                            qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                   qq

                                                                                                                                                                 qq q
                                                                                                                                                                     q q qqq

                                                                                                                                                                       q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                      qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                             qq

                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                           q q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq

                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq


                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qqq

                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q qq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q qq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qq      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q    q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq qqq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q qq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q      q q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q




                                                                    q q qq qq              q     q         q q          q     qqq q           qqq qq q q      q q q   q         q     q q               q q                                                                                                                                                q                  q          qq    q qq   q q q       qqqq  qq q qqq q q q   qqq q       qq             q
                                        q         q       q                 qq             q q                q         q q       qqqq q           q q q                   q           q                                                               q                                                                                                              q            qq      q     q        qq        qq        qqq         q q          q      qq q  q
                                                                     qqq q                 q q q q q qqq                  qq       q qq        q q q         q         q q                                                                                                                                                       q                                                  qq q            qq q  qq     q    q q       qqq     q      qq        qq
                                                          q        q q        qq         q qqq q      q qq        q             q q       qqqq q        qq qq q   q                            q                                              q                                                                                                                  q      qq           q           q    qqq qq          q q       q    qqqq    q qqqq            q
                                           q       q          q q qqq          q q      q qq qqqq           q q           q qqq         qqq q q                q qqq                qq        q      q       q q               q                                                                                                                                                q q  qqq     qq q q qq q q qq      qqqq q  qq    qqq        q q qq            qqqq      q
                                          q                qq qqq q         q q qq qq qqq qq qq qqqq q q           q q       q qq        q     q      q         q                          q     q                    q                                                                                                                                                 q      qq        q q     q qqq   qq qq  qqqq  q q qq    qq qqq      qqq  q q q        q q  qq  q
                                             q q q q q         q      qqqq q qq qq q q qq         qq q q         qq q                      q q        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                qq q qq qq           qq q qq    qq qqq q qq qq qq                        qq
                                               q        qq    qq q q    qqq q qq q       qqqq qq              qqq        q      q     qq     q              q               q                                                                                                                                                                                  q        q            q     qq q   q            q       q qqqq     qqqq q   qq q q q          qq q  q
                                              qq      q q q    qqqqq q      q     qqqqq q q     qq q q qq    q qq             q q      q                     q                                            q                         q                                                                                                                                   q                    qqq      qq     qqqq  qqq  q    qqqq qqq q  q q qq      qq q  qq    qq qqq
                                                         qqq qq  qqqq   qqqq q   q q qq  qq qq q                  qq                 qq q        q           q                                                                                     q                                                                                                                         qq        q               qq qq   qqqq qqqqqq  qq qqq    qqqq q                      qq   q
                                                q q qq   q q  qqqqqqqqqqq q q   qq qqqqq qq qqqqqqqqqqq     qqqqq qqqq  q q qqqq qq     q q           q        q                q                 q                                                                                                                                                          q          q q q  qq q q    qq      qqq qqqqqqq qqqq qqq    qq q q q  qqqqqqq q  qqq    qqqqqqqq  qqq qq
                                      q q q        q q q  qqqqqqq qq      qq qq   q      q q q         qq q q q q q q               q q q    q qq q    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                q    qqq            qq qq   qqq qq  qqq  qqqq qq q  q q q qq  qqq q q   qq q     q        qqq         q
                                            q q      q qqq  qq q qqq  qq qq   qq q q    q q q q qq       q                       qq q               q       q q                                                                                                                                                                                                   q          q q             qq     q    q q qqq q   qq q  q q qq    qqq q q q     qq q q q  q    qqq
                                       q      q q qq q qqq      q q q qq  q q  q      q        q     qq q        qqq q        q q q       q q        qq q            q                                                                                                                                                                                    q               q                    qqq        qq q  q q q        qqq    qqqqqqq q q    q qq  qq       qqq
                                      q q              q           qqq        qq q q           q      q q q         q      qq q q q                      qq                       q                                                                                                                                                                                         q                  q      q       q    qqqq qq       qq qq       q q q      qq         qq
                                                    qq      qqqqq      qq qq     q q   qq q qqqqqq qqqqq  q qqq qq q    qqqq q q   qq           q        q q           q                                       q                                                                                                                                                q          q    qqqq    q q           qq qq q q     qqqqqqqq qqqq q  q q qqq q         q q q q q    q     q
                                                                  q q q    q qqq q     q qq q         q q qq qq qq          q q        q     q     q                       q                                                                                                                                                                                     q         q                      q      qq q q q qq     q qqq    qqqq   qqq q  qq        q
                                                                       q      q       qqq qq q q        qq qq q q   qqq       qqq qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                       q q qqq          q           q     q        q                                     q                                                                                                                                           q qq                  q q q      qqq q    q    q q qq qq q qqqqqq     qqq        qq      q qq  q
                                                               q     q         q qq q q       qqq         q q q q   qqqqq q  q      q q qq qq                                                                                                                                                                                        q                  q                                       qq qq       qqq  qq qqq q          qq q q        qqq qqq q          qq
                                                q                            qq       qq qq   qq q q q q    qq qqqqq  qqqq q   qq q   qqqq            qq                 q q q                                                                                                                                                                                           q              qqq      qqq q qq     qqq q qq qqqq qq   qqqqq qqqqqq    qqq  q q  q q     qq
                                                                               q q q q      qq q q     q q     q      q q       qq              q         qq                                                        q                                                                                                                                                    q         q        q      qq q   q q        q        q            qq qq        qq q  qq

                                                                                                                        q                   q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                              q

                                                                                                                                    q                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                               q




                                     -100                                                                                                   0                                                                                  100                                                                       -100                                                                                                          0                                                              100
                              Receiving time from sample mean (minutes)                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sending time from sample mean (minutes)


                                                                                                        Figure 6: Repo rates and dealer-bank payment timing
Note: SOFR is the secured overnight financing rate. IOR is the interest rate paid by the Fed on reserves.
Receiving time is the time by which half of the total of the ten repo-active dealer banks' incoming payments
have been received. Sending time is the time by which half of these dealer banks' outgoing payments have
been sent. For better visualization, the observation for September 17, 2019, with SOFR-IOR at 315 basis
points, is not shown. Sources: Fedwire Funds Service and FRBNY.


                               net Treasury issuance. Our sample is not restricted to U.S. dealer banks, and we focus
                               on the role of new Treasury issuances, not issuances net of maturing securities, given
                               the distinct role of new issuances on the repo market.36

         The results in Tables 2 and 5 are not estimates of causal sensitivities to reserve balances
because of the endogneity of opening-of-day reserve balances to anticipated stresses during
the day to intraday balances and funding market opportunities. The coefficients associated
with dealer bank balances in our basic regression models in Table 2, although large econom-
ically and highly statistically significant, are likely to underestimate the causal dependence
of SOFR-IOR on the supply of dealer bank opening balances.
         In an attempt to account for this endogeneity, we take an instrumental-variables (IV)
approach. We begin with a focus the dealer-bank balances and repo rates. In a first-stage
  36
     Somewhat surprisingly, Correa, Du and Liao (2020) find that U.S. GSIB repo "borrowing" does not
depend significantly on net Treasury issuances (issuances net of redemption of Treasury securities). This
may be related to the effect of net versus new issuance, or perhaps is related to the inclusion in issuance of
bills and bonds, which do not circulate as heavily in the repo market as new note issuances.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25
       Table 1: Estimated coefficients of a linear model of dealer banks' median receive and send times

                                        median receive time                                     median send time
                               (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                                                   
100 large banks             -120.                                           18.5
                              (3.43)                                        (2.22)

dealer opening balances                  95.5      101.        101.                   -27.8      -15.4      -14.6       -32.8
                                         (7.87)     (6.27)      (7.24)                 (6.62)     (6.33)     (6.59)      (8.41)

other large bank balances              -248.      -216.       -221.                    45.9        31.9       35.5        75.4
                                         (4.00)     (3.70)      (9.55)                 (3.90)      (3.92)     (5.13)      (7.42)

log (normalized SOFR-IOR)                           28.7                                          -9.00
                                                    (1.71)                                         (1.42)

SOFR - IOER SOFR IOER                                             0.964                                      -0.228      -0.402
                                                                 (0.380)                                      (0.148)     (0.245)

net Treasury issuance                              -73.9       -22.4                            -248.       -272.       -268.
                                                    (41.5)      (58.9)                           (36.0)      (39.0)      (42.2)

median time of receives                                                                                                    0.180
                                                                                                                          (0.0416)

Constant                     221.       220.        95.4       194.        -33.9 -33.7              2.48    -30.4       -65.3
                              (5.85)     (4.28)     (8.50)      (9.48)      (4.06) (3.84)          (7.26)    (5.13)      (6.77)

Observations                  1,464      1,464      1,450       1,450       1,464      1,464      1,450       1,450       1,450
R2                            0.515      0.728      0.809       0.789      0.0498      0.090      0.159       0.144       0.173
Adjusted R2                   0.515      0.728      0.808       0.789      0.0492     0.0888      0.157       0.141        0.17
Residual Std. Error            40.4       30.2       25.0       26.3        27.9        27.3       25.4       25.7         25.2

Note: Payments timing measures are in minutes. The units of the explanatory variables are trillions of
dollars, log(basis points), and basis points. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. The date
range is January 1, 2015 to October 30, 2020.  p < 0.1;  p < 0.05;  p < 0.01.


regression shown in Appendix Table 12, we use intraday payment timing variables on day
t - 1 and corporate tax payments37 on day t, along with the exogenous variables related
to Treasury issuance, to predict dealer-bank opening balances on day t. In a second-stage
regression shown in Table 4, we examine the linear relationship between SOFR-IOR and
the dealer-bank opening balances predicted by the first-stage model.
       The intraday payment timing measures used in the first-stage IV are the times on day
t - 1 when dealer-banks have received 25%, 50%, and 75% of the value of all payments
sent to them by banks that are not dealer-banks (nor the bank that clears and settles the
majority of trades involving Treasury securities).38 With this approach, we aim to account for
  37
     We obtained daily corporate tax payment data from https://fiscaldata.treasury.gov/datasets/daily-
treasury-statement/federal-tax-deposits.
  38
     The half-received time statistics used previously (e.g., Table 1) considered all payments received by a


                                                              26
                Table 2: Estimated coefficients of a linear model of repo rate spread (SOFR-IOR)


                                                       Dependent variable: SOFR - IOR
                            (1)       (2)       (3)              (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)
                                                                                                
dealer opening balances -32.2   -32.1                          -13.3        -50.6       -33.9       -34.6
                         (3.53)  (3.52)                         (1.92)       (3.51)      (2.15)      (2.07)

median time of receives                         0.141            0.128                    0.0642      0.0644
                                               (0.0102)         (0.00888)                (0.0156)    (0.0153)

quarter-end fixed effect             13.6      13.3             13.3         13.9        13.9         9.72
                                     (4.12)    (4.09)           (3.90)       (3.96)      (3.95)      (4.00)

Tbills outstanding                                                            9.04        5.50        5.19
                                                                             (0.352)     (0.645)     (0.667)

Treasuries redemption                                                                               -38.9
                                                                                                     (10.3)

Bill issuance                                                                                        44.4
                                                                                                     (9.02)

Coupon issuance                                                                                      69.0
                                                                                                    (11.0)

Observations               1,452     1,452     1,454            1,451        1,450       1,449       1,448
R2                         0.122     0.136     0.360            0.378        0.392       0.414       0.424
Adjusted R2                0.121     0.135     0.360            0.377        0.391       0.412       0.421
Residual Std. Error         12.9     12.8      11.0              10.9        10.8         10.6        10.5
Note: SOFR is the secured overnight financing rate and IOR is interest on reserves. SOFR-IOR is in basis
points. The units of the explanatory variables are trillions of dollars and minutes. A constant was included
for each specification but is not reported. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. The date
range is January 1, 2015 to October 30, 2020.  p < 0.1;  p < 0.05;  p < 0.01.


endogenous changes to dealer-bank balances that are based on aggregate reserves and other
factors unrelated to repo market shocks. The identifying assumption is that the timing of
other banks' payments to the dealer-banks on date t - 1 is unrelated to repo market activity
on date t. This assumption is supported by the fact that these other banks play at best
minor roles in the repo market. We also include the total value of corporate taxes received
by the Treasury on date t as an instrument because this variable is independent of repo rates
and shocks the total reserve balances of banks. (On its own, however, this tax variable turns
out to be a weak instrument.)
dealer-bank, including payments sent among dealer banks. This measure considers the subset of payments
received by a dealer bank which are sent by banks that are not dealer banks.



                                                          27
                      Table 3: Estimated probabilities of a repo rate spike

spike probability   median receive time     dealer opening balances    coupon issuance     quarter end
0.00962                   -0.375                     686.                    10.2               0
0.0201                    57.6                       686.                    10.2               0
0.019                     -0.375                     536.                    10.2               0
0.0371                    57.6                       536.                    10.2               0
0.112                     57.6                       536.                    91.1               0
0.0383                    -0.375                     686.                    91.1               0
0.112                     57.6                       536.                    91.1               0
0.373                     -0.375                     686.                    10.2               1
0.486                     57.6                       686.                    10.2               1
0.477                     -0.375                     536.                    10.2               1
0.597                     -0.375                     686.                    91.1               1
Note: Spike probabilities are estimates from the probit model (column (7) of Table 5) at various levels of
the explanatory variables. Explanatory variables which are not displayed are set at their sample mean.
Continuous explanatory variables on display are set at the sample mean plus or minus one sample standard
deviation. The units of the explanatory variables are minutes and billions of dollars.


    Our IV regression results are shown in Table 4. The first column shows how SOFR-IOR
is related to dealer bank balances and a host of exogenous variables related to Treasury
issuance. The second column lists the estimated coefficients when replacing dealer balances
with first-stage predicted balances. We find that instrumenting for dealer opening balances
increases the magnitude of the negative coefficient on dealer opening reserve balances from
51.3 basis points per trillion dollars to 58.2 basis points. This is consistent with an en-
dogenous response of opening balances to anticipated liquidity stress. Statistical significance
remains high, and the coefficients on the Treasury issuance variables remain roughly the
same.
    A concern with our IV approach is the omission of the half-received payment time, a
variable that we have shown is an important predictor of repo rates. In order to account for
this payment timing variable, beyond its influence on dealer bank balances, we take a two-
step approach. We first regress the half-received time on dealer bank balances and compute
the residuals. We then include these residuals (denoted "residual median received time" in
the IV regression), so as to account for variation in this incoming payment timing variable
beyond its role in predicting dealer-bank balances. As shown in Table 4, column 3, the



                                                   28
estimated coefficient on dealer bank balances changes from -58.2 basis points per trillion
dollars of balances to -47.0 basis points.

                Table 4: Estimated coefficients of an IV model of SOFR as a spread to IOR


                                                                  Dependent variable: SOFR - IOR
                                                                   (1)        (2)         (3)
                                                                         
           dealer opening balances                               -51.3
                                                                  (3.49)

           predicted dealer opening balances                                -58.2      -47.3
                                                                             (5.25)     (3.06)

           residual of median receive time on opening balances                            0.0465
                                                                                         (0.0173)

           quarter-end fixed effect                                9.89       9.53        9.58
                                                                  (4.02)     (4.34)      (4.32)

           Tbills outstanding                                      8.72       9.07        6.19
                                                                  (0.307)    (0.403)     (0.854)

           Treasuries redemption                                 -35.6      -47.5      -39.1
                                                                  (11.2)     (12.1)     (12.6)

           Bill issuance                                          43.5       54.4        44.5
                                                                  (9.62)    (11.2)      (10.7)

           Coupon issuance                                        65.1       77.7        72.5
                                                                 (12.2)     (12.6)      (12.9)

           Constant                                                7.87      11.8        10.5
                                                                  (2.02)     (2.98)      (2.57)

           Observations                                           1,449      1,394       1,393
           R2                                                     0.402      0.336       0.343
           Adjusted R2                                             0.40      0.333       0.340
           Residual Std. Error                                     10.7       11.2        11.1
Note: SOFR is the secured overnight financing rate and IOR is interest on reserves. SOFR-IOR is in basis
points. Predicted dealer balances are those predicted from a first stage regression (see Table 12).The units of
the explanatory variables are trillions of dollars and minutes. A constant was included for each specification
but is not reported. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity. The date range is January 1, 2015
to October 30, 2020.  p < 0.1;  p < 0.05;  p < 0.01.


    Evidence in favor of the validity of our instruments is that during the period of balance
sheet normalization, the total reserve balances of large financial institutions other than the
ten dealer banks was much less related to repo rates, as indicated in Appendix Table 10.
Again, this is not to suggest that other bank balances are not causally important to the

                                                      29
determination of repo rate distortions. As we have discussed, other large bank balances are
highly predictive of delayed payments to the dealer banks, which are in turn highly predictive
of repo rate distortions. In any case, the distribution of opening balances between the dealer
banks and the other large banks seems to play an important role in repo rates, as one might
expect from a lack of perfect-market competition and from imperfect mobility of reserve
balances into the repo market.



6     The role of capital requirements

Correa, Du and Liao (2020) and Wallen (2020), among others, examined the impact of
quarter-end bank capital requirements on funding market arbitrage spreads. They included
a focus on the cross-currency basis. Although reserves and overnight Treasury repos are es-
sentially risk free, they are nevertheless assigned a capital requirement under various versions
of the Basel III leverage-ratio rule. In several important non-U.S. jurisdictions, including
the Eurozone, the leverage-ratio capital requirement applies only to the quarter-end assets
of bank holding companies (Egelhof, Martin and Zinsmeister, 2017; Correa, Du and Liao,
2020).
    On quarter-end dates, we find that interdealer repo rates are substantially elevated,
most likely because regulatory capital requirements on foreign bank holding companies cause
them to reduce their provision of liquidity to interdealer markets, leaving the market to
be intermediated mainly by U.S. dealer banks, which are subject to daily-average capital
requirements rather than quarter-end requirements. Beyond the associated reduction in the
supply of funding market liquidity on quarter ends, the quarter-end effect could be magnified
by the associated reduction in the degree of competition facing U.S. dealer banks (Wallen,
2020; Eisenschmidt, Ma and Zhang, 2021). Correa, Du and Liao (2020) write that "on
quarter-ends, we find that U.S. banks reduce their reserve balances by about $60 billion, and
increase their net reverse repo positions by $40 billion and dollar lending in the FX swap



                                              30
market by $20 billion."
    Our predicted quarter-end increase in the spread between GCF Repo and IOR is 26 ba-
sis points, after controlling for other key factors. When estimating the quarter-end effect
of regulatory capital requirements, it is particularly important to control (Appendix Table
7, column 7) for Treasury issuances, which somewhat frequently occur at quarter ends (Ap-
pendix Table 11). Our estimated quarter-end fixed effect on GCF Repo-IOR is substantially
larger than that estimated by Correa, Du and Liao (2020). The predicted quarter-end effect
on tri-party repo rates, after controlling for Treasury issuances, is not statistically significant
(Appendix Table 8, column 7).
    This difference between tri-party repo and interdealer repo is likely due in part to U.S.
Supplementary Leverage Ratio (SLR) constraints. When a large dealer bank invests cash
in an interdealer repo, it is subject to the SLR, but when the dealer bank sources funds in
the tri-party repo market, it is not subject to SLR because tri-party repo financing shows
up on the dealer bank's balance sheet as a liability.39 Given our quarter-end fixed-effect
estimates, it is likely that the dealer banks demanded higher rates to invest cash in repos
as compensation for the associated increase in SLR-related costs to their shareholders. This
represents an inefficient wedge in funding markets that reduces gains from trade, because
balance-sheet costs are simply debt-overhang frictions (Andersen, Duffie and Song, 2019).
    There is also a non-trivial upward impact of capital requirements on intra-quarter repo-
IOR spreads, mainly because the U.S. SLR rule applies to the large U.S. dealer banks
on a daily-averaging basis.40 For this reason, sponsored repo, which reduces SLR-based
asset measures through netting long and short sponsored repo positions at the FICC, had
a downward impact on repo-IOR spreads (Afonso, Cipriani, Copeland, Kovner, La Spada
and Martin, 2020; Anbil, Anderson and Senyuz, 2020b). We have not estimated this effect.
   39
      Given the existence of a central counterparty in the interdealer repo market, a dealer bank's repo trading
in this segment nets down. As such, our argument on the importance of SLR in this segment applies to
strategies where the resulting transactions do not net down, such as when a dealer bank investing cash in
overnight repos to take advantage of high rates.
   40
      In stages, beginning in April and May 2020, Treasuries and reserve balances were temporarily exempted
from SLR. Treasury repos were not exempted.


                                                      31
Capital requirements based on "GSIB scores" also impinge on balance sheet space for repo
market intermediation (Covas and Nelson, 2019).



7        Other factors relevant to repo rate spreads

Duffie and Krishnamurthy (2016) and Martin, McAndrews, Palida and Skeie (2019) consider
the impact of substitution among Treasury bills, IOR, Treasury repos, the Fed's Reverse
Repurchase Facility, and unsecured bank deposits, suggesting a key role for the supply of
short-term Treasury securities. Martin, McAndrews, Palida and Skeie (2020) show "that a
trillion dollars of additional reserves tends to reduce the fed funds rate by 8 basis points
relative to the IOR rate, while an additional trillion dollars of Treasuries with less than a
year to maturity tends to increase the fed funds rate by about 3 basis points, confirming the
opposing effects these two variables impart on short-term rates."
       Because of the option of non-bank investors, especially government money market funds,
to substitute between Treasury bills and Treasury repos, an increase in the outstanding
supply of Treasury Bills is strongly associated with an increase in SOFR-IOR (Table 2,
Columns 5-7). Depending on the regression model, the estimated effect is 4 to 9 basis points
per trillion dollars of outstanding Treasury bills. From minimum to maximum during our
sample period,41 the quantity of Treasury bills outstanding varied by $3.6 trillion, suggesting
a large estimated effect on SOFR-IOR.
       We next consider how the concentration of Fed balances among the 10 dealer banks affects
repo rates. Figure 7 shows how, as the Fed balances of the dealer banks fluctuated over our
sample period, the concentration of balances across these 10 firms varied. Concentration is
measured with the Herfindahl-Hirschman index.42 As shown, when dealer-bank Fed balances
are higher, the concentration of balances among dealer banks tends to rise. Perhaps sharing
  41
    The sample standard deviation of Treasury bills outstanding is $0.84 trillion.
  42
    The HHI is the sum of the squares of the percentage shares of each firm. For example, if five firms
each have a share of 20%, the HHI is 5 × 202 = 2000, which is roughly the level of HHI in March 2020. If
concentration rises, so that two firms share the entire pool of balances equally, HHI rises to 2 × 502 = 5000.



                                                     32
                                                                                                                 4000
                                         1200




                                                                                                                 3500
     Large dealer balances ($ billion)




                                                                                                                        Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
                                         1000




                                                                                                                 3000
                                                                                                                 2500
                                         800




                                                                                                                 2000
                                         600




                                                                                                                 1500
                                         400




                                                                                                                 1000
                                            2015     2016      2017      2018               2019   2020   2021
                                                                      Balances        HHI




                                                   Figure 7: Concentration of dealer bank balances over time
Note: In blue is the total reserve balances of the dealer banks (left axis). In red is the Herfindahl-Hirschman
index (HHI) of the concentration of dealer bank balances (right axis). The vertical black dashed lines
corresponds to the dates of the repo rate spikes on September 17, 2019 and March 17, 2020.
Source: Fedwire Funds Service.


their Fed balances more efficiently, thus more evenly, becomes less valuable to the large
dealer banks as their aggregate reserves gets more plentiful. This empirical relationship may
alleviate concerns that large spikes in repo rates are caused by the exercise of pricing power
by a small subset of the dealer banks that holds a large fraction of all dealer banks' Fed
balances.



8                   Concluding policy-related remarks

We show that only with a substantial amount of reserves do the large dealer banks avoid
intraday liquidity stress and provide liquidity efficiently to wholesale funding markets. We
also show that when aggregate reserve balances get sufficiently low, the share of reserves held
by the large dealer BHCs is important to liquidity in funding markets. We document that
as balance sheet normalization proceeded and the total quantity of reserves declined, there
were adverse impacts on Treasury repo markets. This raises potential alternative policy

                                                                                 33
approaches for the Fed, including the following.

   1. Maintain a balance sheet that achieves clearly abundant reserve balances, with a focus
       on the resulting quantity of reserve balances chosen by the largest dealer banks. In
       2018, the FOMC outlined its views on the costs of this approach, the most obvious
       of which is the potentially large associated interest expense to the Fed. (The views
       of the FOMC on the costs and benefits of abundant reserves has evolved over time.)
       Cavallo, Negro, Frame, Grasing, Malin and Rosa (2019) consider the political-economy
       costs to the Fed of large interest payments to banks. Holding balances at the Fed also
       impinges on bank capital requirements, and thus, when sufficiently large, crowds out
       other forms of intermediation by banks (Covas and Nelson, 2019). Plosser (2018)
       points to the risk that the Fed could use a large balance sheet for purposes distinct
       from monetary policy, such as credit policy, or that Congress could exploit the Fed for
       this purpose, thus reducing the independence of the Fed's monetary policy. Filardo
       (2020) adds concerns over dampening the incentives of private market participants to
       allocate reserves and monitor counterparties when a large balance sheet implies a large
       footprint of the Fed on money markets.

   2. Establish a standing repo facility, which would offer financing to a designated set of
       repo market participants at a rate slightly above IOR.43 The facility rate could be set
       high enough that the Fed's balance sheet expands only as needed to address temporary
       liquidity crunches.

   3. Relax post-crisis liquidity rules and supervision, which significantly increase the in-
       centive of large banks to maintain thick intraday buffers of reserve balances, and thus
       significantly reduce the elasticity with which they provide liquidity to funding markets
       when those buffers are low enough. Because of the March 2020 Covid shock to bond
       and repo markets, in April 2020 the Fed eliminated reserve requirements, encouraged
  43
    See Andolfatto and Ihrig (2019); Pozsar (2019b); Gagnon and Sack (2020) for arguments in favor of the
creation of such a facilty.


                                                   34
         banks to use their liquidity buffers, and temporarily suspended restrictions and fees on
         the use of daylight overdrafts.

   4. Offer greater incentives for banks to utilize the Discount Window for backstop funding.
         Alternatively, as mooted by Quarles (2020), the Fed could relax the amount of high
         quality liquid assets that banks must keep on their balance sheets under liquidity
         regulations by counting Discount Window access as a substitute for HQLA. Taking a
         related approach,44 the Reserve Bank of Australia offers a Committed Liquidity Facility
         (CLF). Australian banks can access the CLF by paying a fee for a committed line of
         credit that counts toward their regulatory liquidity requirements.



       Because of the huge pace of asset purchases by the Fed in response to the Covid pandemic,
which continue,45 the total amount of reserve balances is at an all-time high and continues to
grow rapidly. Nevertheless, the Fed's past expressed preferences for balance sheet "normal-
ization" may at some point in the future again raise tensions over an appropriate minimum
aggregate level of reserves.




  44
     The RBA's CLF is motivated by the limited outstanding amount of Australian government securities.
  45
     At its meeting of December 2020, The FOMC stated that "the Federal Reserve will continue to increase
its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities
by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee's
maximum employment and price stability goals. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning
and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses."


                                                     35
   Appendix

                                        25                                                             Volume std crunch days
                                                                                                       Volume std normal days
                                                                                                       Volume crunch days
                                                                                                       Volume normal days

                                        20
             Volume (billion dollars)




                                        15



                                        10



                                        5



                                        0
                                             07:00   08:00   09:00     10:00   11:00   12:00   13:00   14:00    15:00     16:00
                                                                     Time of day (20-minute window)


Figure 8: Average and standard deviation, across normal days and across crunch days, of total trading
volume in each 20-minute time window. Source: Tradition.




                                                                                36
                                          20
                                               q

                                                        q
   Peak daylight overdraft ($ billions)

                                                    q
                                                   q

                                                         q                q
                                                        q
                                          15
                                                                q
                                                    q                                                                                                q
                                                                                     q
                                                            q       q
                                                            q   q
                                                                q                                                                                                    q
                                                            q q                                                                         q            q
                                                                                 q
                                                                         q            q                                         q       q                                q                 q
                                                                                                   q                                                                     q
                                                                    q                                                                       q                            q                 q
                                                                                                                                                              q            q q
                                          10                                         q                               q      q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                     q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                      q                      q                                                           q
                                                                                           q                                                                                     q    q                                             q
                                                                             q         q                                        q                                q      q
                                                                                                       q q       q                                       q       q                   q         q
                                                                                                                                                                      q q                  q
                                                                                               q                     q q    q                    q                   q    q                    q                        q
                                                                                                                        q                                    q       q    q
                                                                                                                                             q                       q           q q               q                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q           q
                                                                                                                                             q                q                                                             q                   q
                                                                                                                                    q                                             q q                       q
                                                                                                                                            q qq                                                                            q           q
                                                                                                                                                     q                                                 q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                  q                                             q                   q
                                          5                                                                                                                        q     q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q


                                                                                               1500                                                                              2000
                                                                        Average daily top 100 bank opening balances ($ billions)

                                                                        Figure 9: Peak intraday overdrafts and reserve balances
Note: Peak intraday overdrafts are calculated over two-week periods and published by the Federal Reserve.
Average total reserve balances in our sample are computed over the same two-week periods. The R2 of the
linear relationship, plotted, is 0.57. The slope coefficient, -0.0079, is estimated with a standard error of
0.00061. The red dot corresponds to the observation for the 2-week maintenance period ending September
25, 2019. Sources: Federal Reserve and Fedwire Funds Service.




                                                                                                                                                         37
                 Table 5: Estimated coefficients of a probit model of repo rate spikes


                              (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)          (5)              (6)            (7)
median time of receives        0.00569                     0.00342                       0.00628           0.00372       0.00499
                              (0.00126)                   (0.00154)                     (0.00144)         (0.00173)     (0.00199)

dealer opening balances                    -2.52         -1.47                                           -1.62          -1.78
                                            (0.545)       (0.636)                                         (0.673)        (0.772)

Coupon issuance                                                            10.1         10.2             10.6            7.05
                                                                           (1.37)       (1.41)           (1.44)         (1.71)

quarter-end fixed effect                                                                                                 2.02
                                                                                                                        (0.323)

Constant                     -1.98         -0.289        -1.0             -2.13        -2.25             -1.18          -1.19
                              (0.0782)      (0.336)       (0.419)          (0.0847)     (0.101)           (0.441)        (0.506)

Observations                 1,418          1,417        1,416             1,415        1,414            1,412          1,412
Log Likelihood               -178.          -177.        -174.             -164.        -153.            -150.          -129.
Akaike Inf. Crit.             359.           358.         355.             332.         312.              307.           267.
Note: The probit model is P (Repo Spike = 1 | X1 , X2 , . . . , Xk ) =  (0 + 1 X1 + 2 X2 + · · · + k Xk ) , where  is the stan-
dard normal cumulative distribution function. Repo rate spike dates are listed in Table 11, and determined by the criteria
stated in the table note. The units of the explanatory variables are minutes and trillions of dollars. The date range is January
1, 2015 to October 30, 2020.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                             Table 6: Summary statistics

              Variable                                           N     Mean St. Dev.    Min     Q(0.25) Q(0.75) Max
              dealer opening balances ($ billions)             1,465     686.    150.   362.      619.   759. 1,224.
              other large bank balances ($ billions)           1,465    1,153.   231.   652.      960.  1,335. 1,632.
              Tbills outstanding ($ billions)                  1,522    2,137.   841.  1,233.    1,557. 2,312. 4,802.
              Bill issuance ($ billions)                       1,463      33.    56.8 -0.017        0     75.   273.
              Coupon issuance ($ billions)                     1,463     10.2    31.8 -0.011        0      0    218.
              TBills position ($ billions)                     1,507      24.    20.5  -2.10      13.5   26.1   106.
              Treasuries redemption ($ billions)               1,463     37.9    56.8     0         0    84.7   259.
              net Treasuries inventory ($ billions)            1,507     138.    77.3   9.26      82.4   224.   295.
              median time of receives (minutes)                1,467   -0.375    58.   -172.     -49.4   49.6   155.
              median time of receives from non-dealer banks    1,467   -0.129    53.   -115.     -40.1   34.9   161.
              median time of sends (minutes)                   1,467     0.14    28.6  -155.     -18.7   20.3   69.3
              SOFR - IOR (basis points)                        1,455    -7.84    13.8   -29       -16    -1      315
              GCF Repo - IOR (basis points)                    1,421   -0.724 17.4     -30.2      -9      5.3   391.
              TGCR - IOR (basis points)                        1,455    -11.1    13.8   -26       -20    -3      315
              Treasuries issuance ($ billions)                 1,463     43.2    64.3 -0.017        0     87.   365.
              quarter-end fixed effect                         1,524   0.0164 0.127       0         0      0      1
              corporate tax paid to US treasury ($ billions)   1,467   0.00117 0.00516 -6e-05    5e-05 0.00028 0.0595
              Note issuance ($ billions)                       1,463     9.27    29.5 -0.011        0      0    199.
              log (normalized SOFR-IOR)                        1,455     2.95   0.563     0       2.64   3.37   5.84




                                                                 38
Table 7: Basic regression models for interdealer Treasury repo (GCF Repo) as a spread to IOR. The units
of the explanatory variables are trillions of dollars and minutes.


                                                         Dependent variable: GCF - IOR
                            (1)       (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)         (7)
                                                                                                        
dealer opening balances -38.6   -38.4                          -18.3          -50.5            -31.7        -30.2
                         (4.60)  (4.51)                         (2.87)         (4.66)           (4.76)       (4.40)

median time of receives                           0.137          0.117                            0.0731      0.0728
                                                 (0.0132)       (0.0116)                         (0.0216)    (0.0246)

quarter-end fixed effect              31.0       30.8           30.7            32.5             32.4        26.1
                                     (12.5)     (12.8)         (12.6)          (12.9)           (13.0)      (12.8)

Tbills outstanding                                                               8.26             4.06        2.69
                                                                                (0.514)          (1.10)      (0.926)

net Treasuries inventory                                                                                      8.53
                                                                                                            (17.0)

Treasuries redemption                                                                                       -46.3
                                                                                                             (18.2)

Bill issuance                                                                                                54.6
                                                                                                            (18.8)

Coupon issuance                                                                                             100.
                                                                                                            (18.1)

Observations               1,419     1,419       1,420          1,418           1,417            1,416       1,413
R2                         0.105     0.151       0.251          0.270           0.266            0.283       0.298
Adjusted R2                0.104     0.150       0.250          0.268           0.264            0.281       0.294
Residual Std. Error         16.5     16.0        15.1           14.9            14.9              14.8        14.6
Notes: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;   
                                                                           p < 0.05;   
                                                                                          p < 0.01.
       A constant was included for each specification.




                                                          39
Table 8: Basic regression models for triparty (TGCR) Treasury repo spreads over IOR. The units of the
explanatory variables are trillions of dollars and minutes.


                                                         Dependent variable: TGCR - IOR
                            (1)       (2)         (3)             (4)              (5)                 (6)         (7)
                                                                                                             
dealer opening balances -31.5   -31.5                           -10.6            -52.0            -33.1          -34.2
                         (3.66)  (3.66)                          (1.96)           (3.56)           (2.10)         (1.99)

median time of receives                           0.153           0.143                                0.0726      0.0728
                                                 (0.0102)        (0.00886)                            (0.0156)    (0.0151)

quarter-end fixed effect              9.26        8.88            8.88              9.39               9.39        5.87
                                     (4.10)      (3.88)          (3.73)            (3.57)             (3.63)      (3.67)

Tbills outstanding                                                                10.0                 6.01        5.71
                                                                                  (0.359)             (0.636)     (0.655)

Treasuries redemption                                                                                            -57.0
                                                                                                                  (9.45)

Bill issuance                                                                                                     59.8
                                                                                                                  (8.27)

Coupon issuance                                                                                                   72.5
                                                                                                                 (10.2)

Observations               1,452     1,452       1,454           1,451            1,450               1,449       1,448
R2                         0.116     0.123       0.408           0.419            0.433               0.460       0.469
Adjusted R2                0.115     0.121       0.407           0.418            0.432               0.459       0.467
Residual Std. Error         13.0      13.0        10.6            10.6            10.4                10.2        10.1
Note: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;    
                                                                           p < 0.05;   
                                                                                          p < 0.01.
      Constant included for each specification.




                                                           40
Table 9: Regression models for interdealer (GCF) Treasury repo spread over triparty (TGCR) Treasury
repo. The units of the explanatory variables are trillions of dollars and minutes.


                                                       Dependent variable: GCF - TGCR
                            (1)    (2)          (3)              (4)                  (5)                (6)         (7)
                                                                        
dealer opening balances -2.80 -2.65                            -6.81               0.892                 1.91         2.20
                         (1.83) (1.72)                          (1.67)            (1.91)                (3.62)       (3.45)

median time of receives                        -0.0166         -0.0241                                   0.00396      0.00426
                                                (0.00382)       (0.00366)                               (0.00962)    (0.00951)

quarter-end fixed effect           21.7        21.8             21.8              22.5               22.5            19.5
                                  (10.0)      (10.1)           (10.0)            (10.5)             (10.5)          (10.2)

Tbills outstanding                                                               -2.36                  -2.58       -2.80
                                                                                  (0.236)                (0.673)     (0.695)

Treasuries redemption                                                                                                 5.36
                                                                                                                    (12.3)

Bill issuance                                                                                                         0.390
                                                                                                                    (11.8)

Coupon issuance                                                                                                      30.9
                                                                                                                    (13.7)

Observations               1,418 1,418         1,419            1,417             1,416                 1,415       1,415
R2                         0.0023 0.0972       0.107            0.118             0.138                 0.138       0.154
Adjusted R2                0.0016 0.0959       0.106            0.116             0.136                 0.135       0.149
Residual Std. Error         8.51   8.10         8.05             8.01              7.92                 7.93         7.86
Note: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;   
                                                                          p < 0.05;   
                                                                                            p < 0.01.
      Constant included for each specification.




                                                          41
Table 10: Estimated regressions of SOFR-IOR, restricted to the sample period ending September 19,
2019, including as a regressor the total of the opening reserve balances of those accounts other than those of
the ten large repo-active banks. The units of the explanatory variables are trillions of dollars and minutes.


                                                   Dependent variable: SOFR - IOR
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)                   (5)
dealer opening balances         -48.1          -51.1           -50.4            -61.1              -50.7
                                 (4.02)         (3.37)          (3.26)           (4.9)              (3.36)

other large bank balances         11.2           33.9           33.3              13.9              33.2
                                  (3.65)         (3.78)         (3.88)            (6.94)            (3.86)

median time of receives            0.127          0.118           0.118                                  0.116
                                  (0.0227)       (0.0245)        (0.0241)                               (0.0245)

median time of sends                                                               0.0439                0.00299
                                                                                  (0.0115)              (0.00875)

Tbills outstanding                               16.5           16.0              19.6              16.1
                                                 (4.06)         (4.21)            (3.70)            (4.25)

Bill issuance                                                    27.7             19.1              27.9
                                                                (14.8)           (14.5)            (14.8)

Coupon issuance                                                  64.1             62.5              64.7
                                                                (14.1)           (15.0)            (14.5)

Treasuries redemption                                          -21.6            -10.4              -21.8
                                                                (14.0)           (14.6)             (14.0)

quarter-end fixed effect          14.7           17.3           13.7              13.0              13.7
                                  (4.02)         (4.04)         (3.90)            (3.94)            (3.90)

Observations                     1,179           1,177          1,177            1,177              1,177
R2                               0.386           0.411          0.419            0.393              0.419
Adjusted R2                      0.383           0.408          0.415            0.388              0.415
Residual Std. Error               11.3            11.1          11.0              11.3               11.0
Note: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;      
                                                                             p < 0.05;   
                                                                                            p < 0.01.
      Constant included for each specification.




                                                     42
Table 11: Days on which repo rates spiked. The table shows spreads, in basis points (bps) over IOR, of
the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), of the General Collateral Finance (GCF) repo rate, and the
Tri-Party General Collateral Rate (TGCR), for all days in our sample on which at least one of these repo
rate spreads was above its previous 14 days rolling average by at least 15 basis points. The table also includes
days for which SOFR or TGCR spread is above 20 basis points and for which GCF spread is above 30 basis
points. Also shown are three key covariates: issuance and redemption of Treasuries and total opening reserve
balances of the sample of ten large repo-active dealer banks.
Source: Fedwire Funds Service, FRBNY, and Tradition.

                          SOFR GCF TGCR          dealer     other bank      Treasury     Treasury
                  date    -IOR -IOR -IOR        balances     balances       issuance redemptions
                           (bps) (bps) (bps)    ($ billions) ($ billions)   ($ billions) ($ billions)

                3/31/15      -5      20   -13       822.39       1398.82        103.00         78.42
                6/30/15      -8    17.3   -15       700.86       1330.73         97.00         74.13
                9/30/15      -2    10.2   -15       708.49       1424.81        103.00         69.10
               12/16/15       0      15    -8       650.46       1430.73          0.00          0.00
                3/31/16      -8    13.9   -20       658.48       1272.05        244.59        219.70
                6/24/16       5    35.5    -4       683.58       1271.25         13.00          0.00
                6/27/16       8    26.1    -7       650.60       1226.38          0.00          0.00
                6/30/16      13    37.5   -10       635.46       1208.89        213.57        190.91
                9/27/16       4    18.1   -13       677.23       1136.14          0.00          0.00
                9/28/16      14      29   -10       655.81       1135.62          0.00          0.00
                9/29/16      20    39.1    -8       671.38       1095.33        116.00        102.00
                9/30/16      39    76.6    -3       648.08       1094.85        118.83         94.60
                10/3/16      -5    24.7   -16       635.48        957.59        -0.02           0.00
                10/4/16       5    24.9   -12       654.90       1058.81          0.00          0.00
                1/17/17     -16     1.3   -21       699.42       1119.99         59.10         50.66
                3/31/17     -15     2.5   -20       763.73       1161.05        125.56         94.91
                6/30/17      -5    11.6   -16       764.70       1054.70        118.88         92.25
               12/29/17      -3    33.6   -12       807.56       1065.96         26.99          0.00
                3/29/18       5    31.8     4       737.83       1079.62        196.00        161.01
                5/31/18       6    23.5     3       703.68       1046.11        259.11        231.07
                6/29/18      17    28.3    15       689.84       1018.07         21.00          0.00
                12/6/18      14    24.7    11       580.69        892.63        171.00        160.01
               12/31/18      60   274.9    55       481.36        930.31        126.99         94.39
                 1/2/19      75    83.1    70       459.59        845.31         70.00         70.00
                 1/3/19      30    24.2    30       461.32        886.90        101.01        109.98
                1/31/19      18    29.3    15       468.76        906.32        253.01        245.72
                2/28/19      18    21.8    15       487.01        926.52        239.83        200.11
                3/29/19      25    21.1    18       500.81        846.48         29.00          0.00
                4/30/19      36    40.7    35       414.68        799.44        236.91        223.96
                 7/1/19       7      52     3       362.03        778.73        119.46         93.46
                 7/3/19      21    30.6    20       425.21        770.52          0.00          0.00
                 7/5/19      24    29.2    23       432.94        776.43         72.00         81.00
                9/16/19      33    77.6    32       420.27        691.97         78.00         59.00
                9/17/19     315   390.7   315       410.63        652.37         90.04         90.01
                9/18/19      45      90    40       399.19        718.76          0.00          0.00
                9/25/19      21      21    20       434.84        715.67          0.00          0.00
                9/30/19      55      66    55       436.37        764.10        137.99         93.24
               10/15/19      20      37    15       427.78        777.80        168.03        114.01
               10/16/19      25    26.9    22       439.93        736.79          0.00          0.00
               10/31/19      21    25.7    18       445.40        763.68        252.68        204.02
                3/16/20      16    75.9    13       446.84        950.51         78.07         24.00
                3/17/20      44    53.8    40       519.74        956.32         95.57         88.89




                                                      43
  Table 12: First Stage of IV regression: Prediction of dealer opening balances.

                                                      Dependent variable: dealer opening balances
lag(Q1 time of receives from non-dealer banks)                            -0.00126
                                                                          (0.00019)

lag(median time of receives from non-dealer banks)                        -0.00193
                                                                          (0.00012)

lag(Q3 time of receives from non-dealer banks)                              0.0005
                                                                           (0.00012)

corporate tax to US treasury                                                0.343
                                                                           (0.472)

Tbills outstanding                                                          0.095
                                                                           (0.00363)

Treasuries redemption                                                     -0.633
                                                                          (0.159)

Bill issuance                                                               0.644
                                                                           (0.148)

Coupon issuance                                                             0.291
                                                                           (0.150)

quarter-end fixed effect                                                    0.0238
                                                                           (0.0209)

Constant                                                                    0.482
                                                                           (0.00799)

Observations                                                               1,403
R2                                                                         0.642
Adjusted R2                                                                0.640
Residual Std. Error                                                       0.0898
                                                                                              
Notes: Lagged variables are lagged by one day.                      p < 0.1;      p < 0.05;      p < 0.01.




                                                 44
Table 13: Second stage of IV regression. Prediction of GCF-IOR (basis points). Explanatory variables are
measured in trillions of dollars.


                                                               Dependent variable: GCF - IOR
                                                                (1)           (2)              (3)
dealer opening balances                                      -51.4
                                                              (4.60)

predicted dealer opening balances                                          -61.5            -50.6
                                                                            (6.75)           (6.06)

residual of median receive time on opening balances                                           0.047
                                                                                             (0.0258)

quarter-end fixed effect                                       26.4          26.3            26.2
                                                              (12.5)        (12.7)          (12.8)

Tbills outstanding                                               7.66         8.18            5.21
                                                                (0.472)      (0.552)         (1.56)

Treasuries redemption                                        -45.0         -61.4            -53.4
                                                              (17.2)        (18.2)           (18.1)

Bill issuance                                                  55.6          71.1            61.8
                                                              (15.7)        (17.7)          (16.2)

Coupon issuance                                                97.9         112.            107.
                                                              (19.8)        (20.4)          (20.7)

Constant                                                       16.9          22.6            21.5
                                                               (2.62)        (3.82)          (3.45)

Observations                                                   1,417         1,364           1,363
R2                                                              0.28         0.248           0.253
Adjusted R2                                                    0.277         0.245           0.249
Residual Std. Error                                            14.8           15.2            15.1
Note: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;         
                                                                                p < 0.05;   
                                                                                               p < 0.01.




                                                  45
Table 14: Second stage of IV regression: Prediction of TGCR-IOR (basis points). Explanatory variables
are measured in trillions of dollars.


                                                            Dependent variable: TGCR - IOR
                                                              (1)         (2)               (3)
dealer opening balances                                    -53.1
                                                            (3.53)

predicted dealer opening balances                                       -62.4           -50.7
                                                                         (5.28)          (2.96)

residual of median receive time on opening balances                                         0.0498
                                                                                           (0.017)

quarter-end fixed effect                                      6.06         5.65             5.70
                                                             (3.63)       (4.01)           (4.05)

Tbills outstanding                                            9.71        10.2              7.13
                                                             (0.313)      (0.401)          (0.822)

Treasuries redemption                                      -53.3        -69.7           -60.6
                                                            (10.6)       (11.4)          (11.8)

Bill issuance                                                58.8         73.7             63.1
                                                             (9.15)      (10.7)            (9.93)

Coupon issuance                                              68.0         83.8           78.2
                                                            (11.8)       (11.9)         (12.2)

Constant                                                      3.94         9.21             7.82
                                                             (2.05)       (3.0)            (2.58)

Observations                                                1,449        1,394             1,393
R2                                                          0.442        0.386             0.394
Adjusted R2                                                 0.440        0.383             0.391
Residual Std. Error                                         10.4          10.8              10.8
Note: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;     
                                                                            p < 0.05;   
                                                                                           p < 0.01.




                                                 46
Table 15: Summary statistics for selected other variables. The Broad General Collateral Rate (BGCR) is
a volume-weighted median of overnight Treasury general collateral tri-party repo data published by the New
York Fed.


Variable                                               N       Mean St. Dev.     Min     Q(0.25) Q(0.75) Max
SOFR (basis points)                                   1,455     99.3     85.3      1       17     175    525
TGCR (basis points)                                   1,455     96.0     85.8      1       11     170    525
GCF (basis points)                                    1,421      109.    85.9     0.2     27.7    183    601.
IOER (basis points)                                   1,464      107.    78.8      10      25     175    240
BGCR (basis points)                                   1,455      96.1    85.7       1      11     170    525
BGCR-IOER (basis points)                              1,455     -11      13.8    -27     -20      -3     315
Bond issuance ($ billions)                            1,463     0.959    4.09   -0.005      0      0     41.5
Bill redemptions ($ billions)                         1,463      30.6    51.9      0       0      75.0   207.
Bond redemptions ($ billions)                         1,463    0.116     1.25      0       0       0     18.9
Note redemptions ($ billions)                         1,463     7.20     24.7      0       0       0     155.
Coupon redemptions ($ billions)                       1,463      7.32    25.1      0       0       0     155.
Bonds position ($ billions)                           1,507     97.9     61.7   -7.38     54.8    158.   227.
Notes position ($ billions)                           1,507     6.30     3.55   -0.729   3.75     8.09   20.3
TIPs position ($ billions)                            1,507     9.35     3.74   -0.699   6.71     12.4   17.8
AGYMBS position ($ billions)                          1,507      85.0    18.5    49.0     70.7   99.0    134.
net total inventory ($ billions)                      1,507     223.     85.6     104.   158.    312.    428.
quarter end -1                                        1,523    0.0164   0.127      0       0       0      1
quarter end +1                                        1,524    0.0171   0.130      0       0       0      1
Q1 time of receives from non-dealer banks (minutes)   1,467    0.0221   21.8    -123.0   -14.6    14.4   59.4
Q3 time of receives from non-dealer banks (minutes)   1,467   -0.260     45.2   -166.    -27.6    33.4   116.
median time of receives and sends (minutes)           1,453    -3.36     30.2   -153.    -22.9    16.1   115.
Q1 time of receives and sends (minutes)               1,453    -2.89     17.2   -72.5    -13.5    7.48   102.
Q3 time of receives and sends (minutes)               1,453    0.576     13.5   -143.    -6.07    7.93   174.
median time of sends (minutes)                        1,467      0.14    28.6   -155.    -18.7    20.3   69.3
Q1 time of sends (minutes)                            1,467    0.257     26.1   -94.0    -21.0    20.0   86.0
Q3 time of sends (minutes)                            1,467   -0.0211    12.0   -120.    -5.13    5.87   158.
Q1 time of receives (minutes)                         1,467   -0.029     21.4   -111.    -17.1    13.9   79.9
Q3 time of receives (minutes)                         1,467   -0.148     22.2   -225.    -14.6    16.4   177.
dealer opening balance - balance drop ($ billions)    1,464     0.552   0.152    0.174   0.479   0.638   1.04




                                                      47
Table 16: Basic regression models for market-wide (SOFR) Treasury repo spreads over IOR
for the subsample without spike days. The units of the explanatory variables are trillions of
dollars and minutes.

                                                         Dependent variable: SOFR - IOR
                            (1)       (2)         (3)             (4)                 (5)                (6)          (7)
                                                                                                               
dealer opening balances -24.7   -24.7                           -9.03           -43.1               -33.0           -33.9
                         (1.99)  (1.99)                          (1.11)          (0.984)             (1.59)          (1.58)

median time of receives                           0.123           0.114                                  0.0396       0.0406
                                                 (0.00268)       (0.00276)                              (0.00481)    (0.00484)

quarter-end fixed effect              5.09        2.14            2.49             1.30                  1.51       -3.52
                                     (3.66)      (2.97)          (2.83)           (3.14)                (3.02)       (3.51)

Tbills outstanding                                                                 8.52                  6.33         6.10
                                                                                  (0.170)               (0.306)      (0.302)

Treasuries redemption                                                                                               -47.0
                                                                                                                     (8.46)

Bill issuance                                                                                                        46.6
                                                                                                                     (7.40)

Coupon issuance                                                                                                      70.7
                                                                                                                     (8.86)

Observations               1,410     1,410       1,412           1,409            1,408                 1,407        1,406
R2                         0.147     0.149       0.528           0.544            0.622                 0.639        0.655
Adjusted R2                0.146     0.147       0.527           0.543            0.621                 0.638        0.654
Residual Std. Error        8.84      8.83         6.58            6.47             5.89                  5.76        5.63
Note: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;   
                                                                          p < 0.05;   
                                                                                            p < 0.01.
      Constant included for each specification.




                                                           48
Table 17: Basic regression models for interdealer (GCF) Treasury repo spreads over IOR
for the subsample without spike days. The units of the explanatory variables are trillions of
dollars and minutes.

                                                          Dependent variable: GCF - IOR
                            (1)       (2)         (3)               (4)                (5)             (6)          (7)
                                                                                                             
dealer opening balances -27.8   -27.8                             -11.7          -39.6               -28.1        -29.3
                         (1.94)  (1.94)                            (1.22)         (1.06)              (1.87)       (1.87)

median time of receives                           0.111             0.0983                             0.0451       0.0466
                                                 (0.00303)         (0.00323)                          (0.00588)    (0.00586)

quarter-end fixed effect              4.71        2.37              2.61               2.31            2.25       -3.40
                                     (4.96)      (5.14)            (4.84)             (5.28)          (5.38)       (5.84)

Tbills outstanding                                                                     7.47            4.88         4.38
                                                                                      (0.233)         (0.396)      (0.390)

Treasuries redemption                                                                                             -52.8
                                                                                                                   (10.0)

Bill issuance                                                                                                      57.1
                                                                                                                   (8.79)

Coupon issuance                                                                                                    86.1
                                                                                                                  (10.5)

Observations               1,377     1,377       1,378             1,376              1,375           1,374        1,374
R2                         0.171     0.172       0.415             0.440              0.467           0.488        0.514
Adjusted R2                0.170     0.171       0.414             0.439              0.466           0.487        0.511
Residual Std. Error         8.88     8.87         7.46              7.31              7.12             6.99         6.82
Note: Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.  p < 0.1;   
                                                                          p < 0.05;   
                                                                                         p < 0.01.
      Constant included for each specification.




                                                             49
9     Tradition repo transactions data

Tradition has provided transaction level quote data captured throughout the day by Tradi-
tion's brokering screen. For each transaction record, the fields includes whether the accepted
rate is a bid or an ask, the size of the trade, and the collateral type. The data span 1/4/2016
to 2/27/2020. There are a total of 609691 observations, which contains 453136 trade quotes
with Treasury and Government Agency as collateral. Our paper focuses on the overnight
general Treasury collateral repo rates. There are 202062 overnight trade quotes with general
Treasury collateral, and 33622 special overnight repo.
    We consider only transactions between t0 = 7:00 am and T = 4:00 pm. The Tradition
data consist of bid and ask rates. We first calculate the mid point rate in the following way.
    For general collateral (GC) transactions, let rt be the rate for a transaction at time t and
mt be the estimated midpoint of the bid and offer rate, in that for a GC trade, rt = mt + qt ct ,
where ct is the estimated half bid-offer spread and qt is 1 for a bid and -1 for an offer. Let
ct0 be the ending estimated half bid-offer spread of previous day and let mt0 be the ending
estimated midpoint of previous day. We estimates the midpoint and the half-spread at time
t using previous estimates, rt and qt . Specifically, at time t, let mt- and ct- denote the
previous midpoint and half-spread estimates, respectively. For a GC transaction at time t,
if qt = qt- , let


                                        mt =rt - qt ct-

                                         ct =ct- .


If qt = -qt- , let

                                                 rt - mt-
                                          ct =
                                                     qt
                                        mt =mt-



                                                 50
We replace negative estimates of the bid-offer spread ct with zero.
   Next, we adjust for repo specialness for specific-collateral (SC) transaction. Let


                                    yt = mt- + qt ct- - rt


denote the estimated specialness of a specific-collateral (SC) transaction rate rt at time t.
   If yt > 20 basis points, the specialness is "too large" and the transaction is not consid-
ered. Otherwise, the transaction is accepted as close enough to GC. For each accepted SC
transaction, if qt = qt-


                                       ct =ct-

                                      mt =rt - qt ct + k,


where k is the average estimated repo specialness of accepted transactions on the previous
day. If qt = -qt-

                                                rt - mt-
                                         ct =
                                                    qt
                                        mt =mt- .


   The daily volume-weighted transaction rate (VWATR) is the volume weighted average
of midpoint rates between 7:00 am and 4:00 pm each day.


                                                     s   ^ s · Vs
                                                         m
                                 VWATR(t) =                       ,
                                                          s Vs



where Vs is the volume of any transaction at time s. For some applications we use intra-
day VWATR. For example, VWATR20min is the volume-weighted average of midpoint rates
between 7:00 am and 7:20 am.




                                                51
References

Acharya, Viral and Ouarda Merrouche, "Precautionary Hoarding of Liquidity and
  Interbank Markets: Evidence from the Subprime Crisis," Review of Finance, 2013, 17 (1),
  107­160.

Afonso, Gara and Hyun Song Shin, "Precautionary Demand and Liquidity in Payment
  Systems," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2011, 43, 589­619.

  and Ricardo Lagos, "Trade Dynamics in the Market for Federal Funds," Econometrica,
  2015, 83, 263­313.

  , Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar, "Stressed, Not Frozen: The Federal Funds
  Market in the Financial Crisis," Journal of Finance, 2011, 66, 1109­1139.

  , Marco Cipriani, Adam Copeland, Anna Kovner, Gabriele La Spada, and
  Antoine Martin, "The Market Events of Mid-September 2019," FRB of New York Staff
  Report 918, Federal Reserve Bank of New York March, 2020.

Anbil, Sriya, Alyssa Anderson, and Zeynep Senyuz, "Are Repo Markets Fragile?
  Evidence from September 2019," Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board, October 2020.

  ,   , and    , "What Happened in Money Markets in September 2019?," FEDS Notes,
  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February, 2020.

Andersen, Leif, Darrell Duffie, and Yang Song, "Funding Value Adjustments," Journal
  of Finance, 2019, 74, 145­192.

Andolfatto, David and Jane Ihrig, "Why the Fed Should Create a Standing Repo
  Facility," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, On the Economy Blog, March 6, 2019.



                                           52
Andros, Joseph, Michael Beall, Francis Martinez, Tony Rodrigues, Mary-Frances
  Styczynski, and Alex Thorp, "Approaches to Estimating Aggregate Demand for Re-
  serve Balances," FEDS Notes, October 17, 2019.

Armantier, Olivier, Eric Ghysels, Asani Sarkar, and Jeffrey Shrader, "Discount
  window stigma during the 2007­2008 financial crisis," Journal of Financial Economics,
  2015, 118(2), 317­335.

  , James McAndrews, and Jeffrey Arnold, "Changes in the Timing Distribution of
  Fedwire Funds Transfers," Economic Policy Review, 2008, 14 (2).

Ashcraft, Adam and Darrell Duffie, "Systemic Illiquidity in the Federal Funds Market,"
  American Economic Review, 2007, 97, 221­225.

  , James McAndrews, and David Skeie, "Precautionary Reserves and the Interbank
  Market," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2011, 43, 311­348.

Avalos, Fernando, Torsten Ehlers, and Egemen Eren, "September Stress in Dollar
  Repo Markets: Passing or Structural?," BIS Quarterly Review, December 8, 2019.

Bech, Morten, "Intraday Liquidity Management: A Tale of Games Banks Play," Economic
  Policy Review, 2008, 14.

  and Rod Garratt, "The Intraday Liquidity Management Game," Journal of Economic
  Theory, 2003, 109, 198­219.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reseve System, "History of the FOMC's Policy
  Normalization Discussions and Communications," Federal Reserve Board, Washington,
  D.C., October 2019.

Bush, Ryan, Adam Kirk, Antoine Martin, Philip Weed, and Patricia Zobel,
  "Stressed Outflows and the Supply of Central Bank Reserves," Liberty Street Economics,
  February 20, 2019.

                                          53
Cavallo, Michele, Marco Del Negro, Scott Frame, Jamie Grasing, Benjamin Ma-
  lin, and Carlo Rosa, "Fiscal Implications of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet Nor-
  malization," International Journal of Central Banking, 2019, 15, 255­306.

Clark, Kevin, Antoine Martin, and Timothy Wessel, "The Federal Reserve's Large-
  Scale Repo Program," Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
  August 2020.

Committee on the Global Financial System and Markets Committee, "Regulatory
  Change and Monetary Policy," CGFS Working Paper Number 54, Bank for International
  Settlements 2015.

Copeland, Adam, Linsey Molloy, and Anya Tarascina, "What Can We Learn From
  the Timing of Interbank Payments?," Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of
  New York February, 2019.

Correa, Ricardo, Weixin Du, and Gordon Liao, "US Banks and Global Liquidity,"
  Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board and University of Chicago, March, 2020.

Covas, Francisco and Bill Nelson, "Bank Regulations and Turmoil in Repo Markets,"
  Bank Policy Institute September 2019.

d'Avernas, Adrien and Quentin Vandeweyer, "Intraday Liquidity and Money Market
  Dislocations ," Working Paper November 2020.

Duffie, Darrell, "Post-Crisis Bank Regulations and Financial Market Liquidity," Baffi
  Lecture, Banca d'Italia, March, 2018.

  and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "Passthrough Efficiency in the Fed's New Monetary Pol-
  icy Setting," in Richard A. Babson, ed., Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks
  for the Future, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jack-




                                           54
  son Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27, 2016, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August
  2016, pp. 21­102.

Egelhof, James, Antoine Martin, and Noah Zinsmeister, "Regulatory Incentives and
  Quarter-End Dynamics in the Repo Market," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty
  Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2017.

Eisenschmidt, Jens, Yiming Ma, and Anthony Lee Zhang, "Monetary Policy Trans-
  mission in Segmented Markets," Working Paper, January 2021.

Filardo, Andrew, "Monetary Policy Operating Frameworks: Are Reforms Heading in the
  Right Direction?," Cato Journal, Spring/Summer 2020.

Fleming, Michael, Warren Hrung, and Frank Keane, "Repo Market Effects of the
  Term Securities Lending Facility," American Economic Review, 2010, 100, 591­596.

Gagnon, Joseph and Brian Sack, "Recent Market Turmoil Shows That the Fed Needs
  a More Resilient Monetary Policy Framework," Peterson Institute for International Eco-
  nomics, Realtime Economic Issues Watch, June 18, Peterson Institute for International
  Economics, 2020.

Gorton, Gary and Tyler Muir, "Mobile Collateral versus Immobile Collateral," NBER
  Working paper 22619 September 2016.

Hamilton, James, "The Daily Market for Federal Funds," Journal of Political Economy,
  1996, 104, 26­56.

Han, Yangjue, "Monetary Policy Transmission Before and After the Crisis," Working
  Paper, New York University, May 2020.

H¨
 user, Anne-Caroline, Caterina Lepore, and Luitgard Veraart, "How do secured
  funding markets behave under stress? Evidence from the gilt repo market," Technical
  Report, Bank of England 2021.

                                          55
Ihrig, Jane, "Banks' Demand for Reserves in the Face of Liquidity Regulations," On the
  Economy Blog, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, March 5, 2019.

  , Zeynep Senyuz, and Gretchen Weinbach, "The Fed's "Ample-Reserves" Approach
  to Implementing Monetary Policy," Technical Report, Board of Governors of the Federal
  Reserve System, February 2020.

Keating, Thomas, Francis Martinez, Luke Petit, Mary-Frances Styczynski, and
  Alex Thorp, "Estimating System Demand for Reserve Balances Using the 2018 Senior
  Financial Officer Survey," FEDS Notes, April 9, 2019.

Klingler, Sven and Olav Syrstad, "Life after LIBOR," Journal of Financial Economics,
  2021.

Logan, Lorie, "Observations on Implementing Monetary Policy in an Ample-Reserves
  Regime," Remarks before the Money Marketeers of New York University, Federal Reserve
  Bank of New York, April 2019.

Martin, Andrew, James McAndrews, Ali Palida, and David Skeie, "Federal Reserve
  Tools for Managing Rates and Reserves," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report
  642, August 2019.

Martin, Antoine, James McAndrews, Ali Palida, and David Skeie, "Explaining
  the Puzzling Behavior of Short-Term Money Market Rates," Liberty Street Economics,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 24, 2020.

McAndrews, James and Alexander Kroeger, "The payment system benefits of high
  reserve balances," Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems, 2016, 10 (1), 72­83.

  and Simon Potter, "Liquidity Effects of the Events of September 11, 2001," Economic
  Policy Review, 2002, 8.




                                           56
Plosser, Charles, "The Risks of a Fed Balance Sheet Unconstrained by Monetary Policy,"
  in Michael Bordo, John Cochrane, and Amit Seru, eds., The Structural Foundations of
  Monetary Policy, Hoover Institution Press, Stanford California, 2018, pp. 1­16.

Pozsar, Zoltan, "Collateral Supply and o/n Rates," Global Money Notes 22, Credit Suisse
  Economics, May 2019.

  , "Design Options for an o/n Repo Facility," Global Money Notes Number 25, Credit
  Suisse Economics, September 2019.

Quarles, Randall, "The Economic Outlook, Monetary Policy, and the Demand for Re-
  serves," Speech Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Money Marketeers
  of New York University, New York, New York, Federal Reserve Board, February 2020.

Wallen, Jonathan, "Markups to Financial Intermediation in Foreign Exchange Markets,"
  Working Paper, Stanford Graduate School of Business, January 2020.

Yang, Yilin (David), "Why Repo Spikes," Working paper, Graduate School of Business,
  Stanford University, December 2020.




                                            57
