                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           A SYNTHETIC MODEL OF DISRUPTION AND EXPERIMENTATION

                                        Joshua S. Gans

                                      Working Paper 29091
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29091


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




Thanks to Steven Callander, Scott Stern and seminar participants at the University of Toronto and
Harvard Business School for useful feedback. All errors remain my own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A Synthetic Model of Disruption and Experimentation
Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 29091
July 2021
JEL No. L26,O32

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines how a firm's choice of the type of experiment impacts on its potential
exploitation of new technological opportunities. It does so in the context of the failure of
successful firms (or disruption) where the literature has informally suggested that firms undertake
errors in experimental choice (in particular, choosing experiments that involved biased signals). It
is shown that firms will generically choose biased over unbiased experiments even when there are
no differences in their relative costs. This is done to better inform decisions regarding the
exploitation of technological opportunities. It is shown that these choices can differ between
incumbents and entrants based on their fundamentals as well as because of the anticipation of
competition between them.


Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
joshua.gans@rotman.utoronto.ca
1       Introduction
How should firms learn about new technological opportunities in order to evaluate whether
they should exploit or invest in them? Being able to learn about a technology and evaluate
it prior to costly investments has benefits (e.g., Nelson (1982)). Better information reduces
errors in exploitation decisions both in the direction of investing in technologies that prove to
have limited potential and in the direction of missed opportunities to exploit technologies that
turn out to be significant. Those missed opportunities have been a particular focus on the
literature regarding the loss of market leadership by firms (otherwise known as "disruption").
While the level of informativeness has been explored in the literature on innovation (e.g., Kerr
et al. (2014), Agrawal et al. (2021)), there has been little focus on the type of information
that should be gathered and the nature of the experiments that should be performed.
    This is despite such issues being informally raised in the disruption literature. To take an
example, one of the more compelling stories from Christensen (1997) was that, for disruptive
innovations (that is, innovations with initially poor performance but a trajectory of faster
improvement), when incumbents listen to their own customers whether they would want
a product based on those technologies, the negative signals lead them astray. Christensen
argued that this was because a firm's own customers are less likely to believe they are under-
served by the existing technology.

        Precisely because these firms listened to their customers, invested aggressively in
        new technologies that would provide their customers more and better products
        of the sort they wanted, and because they carefully studied market trends and
        systematically allocated investment capital to innovations that promised the best
        returns, they lost their positions of leadership. (Christensen (1997))

A specific way of formally considering this story is that firms had a choice of the sample of
customers they drew upon to evaluate a new technological opportunity. Implicitly, Chris-
tensen was arguing that the sample ­ focusing on existing customers ­ would give a biased
signal of the technology's potential when it is was disruptive precisely because those tech-
nologies were of greater value to under-served customers or people who may not be presently
customers of the firm.1
    It is well-known that non-random sampling can give rise to biased signals. But Chris-
tensen took from this that firms were making an error in relying on experiments focused on
existing customers. That error caused them to miss the technological opportunity and allow
others to do fill the gap causing a loss in market leadership.
    1
    Azevedo et al. (2020) show that even with very large customer data-sets, there are trade-offs in the
sample selection of the type that means that signal-bias is an issue.

                                                   2
    The purpose of this paper to is to formally explore this contention. Is it the case that
firms exploring technological opportunities should avoid biased signals? That is, should
they choose experiments with greater or lower potential for false negatives/positives (or
Type I versus Type II errors)? And if not, is the bias that established firms choose in
their experiments, sub-optimal or otherwise mistaken? In so doing, I show that, even when
firms can choose unbiased experiments, they will choose to bias their experiments to allow
for better decisions regarding whether to exploit technological opportunities. Moreover,
there is a difference between established firms and startup entrants, in their preferences
over experiments that is consistent with observations of their behaviour in the disruption
literature but with a different normative conclusion.


1.1    The Disruption Literature
There is a large literature on why successful, established firms fail. Thanks to Clay Chris-
tensen (1997) this falls under the rubric of the term `disruption.' Disruption is an event
whereby an established firm fails not because of mistakes or complacency but instead be-
cause it continued to be managed according to the practices that made it successful in the
first place. Christensen identified technologies (aka disruptive technologies) that, for the
firm's consumers, were of inferior current performance but made trade-offs both at the time
and inter-temporarily that could appeal to potential or under-served consumers. He argued
that it was this characteristic whereby firms, who were oriented towards satisfying existing
customers, would fail to take advantage of technological opportunities that, in retrospect,
undermined their competitive advantage.
    While Christensen's argument was focused on the demand-side, Henderson and Clark
(1990) presented a contemporaneous supply-side argument regarding the same phenomenon.
They too argued that successful, established firms are vulnerable to losing market leadership
because they continue to focus on practices that made them successful. For Henderson and
Clark, the culprit was established firms' internal organisation for innovations that evolved
to stress specialisation and modularity amongst product development teams. The problem,
they found, was that a new technological opportunity could present itself that had inferior
current performance to the existing technology but had higher potential as it involved a new
architecture by which components fit together. That potential required a reorganisation of
the firm's innovation system around a new architecture but the existing firm was structured
instead to evaluate component level improvements. This created an opportunity for new
entrants who could emerge that were not hamstrung by an existing organisational structure.
In other words, their costs of developing the new architectural technological opportunity


                                             3
were lower, perhaps considerably so, than incumbent firms.
    Examples abound of both demand and supply-side forces harming established firms.
For instance, Blockbuster failed to leverage its existing relationships with movie studios
and customers to transition to on-demand video seeming to believe that customers enjoyed
the process of physically selecting videos in store. Similarly, Blackberry, the smart-phone
market leader, failed to understand that Apple's iPhone was architecturally distinct from its
own offerings with a different user-interface and application development process at a time
when its own hardware was more robust, both physically and for the cell phone networks it
operated on. In cases such as these, and with the benefit of hindsight, many wonder why
they did not see it coming.
    The answer, of course, as Christensen, Henderson and Clark point out, is that they did
see it coming in the sense of knowing there was a new technological opportunity that required
evaluation and understanding. For Blockbuster, in the early 2000s, before Netflix was even
founded, they launched a world-first movies on-demand system to supply consumers videos
directly to their home over the Internet. That product failed due to a lack of home broadband
in the US at the time. For Blackberry, their sales increased following the iPhone's launch
in 2007 and they were able to develop a touch-screen version of their own phone relatively
quickly. However, within a few years, their performance providing a device beyond calls,
messages and email did not match the wealth of apps both Apple and then Android could
support. While Blackberry could match or exceed hardware component performance it
was and stayed behind on its integration with software; the core of Apple's architectural
innovation.
    This shifts the mechanism of successful firm failure from a lack of attention to, instead,
the methods by which those firms evaluated new technological opportunities. Moreover, it
was not the case that those opportunities could not be evaluated. Indeed, for technologies
that were sustaining or modular, one of the reasons for their past success was that they were
able to evaluate and exploit these technologies and maintain market leadership. Instead,
it was argued that there was a failure to evaluate those new opportunities differently that
sowed the seeds of their demise. Along with that came a call to recognise opportunities that
were disruptive/architectural and deploy different evaluation methods to avoid squandering
those opportunities to preserve their market leadership.
    The research question this paper asks is: was it incorrect for established firms to continue
with certain evaluation and experimental methods to understand new disruptive/architectural
technologies? In so doing, we can evaluate the normative prescription for those firms that
they should have adjusted their experiments accordingly and that this would have been
advantageous to them. The goal here is to take the informal arguments of Christensen,


                                               4
Henderson, Clark and many of those who came after them seriously and assess their efficacy.
This is done using a formal economic model of experimentation and competition between an
incumbent and an entrant firm.
   The approach used to answer this question is as follows:

  1. When do firms, evaluating whether to exploit a technological opportunity, choose cer-
     tain types of experiments?

  2. How do those choices relate to the type of technological opportunity (disruptive/architectural
     versus sustaining/modular) and to the type of firm (incumbent versus entrant)?

  3. Do the answers to these questions change when incumbents and entrants face each
     other in potential competition based on the technological opportunity?

In answering these questions, the focus is on the nature of experiments identified in the lit-
erature and whether the optimal choices of firms match with empirical choices and proposed
normative choices. Therefore, before turning to the body of the paper, it is useful to review
the types of experiments discussed in the literature and how they might be classified.


1.2       Experimental Types
An experiment is a signal of an underlying state variable. Here we focus on a new technolog-
ical opportunity that either "works" (W ) or "does not work" (N ). A technology that works
allows any firm exploiting that technology to earn a positive return while one that does not
work results in a lower or no return.
    This paper takes an abstract view of experiments. Following a recent literature in eco-
nomics, we treat experiments as distinct information sources (Che and Mierendorff (2019),
Liang et al. (2018), Mayskaya (2019)). As will be argued here, this is a natural interpretation
in light of experimental choices that often are, informally, advocated in studies of innovation
and entrepreneurship.2
    Earlier, we noted the discussion by Christensen (1997) of established firms receiving feed-
back on new technological opportunities from their existing customers. While Christensen
expressed and argued it informally, we can express it in information-theoretic terms. Specif-
ically, your own customers are an information source (e.g., the subjects of a survey; i.e., the
experiment design) that gives you a signal of the magnitude of any increment to profits you
might achieve from exploiting a new technological opportunity. Survey results are potentially
a rich source of information. However, a good design would allow for a mapping from that
   2
       See Agrawal et al. (2021) for a review of this literature.


                                                         5
feedback into a signal of whether the opportunity is likely to be positive or not. In other
words it maps into a binary signal (with positive news above a threshold and negative news
below it). If there is a positive signal, you then expect those incremental profits to be high
enough to proceed with implementation. If there is a negative signal, you do not expect any
incremental profits. Your customers can provide a signal as to those increments.
    Seen in this light what Christensen (1997) is saying is that the signal you receive from your
own customers is biased. If a technology happens to be disruptive then, in Christensen's
conception, that means that it involves features that your own customers may not want
because they are coupled with a reduction in quality of features they value: "they typically
present a different package of performance attributes-- ones that, at least at the outset, are
not valued by existing customers." (Bower and Christensen (1995), p.3) Christensen argues
that those customers, precisely because they are satisfied with a firm's current products,
cannot evaluate the trade-offs properly. In other words, when you ask your own customers
about a technology that happens to be disruptive, it is difficult to get a clear signal that the
underlying state is W . Because even if W is the true state, your own customers may not
realise that it is true. This implies that a negative signal may or may not indicate that the
true state is N . By contrast, a positive signal from your own customers would be a clear
indication to pursue the technology. That is, if you ask your existing customers to make a
trade-off regarding features and they are happy with the trade-off, it is a clear signal that
there are incremental profits to be had.
    There are other examples that incumbent firms conducted experiments that were biased
towards negative news. When Blockbuster, in 2004, facing pressure from competition with
Netflix, was considering abandoning late fees for video returns, it decided to conduct a trial.
Nick Shepherd, the Head of International Operations, wanted late fees reduced but John
Antioco, the CEO, wasn't so sure. This led to a trial that was of a particular form.
      Although Shepherd balked at killing late fees altogether, Antioco urged him to
      test such a program in a few U.S. markets. Shepherd chose to test in Chat-
      tanooga, Tennessee, a city where nearly every test initiative went wrong. He
      sent a second-string team of executives to launch the no-late-fees promotion--to
      increase its chances of failure. (Keating (2012), p.117)
As it turned out, the experiment yielded a positive result that gave Blockbuster the confi-
dence to end late fees.
    In the terminology of this paper, Christensen's argument translates into a formal argu-
ment that an experiment based on surveying your own customers is likely to be biased in
favour of generating negative news. Christensen is noting that bias and, consequently, cau-
tioning firms to that bias as well as providing a normative recommendation to avoid those

                                               6
types of experiments. The Blockbuster example though suggests that such experiments may
not be flawed but reflect the decision facing an incumbent firm. As we will see below, while
Christensen's recommendation regarding the interpretation of such biased signals is sound, it
is not clear that this translates into his normative recommendation that such signals should
be avoided.
    Christensen did not simply recommend that firms pay less attention to their own cus-
tomers as experimental subjects but, instead, pursue learning strategies that shed that legacy
and are ones that would be more readily available to independent start-ups. In Bower and
Christensen (1995) (and more comprehensively Christensen and Raynor (2013)), they ad-
vocate that established firms set-up an independent entity located outside the firm's main
operations to explore and evaluate new technological opportunities.

     It follows, then, that senior executives must first be able to spot the technologies
     that seem to fall into this category. Next, to commercialize and develop the new
     technologies, managers must protect them from the processes and incentives that
     are geared to serving established customers. And the only way to protect them
     is to create organizations that are completely independent from the mainstream
     business. (Bower and Christensen (1995), p.3, emphasis added)

Such independent units, often referred to as skunkworks, are often located in a different place
to firm operations (such as IBM's famous independent unit to explore personal computers
in the 1970s and 1980s; see Bresnahan et al. (2011)). However, it can be argued that such
an approach is itself a biased experiment; albiet with a different bias. The mission of such
entities is avoid using a firm's own customers as subjects. This, however, is likely to be an
experiment biased towards positive news, where a positive signal may be received even if
the true state is N . This is because, by ignoring the impact on a firm's own demand, an
independent unit will not receive a signal of whether there would be a negative impact on
a firm's existing product lines and the magnitude of such effects. The bias is, of course, the
point of the exercise. But again this raises the question of whether that bias is appropriate
for decision-making when a firm is evaluating potentially disruptive innovations.
    Noting the potential bias of experiments and information sources is a theme in the innova-
tion literature. For instance, Henderson and Clark (1990) argue that over time, engineering
teams in organisations tend to have an easier time evaluating innovations to components
than to architecture (i.e., how the components fit together).

     Over time, engineers acquire a store of knowledge about solutions to the specific
     kinds of problems that have arisen in previous projects. When confronted with
     such a problem, the engineer does not reexamine all possible alternatives but,

                                              7
     rather, focuses first on those that he or she has found to be helpful in solving
     previous problems. (Henderson and Clark (1990), p.16)

They go on:

     But information that might warn the organization that a particular innovation
     is architectural may be screened out by the information filters and communica-
     tion channels that embody old architectural knowledge. Since radical innovation
     changes the core design concepts of the product, it is immediately obvious that
     knowledge about how the old components interact with each other is obsolete.
     The introduction of new linkages, however, is much harder to spot. Since the
     core concepts of the design remain untouched, the organization may mistakenly
     believe that it understands the new technology. (Henderson and Clark (1990),
     p.17)

The particular bias that Henderson and Clark identify is that associated with asking internal,
specialised teams to evaluate the potential of new technologies. Such teams are likely to
provide a biased signal of a technology's potential if that primary changes are architectural.
In other words, the signal is biased towards negative news and may sometimes dismiss
profitable technological opportunities. Unlike Christensen, while they acknowledge the bias,
Henderson and Clark also note that established firms are likely to have challenges adopting
architectural innovations precisely because it requires breaking out of existing communication
and information filtering built into organisation structure. Instead, they argue that if an
organisation is to adopt architectural innovations, it needs to be designed differently so that
the costs of adopting such innovations are lowered.
    Both Christensen and Henderson and Clark argue that the particular biases arise when
evaluating particular types of technological opportunities. For instance, asking your own
customers does not necessarily give you a biased signal if a technology is sustaining and
internal evaluation processes can work well for component innovations. For disruptive and
architectural technological opportunities, the problems arise and, in both cases, it is impor-
tant that firms recognise biases in certain experiments that can arise there. Being able to
act on those biases, of course, therefore, requires recognising distinct technological types as
well; something that itself can be challenging (Gans (2016)).
    Another form of bias in experiments come from the evaluation of technological opportuni-
ties potentially ahead of their time. For instance, when Blockbuster launched its on-demand
video service, it was at a time when broadband was not widely available in the US. Arguably,
this meant that the experiment was biased towards negative news relative to an experiment
conducted later in the broadband diffusion cycle. That is, it may provide a clear signal that

                                              8
on-demand video was valuable to consumers but was biased towards providing an ambigu-
ous negative signal even if that technology would, as we now know, be successful. Thus,
by analysing a firm's choice of experiment, we can also evaluate what types of firms are
more likely to experiment at the beginning or later stages of underlying technology diffusion
cycles.
    Other forms of experimentation, often associated with entrepreneurial firms as well as
established firms can also be characterised in terms of their potential bias. Moreover, unlike
the ones currently described, these biases may be inherent rather than depending on the
nature of the technological opportunity itself.
    Take, for instance, the release of products for the evaluation of early adopters. One
approach, popularised by Ries (2011) is to release minimum viable products to early adopters.
Here is how he describes that:

      [W]e build a minimum viable product, an early product that is terrible, full of
      bugs and crash-your-computer-yes-really stability problems. Then we ship it to
      customers way before it's ready. And we charge money for it. (Ries (2011), p.4)

A minimum viable product is a product that only just works and is often built in a way that
is not scalable (say, relying on human labor when automation might eventually be possible).
What do innovators learn from releasing these to potential customers? If, given all of its
flaws, the customers accept and like that product, then that is a strong signal that the
opportunity is promising. If they do not like that product, there is very little signal as the
opportunity may be promising or not. The very fact that the release is flawed biases the
signal. In this case, it is biased towards negative outcomes.
    An alternative approach is to build a very high quality product designed to satisfy lead-
users and establish a beach-head in a target market. This is advocated by Moore (2014). He
argues that innovators should evaluate potential customer segments that may be amenable
to products based on the opportunity and then put your best foot forward in trying to win
that segment. It can be seen that this is somewhat opposed to the minimum viable product
approach. This is because those customers need to be highly satisfied so as to become a base
upon which to scale from. In this case, you want to invest in a product that creates that
satisfaction. In other words, you want that product to be an experiment that is w-biased so
that if it fails, you know for sure that, for instance, looking for alternative customer segments
that are `close' to the one targeted is not worthwhile. There are entrepreneurial companies
that use this type of approach (for instance, Segway) but it is also pursued by established
companies (most notably, Apple).
    Once again, for both minimum viable product and lead-user approaches, the question


                                               9
is whether the particular bias inherent in each is appropriate for the implementation deci-
sion innovative firms are evaluating. We will address this question when we examine the
experimental choices of entrants below.


1.3    Preview of the main result
The formal model analyses a firm's choice of experiment and, in particular, whether it is
biased towards favourable or unfavourable news regarding a technology whose value is un-
certain. The key assumption is that the experiment does not yield a perfect signal regarding
the technology's value. An imperfect signal gives credence to the choice of experiment type
and also to how different firm characteristics might drive that choice.
    Of particular note is the firm's predisposition regarding whether to exploit the technology
in the absence of a technology. It is shown that a firm is more likely to choose an experiment
that is biased in the same direction as their own pre-disposition to exploit the technological
opportunity. If a firm would, absent an experiment, choose to exploit an opportunity, they
choose an experiment biased towards positive news. This is because that experiment will be
of most use to them if it can convince them to change their pre-disposition and not exploit
the opportunity. This occurs if a negative signal very clearly indicates that the firm choose
contrary to their disposition.
    Given this, we are able to determine that it is, in fact, optimal for established firms
facing disruptive/architectural opportunities to choose to evaluate those opportunities with
an experiment biased towards unfavourable news (such as a survey of their own customers).
This is because such opportunities invariably mean that current productive assets and profit
sources will be cannabilised by the new technological opportunity (as pointed out by Ar-
row (1962)). This means that incumbent firms will be pre-disposed to not exploit disrup-
tive/architectural opportunities because of low incremental profits or high organisational
costs of so doing. Thus, they optimally opt for an experiment biased against a favourable
signal regarding the technology. By contrast, we find that entrants, in considering whether
to exploit a disruptive/architectural technological opportunity are more likely to adopt w-
biased experiments.
    This main result supports the positive observations of the past literature on disruption
that successful established firms were likely to adopt experiments that were biased towards
unfavourable assessments of the new technology. However, it also demonstrates that their
choices in that regard were optimal. Thus, the model here challenges the normative proposi-
tion that such firms refrain from such experiments in evaluating technological opportunities
that are potentially disruptive.


                                              10
1.4    Plan for the paper
The paper proceeds as followed. In Section 2, the model is set-up and the initial result
regarding own-biased experimentation is proven. Importantly, in that model experiments
involve the same cost to the firm and thus, there is no cost advantage to the firm from
choosing a biased experiment over unbiased ones that are also in the feasible set. Thus,
we are not constraining firms to choose between biased experiments but allowing them to
choose the degree of bias. Section 3 then turns to consider how the type of firm (incumbent
versus entrant) and type of technology (disruptive/architectural versus sustaining/modular)
impact on experimental choice. In addition, comparative results regarding the different
probabilities of these firms in exploiting technological opportunities are established. Section
4 then turns to consider direct competition and cooperation amongst incumbent and entrant
and how these impact on choices. It is demonstrated that the main result is reinforced in
such strategic environments. Section 5 then examines the robustness of the main result
to sequencing of actions and the observability of experimental outcomes. A final section
concludes.


2     Model Setup
A new technological opportunity appears. A firm needs to decide whether to exploit it or
not. The state of the world is such that the new technological opportunity either "works"
(W ) or "not" (N ). If the technology works and the firm exploits it, their payoff is vW while
exploiting a technology that does not work earns vN . The firm can also choose not to exploit
the technology in which case it earns vS (where S stands for status quo). It is assumed that
vW > vS > vN . The firm's prior probability that the technological opportunity will "work"
is p. Absent any other information, the firm will exploit the technology if:

                                    pvW + (1 - p)vN  vS

                                                     vS -vN
    ^ be p such that pvW + (1 - p)vN = vS or p
Let p                                        ^=      vW -vN
                                                            .


2.1    Experiment Set
Prior to choosing whether to exploit the new technology, the firm can explore its feasibility
through experimentation. Let E be the set of experiments. There are no costs incurred by




                                              11
                                              w             n
                                      W       w          1 - w
                                      N     1 - n          n


                     Table 1: Experiment Maps from Signal to State


selecting an experiment from that set.3 Experiments yield two possible signals, w and n,
whose likelihood is governed by the true underlying state.
    It is assumed that Pr[w|W ] = w and Pr[n|N ] = n (see Table 1). The past literature
tends to think of experimentation as generating a signal to the technology's quality (Kerr et
al. (2014)) that is unbiased in the sense that p = Pr[w] = p Pr[w|W ] + (1 - p) Pr[w|N ]. This
          1-n     p
implies 1  -w
              = 1-  p
                      .
    Here, instead, we focus on situations where the firm can choose from a set of experiments
with differing degrees of bias (including no bias at all). It is assumed that w and n are
constrained in magnitude so that w + n   where  < 2. Experiments are informative
so that the posterior beliefs satisfy Pr[W |w]  p  Pr[W |n] which, in turn, implies that
w + n > 1. Thus, a typical element of E is a pair {w , n }  (0, 1]2 such that w + n 
(1, ].
    This experimental choice set makes explicit a trade-off for the firm in choosing between
the probability of a false positive (1 - n ) and the probability of a false negative (1 - w ).
Or, stated another way, if the null hypothesis being tested was that the technology worked,
then 1 - w is the probability of a Type I error while 1 - n is the probability of a Type II
error. An unbiased experiment balances these probabilities relative to the prior.4
    While there are many possible experiments, two, in particular, stand out for closer at-
tention. These are a w-biased experiment, {w , n } = {1, } and an n-biased experiment,
{w , n } = {, 1}, where    - 1. An w-biased experiment yields a signal of w with
probability 1 if the underlying state is W but either signal is possible if the true underlying
state is N . Thus, the news is biased towards receiving `w.' If a signal of n is generated,
it is known with certainty that the true state is not W and must be N ; i.e., Pr[N |n] = 1.
This experiment can, therefore, generate a possible signal, n, where, regardless of their prior,
any firm optimally chooses not to exploit the opportunity. This experiment eliminates the
possibility of a false negative. For an n-biased experiment, the reverse is true and a signal
of w implies that the true state is W ; that is, Pr[W |w] = 1 eliminating the possibility of a
   3
     We only allow one experiment to be selected, so implicitly there is an infinite cost of selecting more
than one experiment.
   4
     In other terminology, w is the sensitivity of an experiment while n is its specificity.




                                                    12
false positive.5 With this experiment, a signal of w implies the firm should always exploit
the opportunity.6


2.2     Experiment Choice
We are now in a position to state our first result characterising when the firm chooses a
w -biased experiment rather than an n -biased experiment.

Proposition 1 If p > p ^, then the firm optimally chooses the w-biased experiment. If p < p
                                                                                          ^,
the firm optimally chooses the n-biased experiment.

All proofs are in the appendix. This proposition says that if, without any experimentation,
the firm would choose to exploit the new technology, then they will choose a w -biased over an
n -biased experiment. The reason is that they are relatively optimistic about the technology's
prospects and it is only if they receive a clear signal otherwise that the firm will change its
mind and choose not to exploit it. This reflects the result of Che and Mierendorff (2019)
that information seekers will choose experiments that reflect their own bias.
     While Proposition 1 considers the choice between the w-biased and n-biased experiment,
it is important to note that, for all but a degenerate case, these are the only two experiments
that will be optimally chosen. This can be shown graphically. In Figure 1, the red line depicts
the frontier of the set E. The blue lines are indifference curves whereby on a particular
curve the same expected outcome is achieved if the decision rule whereby the technology is
implemented if there is a signal of w and is not implemented if there is a signal of n. That
is, each indifference curve involves:

                  V = pw vW + (1 - p)(1 - n )vN + ((1 - p)n + p(1 - w ))vS

                                             p vW -vS
These indifference curves have a slope of - 1- p vS -vN
                                                        which is greater than -1 if p > p
                                                                                        ^ and
less than -1 otherwise. Thus, the optimal experimental choice is typically at a kink of the
   5
      Awaya and Krishna (2021) also considers learning about a technology when such learning is imperfect.
However, their analysis examines the choices of whether to experiment or not and the consequences of that.
In so doing, they assume that experiments involve Pr[w|W ] = Pr[n|N ]. Here, however, Pr[w|W ] = w while
Pr[n|N ] = n and we explicitly consider a choice of experiments where potentially w = n .
    6
      The naming of these experiment types is challenging. I had considered calling them a Sure-No and
Sure-Go experiment respectively with a nod to Savage's Sure Thing Principle. I also tried to find more
interesting names that were, say, based on some ancient parable but came up short. Instead, I relied on the
terminology used by Che and Mierendorff (2019) and the fact that the prior p would not equal the expected
posterior for the two extreme experiments of interest. The term `bias,' reflects the notion that news sources
are slanted towards one type of news, w or n as the case may be.




                                                     13
                        w
                                           A
                          1

                                                                        vS -vN
                                                                   p>   vW -vN


                                                                   B
                           

                                                                             vS -vN
                                                                       p<    vW -vN

                           0
                                                               1       n
                                 Figure 1: Choice of Experiment


frontier of the experiment set; that is, a w-biased experiment at A if p > p
                                                                           ^ and an n-biased
                           7
experiment at B if p < p^.


3       Potential Disruption and Experiment Choice
In the previous section, it was demonstrated that a firm's choice of experiment depends
on their prior and its relationship to a threshold determined by the relative benefits of
success or failure above a status quo outcome. Our interest in this paper is how a firm's
positive choice regarding experimental bias relates to the normative claims made regarding
that choice in the face of disruptive technological opportunities and whether that firm is
an incumbent or an entrant. Thus, our next step is to characterise incumbent/entrant
preferences regarding experimental bias. Following that, how these relate to the disruptive
nature of the technological opportunity are analysed.


3.1     Incumbents versus entrants
We begin by considering the difference between incumbents and entrants and how this im-
pacts on their experiment choices. Suppose that an entrant (E ) can earn (gross) profits of 
if they successfully exploit the new technological opportunity and 0 otherwise. The cost of
                                E           E             E
entry is c (  ). Given this, vW   =  - c, vN  = -c and vS   = 0. By contrast, an incumbent
    7
     The experimental set puts a cap on w + n and so the boundary of that set is a straight line. It may
be that the set of experiments is such that there are diminishing opportunities to receive a clear signal in
one direction or another and so the boundary of E is strongly concave to the origin. In this situation, the
degree of bias chosen will be a function of the distance between p and p
                                                                       ^ and the same qualitative conclusions
that will be drawn throughout this paper will continue to hold.


                                                     14
(I ) can earn (gross) profits of  +  if they successfully exploit the new technological op-
portunity where  are their pre-innovation profits. It is also possible that trying to exploit
the new technological opportunity is disruptive internally to the incumbent and, thus, costs
the C regardless of whether that technology works or not. Finally, we assume that if it
either does not exploit or exploits an opportunity that does not work the incumbent earns
                  I                 I                I
. Given this, vW    =  +  - C , vN    =  - C and vS    = .8
     Given this, we can now prove a result showing a relationship between the type of exper-
iments favoured by entrants and incumbents and their differences.

Proposition 2 The range of p whereby an incumbent chooses a w-biased experiment (i.e.,
 p, 1]) becomes relatively larger (smaller) than the range for the entrant as c - C and/or
(^
 -  increases (decreases).

                                                  i    i      i
This can be seen by substituting in the relevant vW , vN and vS (i  {I, E }) into the equation
for p
    ^ to give:

                                     c                                      C
                              p
                              ^E =                                   p
                                                                     ^I =                                (1)
                                                                            

Thus, if C < c and  >  , then p   ^I < p
                                       ^E . If, however, either C < c and  <  or C > c and
 >  , then the difference between incumbent and entrant experimental choices depends
on the ratio of supply and demand-side factors. Note that this result only characterises a
difference in tendencies to adopt distinct experiments. However, for p very high or low, both
firms opt for the same experimental choice.9


3.2     The type of technological opportunity
The parameters underlying the results in Proposition 2 arise in the literature on disruption.
In particular, for a technological opportunity where    c
                                                          >  C
                                                               , it is generally thought that
opportunity favours entrant rather than incumbent adoption. Consider a situation where
 >  which can arise even when  >>  . What is going on here is that the technological
opportunity leads to products that largely cannabilise an incumbent's own pre-innovation
profits. This is a well-known constraint on incumbent innovation arising from the replacement
   8
      A recent paper by Callander and Matouschek (2021) provides greater underpinnings consistent with
these assumptions in the context of disruption but their focus is on the conditions for welfare-enhancing
innovation-based entry.
    9
      Note that this assumes that the incumbent and entrant have a choice from the same set of experiments,
E. However, it may be that one firm, say, the incumbent has a more informative set that the entrants in the
form of a higher . Note that in this case, the result still holds and p
                                                                      ^I and p
                                                                             ^E drive the choices of the bias
of the experiment. Obviously, if   2, for some firm, they will choose a fully informative experiment with
no bias by definition.

                                                     15
effect (Arrow (1962)). A form of this also appears in Christensen (1997) where he argues
that for disruptive innovations (that involve, lower initial customer satisfaction for existing
customers relative to marginalised customers) provide an opportunity for entrants to profit
from niche areas in a way that incumbents cannot achieve. The reverse is true for sustaining
innovations that do offer increased satisfaction for existing customers.
    While the distinction between a disruptive and sustaining innovation involves a consid-
eration of demand-side factors, we can also provide a supply-side characterisation of the
technological opportunity. Following Henderson and Clark (1990), the costs of exploiting
technological opportunities for an incumbent vary depending upon whether a technological
opportunity involves modular versus architectural innovation. A modular innovation is, by
definition, easy for an incumbent to integrate into their existing technological and organ-
isational structure. Thus, for these innovations it is likely that C < c. By contrast, an
architectural innovation involves creating a new organisational structure to properly exploit
the technological opportunity. This is difficult (and maybe impossible) for incumbent firms
to do while it is relatively easy for new entrants. Thus, an architectural innovation involves
C > c.
    Given this, we will say that a technological opportunity is disruptive/architectural if

 c
   >  C
         and is sustaining/modular if    c
                                           <  C
                                                . Seen in this way, Proposition 2 provides a
new perspective on incumbent and entrant experimental choices and how they relate to the
nature of technological opportunity. An n-biased experiment is more likely to be chosen by
incumbents than entrants if the nature of the technological opportunity is more associated
with disruptive/architectural innovation than sustaining/modular innovation (see Figure 2).
This is because, in this situation, the entrant, in the absence of an experiment, is more
predisposed to exploit the innovation than the incumbent would be. Such experiments are
designed to convince a pre-disposed innovator to refrain from innovating. An incumbent,
for a disruptive/architectural technological opportunity, is more likely to choose an n-biased
experiment. This is because they are potentially are a reluctant innovator and are looking
to experiments to convince them that the technological opportunity should be exploited.
    What Proposition 2 shows is that the normative claim of Christensen (1997) that incum-
bents facing disruptive technological opportunities is incorrect. Instead, if, as argued earlier,
listening to your own customers is n-biased then that is likely to be a more informative ex-
periment for established firms than a w-biased experiment like an independent skunkworks.
This is because disruptive innovations, being disruptive, are less likely to be profitable for
incumbents than entrants and so incumbents will be pre-disposed not to pursue them. That
pre-disposition means that an n-biased experiment is more valuable as it is more likely to
                                                          C
cause them to change that decision. Specifically, if p <    , the expected payoff to the incum-


                                               16
            Figure 2: Experimental Choice and Technology Opportunity
                       E                              E
                       n                              w
                                 p
                                 ^E
                                                      p
                                                      ^I
                                 I                                I
                                 n                                w

                                 Disruptive/Architectural

                                 E                                E
                                 n                                w
                                                      p
                                                      ^E
                                  p
                                  ^I
                       I                              I
                       n                              w

                                   Sustaining/Modular

bent of running an n-biased experiment is + p( - C ) and is only + p - (1 - (1 - p))C
for a w-biased experiment; a difference of (1 - )(C - p) > 0.
    Given the relationship derived in Proposition 2, what does this imply about the rela-
tive likelihoods for the incumbent and entrant in terms of being observed to exploit the
technological opportunity?

Proposition 3 If the technology opportunity is disruptive/architectural, the exploitation
probability is (weakly) lower for the incumbent than the entrant. If the technology opportunity
is sustaining/modular, the exploitation probability is (weakly) higher for the incumbent than
the entrant

Proposition 3 says that, under conditions where the technological opportunity is disrup-
tive/architectural, the entrant is more likely to exploit the opportunity than the incumbent
whereas the reverse is true if the technological opportunity is sustaining/modular.
    This proposition shows that, even when given an opportunity to learn about a new
technological opportunity and when such learning may lead an incumbent to exploit the
technology, the types of experiments chosen by incumbent and entrant end up, in equilibrium,
continuing to reinforce their pre-dispositions. Intuitively, in the absence of an experiment,
in the range of p  (^ pI , p
                           ^E ) where the incumbent and entrant choose different experiment
types, without experimentation the entrant will exploit the opportunity and the incumbent
will not. Outside of this range, without an experiment, they each either exploit or do not
exploit the opportunity. A firm chooses an experiment with a bias designed to increase
the chances that they change their default exploitation incentive. For the entrant, this is
towards non-exploitation. For the incumbent, this is towards exploitation. If each choose

                                              17
the same experiment {w , n } the probability of exploitation for the entrant (incumbent)
would fall (rise) to pw + (1 - p)(1 - n ); the probability that a firm receives a w signal. This
probability is rising in w and falling in n . Thus, choosing an n-biased experiment over a
w-biased one will lower the probability you exploit and vice versa. An incumbent chooses
an experiment that causes them to switch only if the evidence is overwhelming. This means
that they will not risk an error of exploiting when they should have not exploited; i.e., they
minimise Pr[N |w] = 1 - w . This involves favouring a higher w .
    In terms of observations, this result suggests (a) that incumbents will be less likely to
exploit new technological opportunities when the conditions are what is commonly associ-
ated with disruptive/architectural innovation (    c
                                                     > C
                                                         ) and (b) conditional on exploitation,
incumbents are more likely to exploit successfully in that situation. The latter result arises
because the probability of successful exploitation for an entrant with a w-biased experi-
                            p
ment is Pr[W |w] = p+(1-      )(1-p)
                                     < 1 and for an incumbent with an n-biased experiment is
Pr[W |w] = 1. Thus, the observed failure rate will be higher for entrants than incumbents
conditional on exploiting disruptive/architectural opportunities.
    Interestingly, while the incumbent experimental choices and how they match with disrup-
tive/architectural tendencies confirms the observations in the literature (namely, that they
tend to be n-biased), the results for entrants might be regarded as counter-intuitive. Earlier
we argued that the minimum viable product approach of Ries (2011) was n-biased while
the lead user approach was w-biased. Our analysis here suggests that the minimum viable
product approach will be optimally pursued by start-ups in a less disruptive environment
where their own costs and potential profits are relatively low. While this accords with the
`lean' approach that recommends cheap and frequent experimentation, that approach is often
associated with start-ups taking advantage of disruptive opportunities (Gans et al. (2019),
Ching et al. (2019)). However, in those situations, the optimal experimental strategy for
start-ups is likely to be pursuing a w-biased experiment such as focusing on establishing a
beachhead with lead users. This suggests that care must be taken in mapping experimental
approaches to underlying technological and market parameters.10
    Proposition 3 can shed some light on past observed incumbent responses to potentially
disruptive technological opportunities. As Gans (2016) documents, it was often the case that
incumbents often ran experiments on new technological opportunities before entrants. For
instance, Blockbuster launched a video on demand product in the early 2000s well before
Netflix was even founded. This product failed due to the lack of widespread broadband
  10
     Gans (2021) provides a resolution of this apparent puzzle with respect to entrants showing that when
such entrants have to persuade others to devote resources to the venture, the optimal persuasive experiment is
n-biased regardless of how optimistic an entrepreneur is regarding the value of the technological opportunity.



                                                     18
in the US. Given that we know now that video on demand was a workable technology
with sufficiently broadband, launching it without that capability to see if there was low
bandwidth interest was an n-biased experiment yielding a signal that it was not worth
pursuing even if the technology was ultimately workable. For an established firm with a
significant infrastructure that would be replaced by this new technology, they would be pre-
disposed not to adopt it, so running an n-biased experiment was optimal. However, it also
meant that it was less likely to pursue that opportunity than an entrant who ran a w-biased
experiment. Arguably, Netflix, by establishing a beachhead with its DVD by mail service,
was doing just that.


3.3    Confirmation bias
Thusfar, the analysis here assumes that the incumbent and entrant have a common prior
on whether the technological opportunity will work. The disruption literature often posits
potential decision-making biases that impact on subjective probabilities. When there is
fundamental uncertainty, these are more likely to manifest themselves.
    To explore this issue, it is assumed here that, when, in the absence of an experiment, a
decision-maker is pre-disposed to exploit the technology, their subjective belief, pE or pI as
the case may be, is greater than the objective prior, p. Thus, an entrant who is pre-disposed
to exploit the technology is partially pre-disposed because p > p ^E = pE > p. The reverse
is true if the decision-maker is reluctant to exploit the technology, in which case, say, for an
entrant p < p  ^E = pE < p. Confirmation bias of this kind means that a given decision-
maker has an increased incentive to choose an experiment that is designed to run counter to
that bias as that is even more informative. For instance, a reluctant incumbent with pI < p,
will always choose a n-biased experiment as pI < p   ^I .
    Given this, note that the range of p such that the entrant and the incumbent choose
different experiment types is broader than the model considered without differing priors. In
particular, when p  ^I  pE > p > pI  p     ^E , then entrant chooses the w-biased experiment
and the incumbent chooses the n-biased experiment. In this case, the true or observed
exploitation is still based on p and, thus, the incumbent is less likely to exploit than the
entrant. In other words, while the range of p whereby the incumbent and entrant have
different exploitation rates is wider, when they are different, the rankings of those rates
remains the same. The same is true in situations where p    ^I  pE > p > pI  p  ^E .




                                              19
4     Competition
The analysis, thusfar, has analysed incumbent and entrant experiment independently from
one another. The purpose was to identify how their different starting positions impacted
on their optimal experimental choice. This implicitly assumes, however, that experimen-
tal outcomes themselves do not mould or are moulded by the anticipation of competition.
Certainly, the informal statements of those advocating for incumbents to perform w-biased
rather than n-biased experiments when facing potential disruption, do often state that it
is the existential risk that incumbents face from competition by would-be disruptors that
should cause them to undertake investigations to better uncover those threats and react to
them.
    Here we add a competitive element to our model. This allows us to analyse, say, the
impact of both firms obtaining a signal suggesting that the technology is workable with
the implication that there will be more competitive outcomes ex post than if only one firm
received such a signal. There are also nuances that arise as the exploitation actions of the
firms themselves provide a signal of the outcomes of experiments and also that ex post
competition might be avoided by the incumbent and entrant reaching a cooperative deal
(e.g., licensing or acquisition). In this section, we explore these outcomes.


4.1     Competition without Signaling
We begin by considering ex post competition in the absence of the exploitation actions
                                              I        E
providing a signal to competitors. Let i        and i    denote the experimental choice of the
incumbent (I ) and entrant (E ) respectively between i  {w, n}-biased. Let  and  be I 's
profits and increment to profits if they face no competition from E and c and c be their
profits if there is competition. For E , let  be their profits if the incumbent does not innovate
and c be the profits if the incumbent innovates. It is assumed that  +  > c + c + c .
We assume that the entrant, if they enter but the technology does not work, immediately
exits. In addition, we assume that I and E make their exploitation choices on the basis of
their own experimental outcomes and are not in a position to draw inferences from their
rival's exploitation decisions.
    There are four potential exploitation outcomes depending on the signal received:

    1. (Both receive n) Entrant does not exploit and incumbent is able to earn their ex ante
       monopoly profits of .

    2. (Incumbent receives w while entrant receives n) In this case, the entrant does not



                                               20
        exploit while the incumbent earns an expected payoff of

                            I        E                          I        E
                  P (W |{w, i }, {n, i })( +  - C ) + P (N |{w, i }, {n, i })( - C )


  3. (Entrant receives w while incumbent receives n) In this case, the entrant exploits and
     receives an expected payoff of

                                 I        E                      I        E
                       P (W |{n, i }, {w, i })( - c) + P (N |{n, i }, {w, i })(-c)

        while the incumbent receives an expected payoff of

                                      I        E                 I        E
                            P (W |{n, i }, {w, i })c + P (N |{n, i }, {w, i })


  4. (Both receive w) Both exploit with the entrant's expected payoff

                                I        E                       I        E
                      P (W |{w, i }, {w, i })(c - c) + P (N |{w, i }, {w, i })(-c)

        and the incumbent's expected payoff of

                           I        E                            I        E
                 P (W |{w, i }, {w, i })(c + c - C ) + P (N |{w, i }, {w, i })( - C )


These outcomes can be quite varied as the incumbent and entrant may be conducting exper-
iments with different biases even though they are tying to learn about the same underlying
state. That said, if, say, the incumbent conducts an n-biased experiment and receives a
signal of w, then they know that E also received that signal even if E conducted an n-biased
experiment and, even if E did not, then the underlying state that determines their compet-
itive threat will be W . Thus, determining which experiments each firm might choose could
be complex. Nonetheless, we will continue to assume that each has a common prior, p.11
The probabilities that each of these signal combinations are generated (contingent upon the
experiments being chosen) are listed in Table 2.
    Despite these potential complexities, the following proposition shows that the equilibrium
choices are fundamentally driven by the factors as in Proposition 1. That is, for this game,
we can write:
                                                                 
          +  - C                                    E             - c                       I
            c      c                             if w               c                   if w
  vIW =                                                   v E
                                                            W =
         ( +  ) + (1 - )( + ) - C if  E                           + (1 - ) - c if  I
                 c      c                             n               c                   n

  11
       Because we are not a masochist.


                                                 21
                             I   E             I   E             I   E         I   E
                             w , w             w , n             n , w         n , n


   I
   i      E
     = w, i =w         p + (1 - p)(1 - )2         p                p             p2


    I
    i      E
      = w, i =n         (1 - p)(1 - )           1-                 0          p(1 - )


    I
    i      E
      = n, i =w         (1 - p)(1 - )             0              1-           p(1 - )


    I
    i      E
      = n, i =n             (1 - p)2          (1 - p)           (1 - p)    1 - p + p(1 - )


                                Table 2: Signal Probabilities

                          
                           - C                            E
                           c                           if w
                     vI
                      N =                                        vE
                                                                  N = -c
                           + (1 - ) - C                     E
                                  c                    if   n


                                
                                                         E
                                      c               if w
                         vI
                          S =                                   vE
                                                                 S = 0
                                 + (1 - ) if  E
                                c            n


Thus, it can be seen that the threshold values p^E and p ^I will, for the most part, depend on
their rival's experimental choice. In particular, both firms have higher expected payoffs in
their rival is pursuing an N rather than a w-biased strategy. That is because, in that case,
there is a chance that they will be the only firm who exploits the opportunity.
   Given this, we can now characterise the pure strategy Nash equilibrium of the game
where the incumbent and entrant simultaneously choose their experiments.

                                                            I      E
Proposition 4 Suppose that I and E simultaneously choose i    and i  . Then, the pure
                                            I   E                C  c          I   E
strategy Nash equilibrium choices are: (i) {w , w } if p > max{ c , c }; (ii) {w , n }
             C       c          I  E               c     C              I   E
if p  [ (1-)+c , c ]; (iii) {n , w } if p  [ c +(1-) , c ]; and (iv) {n , n } if p 
         C           c
min{ (1-)+     ,
            c c +(1-)
                         }.

The proof (in the appendix) shows that the level of p drives the equilibrium outcomes. The
particular thresholds of p are driven by the same considerations as Proposition 1 in that they
mark the level of p whereby a firm would choose, in the absence of an experiment, to exploit

                                             22
if p is above that threshold and otherwise not exploit. As noted earlier, the difference here
is that those thresholds are influenced by the experimental choices of the rival firm.12
    Importantly, note that the non-experiment incentives to exploit decrease as a rival moves
from an N to a w-biased experiment. This is because the experimental choices of each firm
                                               I   E         I    E        I     E           I   E
are strategic substitutes. For instance, vI (w   , w ) - vI (n , w  )  vI (w , n   ) - vI (n   , n )
implies that: (1 - )(pc - C )  (1 - )p((1 - ) + c - C ) which always holds. The
same qualitative relationship holds for E . Hence, for intermediate levels of p, Proposition 4
shows that the two firms choose experiments of different types. In particular, this reinforces
the differing preferences over experiments in the stand-alone case whereby the incumbent
firm is more (less) likely to choose a w-biased experiment than then entrant for a sustain-
ing/incremental (disruptive/architectural) technological opportunity.
    This provides more insight into the potential for disruption whereby an entrant chooses
                                                                               C
to exploit an opportunity while the incumbent does not. When p  [ (1-)+           c c
                                                                                      , c ], some-
thing that is more likely to arise as c - C or c - c rises (i.e., the opportunity is disrup-
tive/architectural), I chooses the n-biased experiment and, therefore, exploits the opportu-
nity with probability p while the entrant exploits the opportunity with probability p+1-.
While the entrant is more likely to exploit than the incumbent, the probability that the en-
trant successfully exploits is p. Thus, compared with the stand-alone outcome in Proposition
3, the entrant has a higher probability of exploitation with the same probability of successful
exploitation while the incumbent's exploitation and successful exploitation probabilities are
unchanged. That is, in the presence of an incumbent simultaneously conducting a w-biased
                                                         I   E
experiment, the entrant's expected payoff falls to vE (n   , w ) = p(c - c) + (1 - )(p - c)
             E
from vE (0, w ) = p - (p + (1 - p)(1 - ))c. From the incumbent's perspective, the pres-
ence of competition from the entrant reduces their expected payoff but only reinforces their
incentives to undertake an n-biased experiment relative to the stand-alone case.


4.2      Ex post Cooperation
The above model assumes that the incumbent and entrant become competitors if both should
successfully exploit the technological opportunity. However, as Gans and Stern (2000) note,
there are virtues to the incumbent and entrant cooperating rather than competing. Moreover,
   12
     Let x = 1 indicate that a firm always exploits and x = 0 indicate that a firm never exploits. Thus, for
                                                                                          E
example, if I exploits while E chooses an experiment, I 's expected payoff is vI (1, i      ) while if E chooses never
to exploit this payoff is vI (1, 0). Thus, we have, to derive the threshold for which p above that threshold the
                                                 E                                          E
firm chooses a w-biased experiment, vI (1, w       ) = p(c + c ) + (1 - p) - C > vI (0, w     ) = pc + (1 - p) =
     C                E                                                             E
p>    c
        and  vI (1 , n
                        ) = p  (  c +  c ) + (1 - p  )  + p (1 -   ) - C > vI (0 , n  ) = p   c + (1 - p) =     p>
     C                          I                                c             I
c +(1-) . For E , vE (1, w ) = pc - c > 0 =             p > c and vE (1, n ) = p(c + (1 - ) ) - c > 0 =
          c
p > c +(1   -)   .  You   can see that these  threshold  levels correspond to those in Proposition 4.


                                                         23
as Marx et al. (2014) document, it is often a feature of competition in disruptive technologies
that entrants enter first and then switch to cooperation thereafter.
    Here we consider that possibility by assuming that, if it chooses to enter, E can, if the
technology is workable, come to a cooperate deal with I . In that deal, I pays E a lump sum
about  that neutralises competition between them and allows the incumbent to earn  + .
It is assumed that this deal can occur either if the incumbent has not chosen to exploit the
opportunity (in which case, C is never incurred) or even if it has.13 For E to be part of a
cooperative deal, they must enter and incur c.14
    The first step is to determine the outcome of bargaining over the price of any cooperative
arrangement should the opportunity arise. There are two cases to consider. In the first, I
exploits the technology alongside E . If they do not arrive at a deal, I earns c + c and
E earns c . If they arrive at a deal the joint profits become  + . If we use the Nash
bargaining solution with equal bargaining power, then c = +-2          c -c +c
                                                                               . In the second
case, I does not exploit the technology. In this case, absent a deal, I earns c and E earns
 . This implicitly assumes that I cannot exploit at a later stage. Here,  = +-       2
                                                                                       c +
                                                                                           .
    Given this the four outcomes become:
   1. (Both receive n) Entrant does not exploit and incumbent is able to earn their ex ante
      monopoly profits of .

   2. (Incumbent receives w while entrant receives n) In this case, the entrant does not
      exploit while the incumbent earns an expected payoff of

                          I        E                          I        E
                P (W |{w, i }, {n, i })( +  - C ) + P (N |{w, i }, {n, i })( - C )

                                                                                     +-c +
   3. (Entrant receives w while incumbent receives n) In this case,  =                2
                                                                                                 and the
      entrant exploits and receives an expected payoff of

                                I        E                      I        E
                      P (W |{n, i }, {w, i })( - c) + P (N |{n, i }, {w, i })(-c)

       while the incumbent receives an expected payoff of

                              I        E                         I        E
                    P (W |{n, i }, {w, i })( +  -  ) + P (N |{n, i }, {w, i })

                                                         +-c -c +c
   4. (Both receive w) Both exploit and c =                2
                                                                        giving the entrant's expected
  13
      Each of these situations might run afoul of anti-trust laws but we assume those laws either do not or
are not applied.
   14
      It is only by doing this that they can signal to the incumbent that the technology is workable and so
be in a position to make a cooperative deal.

                                                    24
                            E                                                E
                            w                                                n

          vI = p( - c )                                    vI = p( - c )
I
w         + - (1 - (1 - p))C                               + + p(1 - ) - (1 - (1 - p))C
          vE = pc - (1 - (1 - p))c                         vE = pc - pc
          vI = p( - c - (1 - ) )                           vI = p( - c - (1 - ) )
I
n         + - pC                                           + + p(1 - ) - pC
          vE = p(c + (1 - ) ) - (1 - (1 - p))c             vE = p(c + (1 - ) ) - pc

                       Table 3: Payoffs with Ex Post Cooperation


      payoff
                              I        E                       I        E
                    P (W |{w, i }, {w, i })(c - c) + P (N |{w, i }, {w, i })(-c)

      and the incumbent's expected payoff of

                      I        E                              I        E
            P (W |{w, i }, {w, i })( +  - c - C ) + P (N |{w, i }, {w, i })( - C )


    Given this, we can prove the following.

                                                                   I       E
Proposition 5 Suppose that I and E simultaneously choose i           and i   . If ex post cooper-
                                                                                   I    E
ation is possible, then, the pure strategy Nash equilibrium choices are: (i) {w      , w  } if p >
       C   c           I   E               C        c           I    E                c        C
max{  -c , c }; (ii) {w , n } if p  [ (1-)+( -c ) , c ]; (iii) {n , w } if p  [ c +(1-) ,  -    c
                                                                                                  ];
            I   E                    C           c
and (iv) {n , n } if p  min{ (1-)+( -c ) , c +(1-) }.

What this shows is that the cooperation case follows the contours of the competition case.
The experimental choices of both firms remain strategic substitutes and moving from an
n-biased to a w-biased experiment is driven by the incremental profits from generating a
workable innovation (that is, a payment for E and a reduced payment for I ) as well as what
might be earned if a firm can innovate successfully while the other does not (that is, an
increased payment for E and incremental profits without a payment for I ).
    Note that both I and E choices depend on  - c = 1         2
                                                                ( - c + c ) but in opposite
directions. An increase in  - c causes I to favour a w-biased experiment whereas the
opposite is true for E . In addition, both firms are pushed towards a w-biased experiment as
 increases. Thus, on the demand-side, as  -  increases, E favours a w-biased experiment
while I 's response is more muted and potentially ambiguous (depending on ). Thus, we
can see that, for the entrant, the pressures to undertake a w-biased experiment actually fall
as the technological opportunity becomes potentially more disruptive.


                                                25
5     Experiments with market signals
One view of disruption is that it represents a squandered opportunity. In this view, es-
tablished firms are in a position to exploit a technology opportunity ahead of others but,
because they fail to evaluate the technology's potential appropriately, they miss the oppor-
tunity to preempt competitors. There is a literature in economics that complements this
view, showing that Arrow's replacement effect may not arise if, in the absence of innovation
by incumbents, competition is inevitable (Gilbert and Newbery (1982)). Translated into the
language of disruption, it is argued that incumbents should disrupt themselves before they
are disrupted.
    This paper has focused on the choice of experiments as the mechanism by which techno-
logical opportunities are evaluated for the purpose of exploitation. To evaluate the squan-
dered opportunity argument, here we consider a situation where I is able to conduct an
experiment and exploit the technology, if they so choose, ahead of any actions by the en-
trant. Given this timeline, there are two broad cases of interest. In the first, we maintain our
assumption from the previous section that the outcomes of experiments are not observable
but the exploitation decision is. In the second, we consider a situation where experimental
outcomes themselves are observable to the entrant.


5.1    Unobservable experimental outcomes
Suppose that I is able to experiment and exploit the technological opportunity prior to E .
Our interest is in whether, under conditions we have already identified where it is optimal for
I to choose an n-biased experiment, whether being able to experiment and exploit ahead of
                                                            I   E
E changes the incumbent's choice. From Proposition 4, {n      , w } is an equilibrium outcome
                                             c     C
in the simultaneous move game if p  [ c +(1-) , c ]. Note that this continues to hold if the
                                                                c     C
opportunity is also disruptive/architectural in the sense that    <     as I would still choose
an n-biased innovation. Thus, we will assume that both of these conditions hold in what
follows.
    To evaluate this choice, we work backwards by considering E 's response to I 's actions.
As we are looking for equilibrium outcomes, in deriving this we presume that E correctly
infers the experimental choice (if any) of I and infers information from their subsequent
exploitation choice.
    First, note that if I chooses an n-biased experiment, their best outcome is if E does not
enter regardless. However, if I receives a signal of w, I will exploit as it earns a payoff of
c + c - C because E exploits with certainty in this case. By contrast, if the signal is n,
E may not enter. This happens if the posterior probability Pr[W |{n, n      I
                                                                              }] is less than cc .

                                               26
However, if this condition did not hold, then it would be optimal for E to conduct a w-biased
experiment. Thus, there is a weak improvement in I 's return to a n-biased experiment in this
case as a negative signal reduces the probability that E ends up exploiting the technology.
   Second, note that if I chooses a w-biased experiment, E will only enter if I exploits the
technology (that is, I receives a signal of w). The problem is that, under the conditions
above, it is always optimal for E to conduct a w-biased experiment if I chooses to exploit
the technology. Thus, a preemptive w-biased experiment does not improve the probability
that I can exploit the technology in the absence of entry by E . Thus, the returns to the
w-biased experiment are no higher than before.
   Thus, we are left to conclude that because E has the option to experiment following I 's
exploitation decision that the relative return to a w-biased experiment relative to an n-biased
experiment for I are not improved if I can preemptively experiment and exploit prior to the
entrant.


5.2    Observable experimental outcomes
The experimental choices analysed in the previous section assumed that, while firms could
infer the bias of experiments being conducted by their rival, the experimental outcomes
themselves were private. This could be a reasonable assumption if the experiments involved
direct feedback from groups about product prototypes rather than the launch of a minimum
viable product or any type of product as part of an experiment to test its market performance.
In such cases, experimental outcomes could be observed by the rivals. In this section, we relax
that assumption for an incumbent firm who is able to experiment and exploit preemptively.
    Consider the case, akin to the previous subsection, where only the incumbent conducts
an experiment but the outcome of this experiment can be observed by a potential entrant.
This scenario aligns with a situation where the technological opportunity is first presented
to the incumbent who can then choose to run an experiment to test it. This approximates,
for instance, the experiment by Blockbuster in on-demand video in the early 2000s before
others had done so. As argued earlier, because broadband technology was nascent at the
time, this represented an n-biased experiment. Thus, having an observed n signal caused
Blockbuster to not pursue that opportunity while not precluding others from inferring that
on-demand products may be successful in the future and entering on that basis.
    One factor that will guide the incumbent's choice is how the entrant reacts to different
signals. Thusfar, we have assumed that a w signal results in exploitation while an n does
not. In this case, the incumbent can expect the following:

  1. With an n-biased experiment, a w signal results in I receiving c + c - C while an

                                              27
       n signal results in .
                                                                                       p
   2. With a w-biased experiment, a w signal results in I receiving               p+(1-p)(1-)
                                                                                              (c    + c ) +
       (1-p)(1-)
      p+(1-p)(1-)
                   - C and an n signal results in 

Given this, I will favour an w-biased experiment over an n-biased one if:

       p(c + c ) + (1 - p) - (p + (1 - p)(1 - ))C  p(c + c - C ) + (1 - p)

                                                                 C
This never holds if c + c <  as p cannot be less than c +          c -
                                                                       . If c + c > , then
                                                   C
a w-biased experiment will be chosen if p  c +       c -
                                                         . Nonetheless, we can conclude that
when the incumbent's experimental outcome is observable this makes it more likely that the
incumbent will choose an n-biased experiment. This, however, is a result of the payoff from
a favourable experimental outcome being lower than a strategic effect to impact on entrant
behaviour.
    This raises the natural question of whether there are ways for the experimental choice
to impact on entrant choices? Specifically, is it possible for an experimental choice to lead
to a situation where an entrant does not enter following a w signal? Clearly, if c  c, this
is only possible if I conducts a w-biased experiment. In this case, following a w signal, E 's
                                                                            -)c
expected payoff is p+(1-p p
                                 - c. If pc < (1 - (1 - p))c or p < (1
                           )(1-) c                                          c -c
                                                                                 , then E will
never exploit if I conducts a w-biased experiment.15 Given this, I will favour an w-biased
experiment over an n-biased one if:

       p( + ) + (1 - p) - (p + (1 - p)(1 - ))C  p(c + c - C ) + (1 - p)

              -)C
or p  +(1    (-c -c )
                       . In this case, we see that there can be strategic value to the incumbent
choosing a w-biased experiment because it presents an unclear signal to the entrant and this
is sufficient to deter their entry.
    Interestingly, however, this effect is strongest if the technological opportunity is more
sustaining/modular than disruptive/architectural. In other words, if the opportunity if dis-
ruptive/architectural, choosing a w-biased experiment even if it potentially deterred E 's
entry, would not be optimal for the incumbent.16 What this means is that even if there
is a scenario whereby I choosing a w-biased experiment can facilitate in preempting en-
  15
      This also means that E themselves would never conduct a w-biased experiment themselves in this
situation.
   16
      In addition, having received a w signal from the incumbent's experiment, if experiments are costless, it
is optimal for the entrant to pursue an n-biased experiment in this case as it would otherwise not exploit
the technology. If this occurred, then the incumbent's upside from deterring entry would not occur and it is
easy to see that the incumbent would find it optimal to initially choose an n-biased experiment.


                                                     28
try by E , this is not likely to be optimal precisely when the technological opportunity is
disruptive/architectural.


6        Conclusion
This paper has put the nature (in particular, the bias) of experiments at the forefront of
studying how new technologies are evaluated. In so doing, it addresses the (ahem) implicit
bias that many informal discussions have towards unbiasedness. It has been shown that firms
will favour biased experiments when evaluating new technological opportunities because
these offer a way of obtaining a clearer signal when the state of the world is in opposition
to their predispositions regarding exploitation in the absence of experimentation. Thus, the
paper shows that many of the biases that exist in experiments including choices of sample
selection, timing with respect to technology evolution or prototype design can be optimal
given the nature of the decision facing firms.
    Nonetheless, this paper is still at a high level on several dimensions. First of all, bias was
modelled generically rather than derived from more specific information regarding experi-
ments being run. Future work could actually measure the bias of such experiments based
on their context and methodology. Indeed, the results here suggest that assessing bias more
carefully is warranted. A recent example of the literature moving in this direction is Cao
et al. (2020) who relate bias to the gender-composition of a product's beta testers and find
that such bias impacts on the assessment and launch of new product designs.17
    Second, the role of experiments presented here is simply to inform the exploit or not
choice by a single decision-maker. This is not uncommon but in the literature on disruption,
decisions can often be driven by internal frictions within incumbent firms (see, for example,
Bresnahan et al. (2011)) and dealing with outside resource providers for entrant firms (see,
for example, Kerr et al. (2014), Agrawal et al. (2021)). This introduces an additional role for
experiments as a means of persuading other agents as to the efficacy of exploitation choices
in order to reduce or manage such frictions.18
    Finally, the model here considers a firm's choice of a single experiment. In principle,
there is nothing preventing firms from running multiple experiments each with different
biases spanning the available set. Moving in this direction, however, would require making
assumptions regarding the relative costs of different experiments; something that I have
avoided doing here for clarity. How to manage a portfolio of experiments is, therefore, a
    17
     Another recent paper by Camuffo et al. (2020) shows how experimental methods training can improve
business outcomes for innovators.
  18
     These issues are explored in a companion paper (see Gans (2021)).



                                                 29
fruitful direction for future research.




                                          30
7      Appendix: Proofs of Propositions
7.1     Proof of Proposition 1
Let w and n denote the w - and n -biased experiments respectively. First, if the firm chooses
the w -biased experiment, their payoff upon receiving a signal of n is vS as they optimally
choose not to exploit. If they receive a signal of w and exploits, their expected payoff is
                                                                            p
P (W |w, w )vW + (1 - P (W |w, w ))vN where P (W |w, w ) = p+(1-              )(1-p)
                                                                                     . This will be an
                                                  (1-)(vS -vN )
optimal response if this exceeds vS or p > vW -vS +(1-)(vS -vN ) . The RHS is less than p     ^ so this
holds for p > p^.
    Second, if the firm chooses the n -biased experiment and exploits contingent on receiving
a signal of w, they earn vW as they optimally choose to exploit. If they receive a signal of n,
they will choose to exploit if (1 - P (N |n, n ))vW + P (N |n, n )vN > vS where P (N |n, n ) =
    1-p                                                    vS -vN
p(1-)+1-p
           . This is an optimal response if p > (1-)(vW     -vS )+vS -vN
                                                                         . The RHS is greater than
p
^ so this may or may not hold if p > p    ^.
    There are, therefore, two cases to consider regarding the firm's experiment choice if p > p      ^:
                  vS -vN                             vS -vN
(1) p  [^p, (1-)(vW -vS )+vS -vN ] and (2) p > (1-)(vW -vS )+vS -vN . In case (1), the firm chooses
w if

 (1 - (1 - p))(P (W |w, w )vW + (1 - P (W |w, w ))vN ) + (1 - p)vS  pvW + (1 - p)vS

which holds for all p > p
                        ^. In case (2), the firm will exploit regardless of the signal from L .
Thus, the firm chooses w if

    (1 - (1 - p))(P (W |w, w )vW + (1 - P (W |w, w ))vN ) + (1 - p)vS  pvW + (1 - p)vN

which holds for all p which proves the first part of the proposition. The second part can be
proved in the same way.


7.2     Proof of Proposition 3
The exploitation probability is the probability that a firm is observed to exploit a technolog-
ical opportunity; that is, it is pw + (1 - p)(1 - n ). Note that when p  max{p         ^I }, both
                                                                                  ^E , p
incumbent and entrant choose the w-biased experiment and their exploitation probability
is p + (1 - p)(1 - ) for both. When p  min{p           ^I }, both incumbent and entrant choose
                                                  ^E , p
the n-biased experiment and their exploitation probability is p for both. If    c
                                                                                  >   C
                                                                                        , then it
is possible that p
                 ^E < p < p  ^I and the incumbent chooses the n-biased experiment while the
entrant chooses a w-biased experiment. This implies that the probability that the entrant

                                                  31
exploits the opportunity is p +(1 - p)(1 - ) while the probability that the incumbent exploits
the opportunity is p. It is easy to see that p + (1 - p)(1 - ) > p for  < 1. The proof for

c
  <  C
       follows analogously.


7.3    Proof of Proposition 4
                                                                                   I
Let's first focus on the incumbent's experimental choice. If the incumbent chooses w , then
                                                  E
their expected payoff if the entrant also chooses w is:

                I   E
            vI (w , w ) = (p + (1 - p)(1 - )2 )(P (W |{w, w
                                                          I        E
                                                            }, {w, w })(c + c )
                                                             I        E
                                                  +P (N |{w, w }, {w, w }) - C )            (2)
                     +(1 - p)(1 - )( - C ) + (1 - p)(1 - ) + (1 - p)2 

                                                                               (1-p)(1-)2
where P (W |{w, wI        E
                   }, {w, w }) = p+(1-pp
                                       )(1-)2
                                                            I
                                              and P (N |{w, w        E
                                                              }, {w, w }) =   p+(1-p)(1-)2
                                                                                           .   If
                      E
the entrant chooses n , the incumbent's expected payoff becomes:

           I   E                                      I        E
       vI (w , n ) = p(c + c - C ) + (1 - )(P (W |{w, w }, {n, n }) +  - C )
                                                                                            (3)
                                                                   +0c + (1 - p)

                                     -)
where P (W |{w, w I        E
                    }, {n, n }) = p(1
                                    1-
                                        . Notice that it is only in situations where a signal
confirms the bias of the signal chosen by both firms that there is ambiguity regarding the
                                           I        E
eventual state. For instance, P (W |{w, w    }, {n, w }) = 0 because E 's choice of a w-biased
experiment means that if they receive a signal of n, then the true state of the world is N
with certainty. This simplifies the expressions considerably. We can write similar expected
                                   I                             E
payoffs for I should they choose n    while the entrant chooses w  :

      I   E                                                    I        E
  vI (n , w ) = p(c + c - C ) + 0( +  - C ) + (1 - )(P (W |{n, n }, {w, w })c
                                                                                            (4)
                                                          I        E
                                               +P (N |{n, n }, {w, w })) + (1 - p)

                                    -)                                  (1-p)(1-)
where P (W |{n, nI        E
                   }, {w, w }) = p(1
                                  1-
                                       and P (N |{w, nI        E
                                                        }, {n, w }) =      1-
                                                                                  .   If the en-
              E
trant chooses n , the incumbent's expected payoff becomes:

                      I   E
                  vI (n , n ) = p2 (c + c - C ) + p(1 - )( +  - C )
                                                                                            (5)
                                     +p(1 - )c + (1 - p + p(1 - )2 )

This last case is interesting because both have chosen n-biased experiments. This means
that if either one gets a signal w and innovates, there is no residual uncertainty. Of course,


                                             32
                             E                                        E
                             w                                        n

            vI = p(c + c ) + (1 - p)                 vI = p(c + c ) + p(1 - )
   I
   w        -(1 - (1 - p))C                          +(1 - p) - (1 - (1 - p))C
            vE = pc - (1 - (1 - p))c                 vE = pc - pc
            vI = p(c + c ) + (1 - p) - pC            vI = p(c + c ) + p(1 - )
   I
   n        vE = p(c + (1 - ) )                      +(1 - p) - pC
            -(1 - (1 - p))c                          vE = p(c + (1 - ) ) - pc

                      Table 4: Payoffs with Ex Post Competition


the same is true if neither innovate; something that arises in all four cases considered above.
   I prefers the w-biased experiment if:

            I   E        I   E                                            C       E
        vI (w , w )  vI (n , w ) = (1 - )(pc - C )  0 = p                 c
                                                                              p
                                                                              ^I (w )

I prefers the n-biased experiment if:

    I   E        I   E                                                            C          E
vI (w , n )  vI (n , n ) = p(1-)((1-)+c )  (1-)C = p                          (1-)+c
                                                                                         p
                                                                                         ^I (n )

   Turning now to E 's choice of experiment, the four cases for I translate into the following
payoffs for E :

                I   E
            vE (w , w ) = p(c - c) + (1 - p)(1 - )2 (-c) + (1 - p)(1 - )(-c)               (6)

                                       I   E
                                   vE (w , n ) = p(c - c)                                  (7)

                     I   E
                 vE (n , w ) = p(c - c) + (1 - )(p( - c) + (1 - p)(-c))                    (8)

                            I   E
                        vE (n , n ) = p2 (c - c) + p(1 - )( - c)                           (9)

Table 4 summarises the payoff matrix. E prefers an w-biased experiment if:

                I   E        I   E                                    c       I
            vE (w , w )  vE (w , n ) = (1 - )pc  c = p                c
                                                                          p
                                                                          ^E (w )

    I   E        I   E                                                            c         I
vE (n , w )  vE (n , n ) = p(1-)(c +(1-) )  (1-)c = p                         c +(1-)
                                                                                        p
                                                                                        ^E (n )

   We are now in a position to characterise the Nash equilibrium outcomes regarding the
simultaneous experimental choice by I and E .



                                              33
                  E        I
  1. p > max{p^I (w ), p
                       ^E (w )}: it is optimal for both firms to choose the w-biased experi-
     ment given that the other firm is doing so.
              I        E
  2. p  [^
         pE (n  ), p
                   ^I (w )]: it is optimal for E to choose the w-biased experiment and I to
     choose the n-biased experiment.
              E        I
  3. p  [^
         pI (n  ), p
                   ^E (w )]: it is optimal for E to choose the n-biased experiment and I to
     choose the w-biased experiment.
                  E         I
  4. p < min{p^I (n ), p
                       ^E (n  )}: it is optimal for both firms to choose the n-biased experiment
     given that the other firm is doing so.
                 I        I
If, say, p  (^
             pE (n ), p
                      ^E (w )), then E would want to choose a w-biased experiment only if
                                                E
I chose an n-biased one. However, if p > p  ^I (w ), then I will want to choose a w-biased
experiment. In this case, there would be no pure strategy Nash equilibrium.


7.4    Proof of Proposition 5
First, note that should E choose to exploit the technology in the absence of a cooperative
deal, then, under Nash bargaining, a cooperative outcome will emerge because joint surplus,
 +   c +  or  +   c + c + c as the case may be. Given this, the expected
payoffs for E and I are as depicted in Table 3. Since   c - c , then  > c .
                                                                       I   E         I   E
    Second, using those payoffs it is easy to see that, for E , vE (w    , w ) - vE (w , n ) =
(1-)(pc -c) > 0 = p > cc while vE (n         I   E
                                               , w       I
                                                   )-vE (n   E
                                                           , n ) = (1-)p((c +(1-) )-c) >
                  c                        I  E        I   E
0 = p > c +(1-) . Moreover, vI (w , w ) - vI (n , w ) = p(1 - )( - c ) > C = p >
 C            I    E         I   E                                                     C
 -c
     and vI (w  , n  ) - vI (n , n ) = p(1 - )((1 - )+ ( - c )) > C = p > (1-)+          ( -c )
as the condition for I making a w-biased choice. The proof is completed by the same method
as the proof of Proposition 4.




                                              34
References
Agrawal, Ajay K, Joshua S Gans, and Scott Stern, "Enabling Entrepreneurial
 Choice," Management Science, 2021.

Arrow, Kenneth, "Economic Welfare and The Allocation of Resources for Invention," in
 "The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity," Princeton University Press and NBER,
 1962.

Awaya, Yu and Vijay Krishna, "Startups and Upstarts: Disadvantageous Information
 in R&D," Journal of Political Economy, 2021, 129 (2), 000­000.

Azevedo, Eduardo M, Alex Deng, Jos´     e Luis Montiel Olea, Justin Rao, and E Glen
 Weyl, "A/b testing with fat tails," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (12), 4614­
 000.

Bower, Joseph L and Clayton M Christensen, "Disruptive technologies: Catching the
 wave," Harvard Business Review, 1995, pp. 1­12.

Bresnahan, Timothy F, Shane Greenstein, and Rebecca M Henderson, "Schum-
 peterian competition and diseconomies of scope: illustrations from the histories of Mi-
 crosoft and IBM," in "The rate and direction of inventive activity revisited," University
 of Chicago Press, 2011, pp. 203­271.

Callander, Steven and Niko Matouschek, "The Novelty of Innovation: Competition,
 Disruption, and Antitrust Policy," Management Science, 2021.

Camuffo, Arnaldo, Alessandro Cordova, Alfonso Gambardella, and Chiara Spina,
 "A scientific approach to entrepreneurial decision making: Evidence from a randomized
 control trial," Management Science, 2020, 66 (2), 564­586.

Cao, Ruiqing, Rembrand Koning, and Ramana Nanda, "Biased sampling of early
 users and the direction of startup innovation," Harvard Business School Entrepreneurial
 Management Working Paper, 2020, (21-059), 21­059.

Che, Yeon-Koo and Konrad Mierendorff, "Optimal dynamic allocation of attention,"
 American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (8), 2993­3029.

Ching, Kenny, Joshua S Gans, and Scott Stern, "Control versus execution: endoge-
 nous appropriability and entrepreneurial strategy," Industrial and Corporate Change, 2019,
 28 (2), 389­408.

                                            35
Christensen, Clayton and Michael Raynor, The innovator's solution: Creating and
 sustaining successful growth, Harvard Business Review Press, 2013.

Christensen, Clayton M, The Innovator's Dilemma: when new technologies cause great
 firms to fail, Harvard Business Review Press, 1997.

Gans, Joshua S, The Disruption Dilemma, MIT press, 2016.

  , "A Theory of Disruptive Vision," mimeo., Toronto 2021.

   and Scott Stern, "Incumbency and R&D incentives: Licensing the gale of creative
  destruction," Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2000, 9 (4), 485­511.

  , , and Jane Wu, "Foundations of entrepreneurial strategy," Strategic Management
  Journal, 2019, 40 (5), 736­756.

Gilbert, Richard J and David MG Newbery, "Preemptive patenting and the persis-
 tence of monopoly," The American Economic Review, 1982, pp. 514­526.

Henderson, Rebecca M and Kim B Clark, "Architectural innovation: The reconfigura-
 tion of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms," Administrative
 science quarterly, 1990, pp. 9­30.

Keating, Gina, Netflixed: The epic battle for America's eyeballs, Penguin, 2012.

Kerr, William R, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, "Entrepreneurship
 as Experimentation," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (3), 25­48.

Liang, Annie, Xiaosheng Mu, and Vasilis Syrgkanis, "Optimal and myopic infor-
  mation acquisition," in "Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics and
  Computation" 2018, pp. 45­46.

Marx, Matt, Joshua S Gans, and David H Hsu, "Dynamic commercialization strate-
 gies for disruptive technologies: Evidence from the speech recognition industry," Manage-
 ment Science, 2014, 60 (12), 3103­3123.

Mayskaya, Tatiana, "Dynamic choice of information sources," 2019.

Moore, Geoffrey A, Crossing the chasm, Harper business, 2014.

Nelson, Richard R, "The role of knowledge in R&D efficiency," The quarterly journal of
 economics, 1982, 97 (3), 453­470.


                                            36
Ries, Eric, The lean startup: How today's entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create
 radically successful businesses, Currency, 2011.




                                            37
