                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE ECONOMICS OF ELECTRIC VEHICLES

                                        David S. Rapson
                                        Erich Muehlegger

                                       Working Paper 29093
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29093


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the
research described in this paper. We thank Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Ken Gillingham,
Joseph Shapiro and many seminar participants for their helpful comments. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David S. Rapson and Erich Muehlegger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Electric Vehicles
David S. Rapson and Erich Muehlegger
NBER Working Paper No. 29093
July 2021
JEL No. Q54,Q55,Q58,R4

                                           ABSTRACT

Electric vehicles (EVs) powered by renewable electricity are a centerpiece of efforts to
decarbonize transportation. EV advocates also claim benefits from local pollution reductions,
lower life-cycle costs to consumers, and improved energy security. We examine the theory and
evidence behind these claims and evaluate when the market will produce the optimal path of EV
adoption. Optimal EV policy is nuanced. While EVs driven in some locations reduce pollution,
they increase pollution in others. While many consumers enjoy cost savings from EVs, some
experience net benefits from choosing gasoline-powered cars, even after accounting for EV
subsidies. And depending on the dynamic benefits of stimulating EV adoption today, optimal
policy might front-load stimulus, even though the environmental benefits of EV adoption are
likely to increase over time as electricity grids become cleaner. Reflecting these nuances, the
policy landscape is complicated and often creates conflicting incentives for EV adoption in
regions with ambitious adoption goals. We highlight several themes for policy design, including
1) promoting regional variation in EV policies that align private incentives with social benefits, 2)
pursuing a time-path of policies that follows the trajectory of marginal benefits, and 3)
rationalizing electricity and gasoline prices to reflect their social marginal cost. On the extensive
margin, purchase incentives should ramp-down as learning-by-doing and network externalities
that may exist diminish; on the intensive margin, gasoline should become relative more expensive
than electricity (per mile traveled) to reflect cleaner marginal emissions from electricity
generation.


David S. Rapson
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
dsrapson@ucdavis.edu

Erich Muehlegger
University of California,Davis
Economics Department
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
emuehlegger@ucdavis.edu
      1     Introduction
      Policymakers view electrification of the vehicle fleet as a central element to addressing major
      environmental, transportation and energy policy challenges. States and countries around the
      world have set ambitious long-run goals to transition away from internal combustion engines
      (ICEs), with targets for large-scale electric vehicle (EV) adoption1 or timelines to phase out
      ICEs entirely.2 However, EVs are not yet universally superior to ICEs, either economically or
      environmentally, leading to a complicated landscape of optimal policy.
          This paper examines the economic rationale and policy implications of the complex suite
      of policies that currently affect EVs. Our goals are to clarify three aspects of the economics of
      EVs. First, we evaluate the private rationale for EV adoption by consumers. In many cases, the
      operational savings of EVs counteract higher upfront price of purchasing an EV. However, the
      operational savings of an EV relative to a gasoline-powered vehicle vary substantially across
      states, and even within states across different utility territories. We document the variation in
      the private benefits to EV adoption and highlight the role of regulatory policy.
          Second, we consider external benefits of EVs that policy-makers offer as a rationale for
      intervention in the EV market. Potential social benefits of EV subsidies include a reduction
      in global and local pollution externalities, industrial learning-by-doing, network externalities
      relating to charging infrastructure, and enhanced energy security. We evaluate the relevance
      and potential magnitude of these claimed benefits through the lens of economic theory and,
      when available, empirical evidence.
          Third, we discuss what the private and public economics of EVs imply about optimal EV
      policy. Using efficiency as a benchmark, we describe and assess the current landscape of EV
      policy. We consider the impact that the suite of existing policies has on private benefits of EV
      adoption, the degree to which existing policies can be expected to improve or diminish social
      welfare, and how (and why) current policies might work in concert to spur or to hinder EV
      adoption.
          The latter of these three points is especially important for policy. EVs operate in a space at
      the intersection of environmental, transportation and energy issues and are viewed as an im-
      portant element to addressing challenges in each area. Yet, policies to address these challenges
      are often formed in isolation from each other, leading to policies that may be uncoordinated
      and, in some cases, conflicting. As an example, high electricity prices that encourage individu-
      als to adopt rooftop solar or make energy-efficient capital investments also make EVs more ex-
      pensive relative to ICEs. Moreover, even within a single regulatory "silo" such as a public util-
      ity commission or department of transportation, policymakers often design EV interventions
      to satisfy the objectives of multiple stakeholders. Electricity providers, manufacturers, envi-
      ronmentalists, urban planners, consumer groups and environmental justice advocates each see
      the potential of fleet electrification as a way to achieve different end goals. The rhetoric and
      details of EV policies often echo this "coalition-building", at the cost of reducing the efficacy of
      achieving a single objective, like reducing emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs).
          The paper offers several lessons for optimal EV policy:
   1 For example, Germany aims to have 6 million EVs on the road by 2030. In the U.S., California has also set ambitious

targets 1.5 million zero emission vehicles (ZEVs) on the road by 2025 and 5 million by 2030.
   2 Recent pledges to phase out ICEs include those in France and the United Kingdom UK (by 2040), Norway (by

2025), China (2035) and India (by 2030).



                                                           2
    1. Some market failures have external costs or benefits that are similar across locations in
       the US in the short- and medium-run. These included production spillovers, energy se-
       curity and global climate change mitigation. When equating marginal costs and marginal
       benefits on these dimensions, a policy that is uniform across locations will likely arise.
    2. Other market failures vary by geography, such as externalities arising from local pollution
       or network effects relating to density of local charging station infrastructure. To address
       these concerns, a decentralized approach to policy makes sense, and it may be optimal to
       delegate decision control to state and local authorities.
    3. An important temporal component exists in the EV market. There are efficiency reasons
       to front-load stimulus in the EV market, as well as reasons to ramp the stimulus up grad-
       ually over time. To the extent production spillovers and indirect network effects associ-
       ated with charging infrastructure exist, the dynamic effects of such investment increase
       the marginal benefits of taking action today. However, the pollution reduction benefits
       from driving EVs rather than ICEs will likely grow over time, as electricity grids shed
       coal and add renewables. Presently, an EV charged in the midwestern U.S. generates
       roughly as much pollution as a comparable ICE, but this is likely to change over coming
       years and decades. If environmental objectives are paramount, then optimal policy might
       exhibit spatial differences according to current grid composition and ramp-up incentives
       as electric grids become less pollution-intensive.
    4. Current subsidy levels are difficult to justify based on the cumulative external benefits
       of environmental, energy security and network externalities relating to charging infras-
       tructure. Economic justification for EV subsidies at recent levels relies on the presence of
       substantial non-appropriable learning by firms. Unfortunately, it is difficult to estimate
       the true extent of learning-by-doing, let alone determine the extent of non-appropriability.
    In what follows, readers may notice that the order of subsection topics (e.g. discussion
of the intensive versus extensive margin) is not symmetric across sections. We begin each
section by discussing the topic that seems most salient or important. That the order changes
between sections reflects a misalignment between the externalities (which mostly occur on
the intensive margin) and existing EV policies (which mostly seek to influence the extensive
margin). In Section 2 we discuss the (private) incentives facing consumers who are deciding
whether to purchase an EV or an ICE. We then turn our focus to several potential externalities
that relate to the production and use of EVs (Section 3), followed by a discussion of what these
considerations collectively imply about optimal EV policy (Section 4). Section 5 concludes.


2     Private Economics of Electric Vehicles
Conventional wisdom is that EVs are more expensive to buy and less expensive to operate
than gasoline-powered cars. The reality is more complex. In this section we explore the private
economics of EVs through the lens of the consumer, separately discussing the three main cost
components: up-front cost, operating costs and maintenance costs. We highlight three main
takeaways related to the private benefits of EV ownership. First, EVs continue to operate at
an up-front cost disadvantage, relative to conventional vehicles, although the purchase price
gap between the two is closing as battery costs fall. Second, although for many users, this up-


                                                 3
    front cost disadvantage is offset by operational cost savings, the extent of these savings vary
    substantially across states and electric utilities. Finally, the nascence of electric powertrains
    implies that data on long-term maintenance costs for electric vehicles is still relatively limited
    ­ battery longevity and replacement costs remain a source of cost uncertainty.


    2.1       Up-Front Cost
    EVs are at a manufacturing cost disadvantage due to the need for an expensive battery in-
    stead of a cheap gasoline tank. Although battery costs have fallen significantly over the past
    decade, EVs remain more costly to produce than comparable conventional vehicles. Accord-
    ing to Bloomberg New Energy Finance, lithium-ion battery pack prices fell by 85 percent from
    2010-2018.3 Synthesizing academic, industry and government estimates, Tsiropoulos et al.
    (2018) find disagreement as to specific date when EVs might reach cost-parity with internal
    combustion engines (anticipated price of roughly $90 per kWh). Although many estimates
    suggest price parity within the next ten years,4 other industry participants question whether
    parity (with regards to both cost and range) will ever be possible with current technology par-
    ity within the next 15 years.5
        In exchange for higher upfront costs, EVs offer a different bundle of attributes from ICEs,
    arising from the differentiation of the electric powertrain. Some of these difference may be pre-
    ferred by consumers and reflected in a willingness to pay a premium for an EV. For example,
    EVs offer superior torque and acceleration, and do so more smoothly (no gears) and quietly (no
    combustion engine) than ICEs. On the other hand, battery constraints introduce some unap-
    pealing features of EVs relative to their ICE counterparts. The driving range of EVs is typically
    lower than the range offered by ICEs, limiting the usefulness for certain transportation needs
    (e.g. longer road trips). Batteries take more time to charge than it takes to fill a gasoline tank,
    even with frontier fast-charging technologies. The present inconvenience of within-trip refuel-
    ing may be offset somewhat by the advantage of being able to recharge at home for consumers
    who have access to home charging infrastructure. In fact, the desire to increase the flexibility of
    EVs for longer trips partially offsets declining battery costs, as automakers increase the vehicle
    battery capacity to increase range. And major improvements to charging speed might require
    innovation beyond the current slate of battery technologies.6
        The novelty of EVs cuts both ways in terms of consumer willingness to pay. For some con-
    sumers, EVs present an opportunity to engage in pro-social behavior, and yield utility in the
    form of warm glow or virtue signaling. For others, novelty may instead represent uncertainty
    about resale value, battery lifecycle and replacement costs, or availability of ongoing mainte-
    nance years into the future for models that may no longer exist. That EVs typically are available
    with limited trim options may also lead to poor matches with some consumers' tastes, forcing
    them either to select an EV with a suboptimal bundle of attributes or an ICE. The difference
    in upfront costs leads to a fundamental policy challenge. Ambitious aspirations for EV adop-
    tion are inhibited by the fact that EVs cost more, to which the standard response is to offer
    government-funded subsidies to bring EVs closer to price parity with conventional vehicles.
3 https://about.bnef.com/blog/behind-scenes-take-lithium-ion-battery-prices/
4 See,   e.g., (n.d.) that projects cost parity later this decade.
5 https://insideevs.com/bmw-talks-electric-car-cost-nightmare/
6 https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-01-06/before-the-electric-car-takes-over-someone-needs-to-reinvent




                                                               4
      2.2   Operating Cost
      Conventional wisdom (and EV marketing materials) tout the operation cost savings associated
      with driving an EV. Yet, these savings can vary substantially across locations. Three factors
      determine the relative operating costs of EVs versus ICEs: the effective electricity price, the
      gasoline price, and the effective fuel efficiency of the propulsion system. Depending on these
      factors, the operating cost savings from driving an EV can be anywhere from positive and
      substantial to zero or even negative.
          In this section we will compare the cost of driving a variety of EVs and ICEs based on
      relative energy prices (which differ based on time and location) and fuel efficiency (which differ
      based on car choice). We use average gasoline prices over 2016 by state, aggregated from daily
      gasoline prices for each state reported by AAA. 2016 electricity prices come from Borenstein
      and Bushnell (2018), and originally sourced to Form EIA-861. For these calculations, we use the
      weighted-average fuel efficiency that is provided by the EPA and reflects implicit assumptions
      about highway versus city driving mileage.
          The pattern of variation in electricity prices differs from that of gasoline prices in some
      important dimensions. First, gasoline prices are closely linked to the global price of crude oil,
      causing them to exhibit less variation in the cross-section and substantial variation over time.
      While it is true that gasoline prices can vary across space due to variation in fuel taxes, local
      environmental regulations or market power, this variation is dwarfed by temporal changes.
      Since 2005, the average price of gasoline nation-wide has fluctuated from roughly $2/gal to
      $4/gal following crude oil prices. In contrast, state-level gasoline price variation (with the
      exception of California) is generally within thirty to fifty cents per gallon.7
          In contrast, retail electricity prices differ by utility district, mainly due to regulator decisions
      about whether to recover fixed costs via a fixed charge or by distributing them into variable
      rates and due to regulatory decisions covering cost recovery. Difference can be substantial -
      as in illustration, the top marginal retail electricity price for residential consumers in Pacific
      Gas and Electric's service territory (which covers West Sacramento) was 40 cents per kWh, al-
      most four times higher than the 11.4 cents per kWh rate for a residential household living in
      the Sacramento Municipal Utility District service territory. Moreover, differences may appear
      both between and within utility districts. The EV customer in Pacific Gas and Electric's territory
      could either be on a time-varying EV rate or on a time-invariant increasing block rate, and
      this distinction can dramatically change the operating cost differences experienced by differ-
      ent consumers. Likewise, the increasing block usage thresholds differ by climate zone, again
      affecting the probability that a household finds itself on the highest rate tier when charging.
      Throughout this section we will be clear about which rate is being used for comparison.
          Figure 2 shows the annual fuel savings enjoyed by a Nissan Leaf owner as compared to an
      identical owner (in terms of vehicle-miles travelled and driving behavior) of other popular ve-
      hicles. Vertical lines represent various electricity prices across the country, including different
      tiers at a major California utility, Southern California Edison. As one would expect, private
      savings from driving an EV are decreasing in the electricity price and increasing in the fuel
      intensity of the comparison gasoline-powered vehicle. The main observation here is that the
      range of savings resulting from actual differences in electricity prices could be substantial ­
  7 See,
       e.g., tax-inclusive gasoline prices reported by the Energy Information Administration at https://www.eia.
gov/dnav/pet/pet_pri_gnd_a_epmr_pte_dpgal_w.htm


                                                         5
roughly $1,000 per year in savings for someone in Texas or Georgia who is choosing between
a Leaf and a Toyota Camry (the most popular light duty car in the U.S.) ­ or slightly negative
for customers with prices on the top SCE residential tier in California.
    Actual savings will fluctuate to reflect changes in gasoline prices. For a decision between
the Nissan Leaf and the Nissan Versa, these differences can be seen in Figure 3. Diagonal
lines reflect gasoline prices at $2, $3 and $4/gallon. A $1/gallon increase in the gasoline price
translates to $300/year in savings from switching to an EV. Horizontal placement on the graph
reflects the effective electricity price for charging. For an EV owner in LA who's on the low-
est residential price tier, the three dots show how savings will change over time, both due
to changes in electricity rates and in the gasoline price. The differences can be substantial.
While electricity prices didn't change much during that period, gasoline prices declined sub-
stantially from 2014 to 2016 before increasing substantially from 2016 to 2018. Those gasoline
price changes are enough to change annual operating costs of an ICE as much as going from a
Nissan Versa to a Ford F150 pickup truck.
    Operational cost savings can influence consumers' decisions about which car to buy. To the
extent EVs are cheaper to operate than ICEs, and to the extent that consumers are aware of these
savings and incorporate them into their purchase decisions, one would expect the rate of EV
adoption to be high. Evidence from the literature on gasoline car adoption tends to support the
hypothesis that consumers value future cost savings at their time of purchase. When gasoline
prices are high, consumers buy more hybrid cars and fewer SUVs. This intuition is tested and
supported in Busse et al. (2013), Allcott and Wozny (2014), and Sallee et al. (2016). Yet, whether
consumers incorporate electricity prices to a similar extent remains an open question. But,
any results would need to be placed into the context of consumers who may experience range
anxiety or envision the utility of EVs to be different from or complementary to ICEs. As an
example, Davis (2019) documents the substantial gap between vehicle-miles traveled (VMT)
in EVs as compared to ICEs - if EVs are driven less than conventional vehicles, on average,
traditional estimates may overstate the potential benefits from driving an EV.


2.3   Maintenance
EVs have fewer moving parts than vehicles relying on an internal combustion engine. As a
result, conventional wisdom is that EV owners will enjoy lower regular maintenance costs.
A forward-looking buyer would rationally incorporate this benefit into his or her purchase
decision. Yet, the short history of EVs limits our observable experience with maintenance costs,
especially when considering larger, discrete maintenance expenses that are likeliest to occur
as the vehicle ages. There are several papers that describe the differences between EV and
ICE costs, but the quantitative aspects of these studies relating to maintenance appear to be
either purely assumption-driven or based on references that we have not been able to track to
an original source. Instead, we describe qualitative differences in ongoing maintenance costs
before presenting new data from recent but imperfect sources.
    There are three main categories of ongoing maintenance costs of cars: costs unrelated to en-
gine technology, ongoing maintenence of the engine and/or drivetrain and major component
replacement. The first category includes ongoing maintenance costs, such as insurance, tire
replacement, electronics system repair, body work resulting from ambient conditions (e.g. salt
in the wintertime). We see no reason why these costs would differ based on engine type, at


                                                6
      least conditioning on driver behavior and vehicle replacement value.
          But, the other two categories of maintenance costs will differ. For ICEs, ongoing engine
      maintenance relating to internal combustion is significant. Oil and filters need changing, along
      with spark plugs and other components in the ignition system. The simplicity of an electric
      drivetrain eliminates these costs.
          The final category of costs ­ major component replacement ­ is experienced by cars with
      both engine types. EVs have batteries that are expensive and need to be replaced. While costs
      have declined significantly in recent years, replacing a battery still costs thousands of dollars.
      Whether the car owner pays for this directly or through a manufacturer's warranty, it is a sub-
      stantial cost that is unique to EVs. On the other hand, ICEs don't have expensive batteries, but
      have transmissions and gear-boxes that eventually wear out and need to be replaced. More-
      over, the presence of regenerative braking in EVs dramatically extends the usable lifespan of
      brake pads, also reducing costs for EVs relative to ICEs.
          We now shift to the available data on costs. As noted above, battery replacement costs
      are large and have been declining rapidly over time. At the moment, the pack price-per-kwh is
      roughly $150. At this price, a 30 kwh capacity battery (roughly the size of a Nissan Leaf battery)
      would be $4,500, and a 75 kwh Tesla Model 3 battery would cost $11,250. The ICE analog
      of battery replacement is perhaps transmission replacement. A remanufactured transmission
      replacement costs in the range of $1,100 to $3,400.8 This is no doubt higher for luxury brands.
      The point is, replacing a transmission has costs roughly the same order of magnitude as a
      battery replacement may cost to EV drivers in a few years.
          What does the evidence say about costs overall? The best evidence that we were able to
      find on overall relative EV and ICE maintenance costs is from the Consumer Expenditure Sur-
      vey. In the 2018 CES, there are only 23 EVs of model-year 2013 or later, as compared to over
      23,000 ICEs. Over the first five years of ownership of these cars, ICEs and EVs had statistically
      indistinguishable average maintenance costs of $200 and $224, respectively. While these statis-
      tics don't appear to align with conventional wisdom, they are also the best available source,
      to our knowledge.9 Moreover, the sample underpinning ICE maintenance costs is large, and
      these numbers can be viewed as credible. They are also small in magnitude, particularly when
      compared to fuel and electricity costs. Even if EVs were to halve the maintenance costs of
      ICEs, that would save drivers just $100 per year. Finally, these aggregate statistics gloss over
      information about intensity of use. EVs are driven substantially less than ICEs, and one may
      consider maintenance costs on a per-mile basis as being more relevant than maintenance costs
      per year.10
   8 https://www.transmissionrepaircostguide.com/
   9 New   York City released a report in 2019 (REFERENCE) about relative EV versus ICE maintenance costs in its
vehicle fleet. In it, the reported annual amount spent on ICE maintenance was $1,286 as compared to $317 for EVs.
However, this is not an apples-to-apples comparison. Their EVs were brand new (purchased in 2018), while the ICEs
were bought in 2017 or earlier. Also, while the "estimated mileage" of both car types was the same, the use of vehicles
was not reported and could have been different.
  10 Davis (2019) reports statistics from the 2017 National Household Travel Survey that reveal annual average EV miles

driven is 6,300 as compared to 10,200 for ICEs.




                                                          7
      3      Market Failures in Electric Vehicles
      Externalities arise when decision-makers do not internalize the full social costs (or benefits) of
      the decisions they make. The presence of externalities (both positive and negative) are reg-
      ularly offered as justification for government intervention in the EV market, by po policy-
      makers, industry participants and EV advocates. In this section, we describe the main exter-
      nalities that might relevant, grouping the externalities into those created by the operation of
      EVs (the "intensive" margin) and those arising from the production or stock of EVs on the road
      (the "extensive" margin). For each of the externalities, we consider the efficiency rationale for
      policy - specifically, whether a price-based intervention, such as a tax or subsidy, might be a
      way to address a market failure.


      3.1     Usage-based "Intensive" Externalities
      3.1.1    Carbon Emissions
      Greenhouse gas emissions from electricity generation, much like local pollutant emissions,
      vary based on timing and location of electricity demand. Unlike local emissions, however,
      GHG emissions contribute to a global stock that diffuses in the atmosphere and diminishes
      slowly with time. The methodology to compare the GHG footprint of EVs to ICEs is similar
      to the methodology described in the previous section. Graff Zivin et al. (2014) were the first to
      estimate the marginal emissions factor of EVs, articulating the (correct) intuition that marginal
      emissions may be very different from inframarginal emissions. That distinction is worth de-
      scribing in some detail.
          The electricity generation sector is comprised of many different technologies: wind, so-
      lar, hydro (run-of-river and dammed), nuclear, and various fossil fuel technologies such as
      coal, natural gas (combined-cycle gas turbines, combustion turbines) and even some petroleum
      "peakers". What matters when attributing pollution to a marginal additional load source like
      an EV is which generator "turns on" or ramps up production when demand increases. It can-
      not be the case that the marginal supply comes from a technology that would be producing
      electricity irrespective of whether the EV is plugged in. The marginal supply must be, almost
      by definition, "dispatchable"; i.e. it must be a source that can be turned on or off depending on
      market conditions. Typically this rules out intermittent sources of renewable supply such as
      wind (which produces when the wind is blowing, irrespective of demand conditions) or solar
      (which produces when the sun is shining, irrespective of demand conditions).
          For EVs, Graff Zivin et al. (2014), Archsmith et al. (2015), and Holland et al. (2016) all use
      variants of a methodology that attempt to empirically estimate the emissions profile of gen-
      erators that "are on the margin". Archsmith et al. (2015) extend that methodology to allow
      renewables (such as dammed hydro) to be part of the marginal supply mix. They also include
      upstream ("life cycle") emissions that are associated with the extraction and transportation of
      inputs.11 Ambient temperature is also an important determinant of the efficiency of EVs, both
      due to declines in charging and discharging efficiencies experienced in very cold temperatures.
      Tamayao et al. (2015) runs scenarios that assume a range of potential emissions factors as the
  11 While  natural gas is the cleanest fuel at the point of combustion, it has a much higher upstream emissions factor
than coal or gasoline. Coal, by comparison, is often extracted very close to its point-of-use, and is transported quite
efficiently from a GHG perspective.


                                                          8
basis for the EV side of the EV-ICE comparison. The GHG profile of ICEs depends mainly on
features of the car and driving patterns, but there is less heterogeneity in fuel source. Life cycle
emissions of gasoline have been studied extensively and vary primarily based on the location
and extraction technology of the crude oil inputs.
     The conclusions of the above studies are qualitatively similar. EVs tend to provide some
GHG savings relative to ICEs in areas where natural gas is on the electricity generation mar-
gin, but tend to be more GHG-intense if coal is on the margin. GHG emissions from EVs are
substantially higher in areas with cold winters, which in the case of the midwest U.S. coincides
(at present) with a higher likelihood of coal being the marginal generation fuel. Archsmith et
al. (2015) estimate that a Nissan Leaf generates roughly $425 worth of life cycle GHG savings
when driven in California instead of the Nissan Versa, its ICE equivalent. That's a 20 percent
life cycle GHG savings in California, compared to 5 percent nationwide and -10 percent in the
midwest, each of which is consistent with results from Graff Zivin et al. (2014), Tamayao et al.
(2015), and Holland et al. (2016).
     One challenge with retrospective analyses in this context is the dynamic nature of electric-
ity supply and EV technology itself. As the electricity generation sector moves away from
coal and towards renewables (potentially with storage) and natural gas, the GHG profile of
electricity supply will improve. Moreover, improvements in EV technology may improve en-
ergy efficiency of the electric drivetrain, particularly in cold temperatures, thus reducing GHG
emissions conditional on any source of electricity generation. While this vision is appealing
and may represent one of the most promising avenues to widespread decarbonization of de-
veloped economies, we are far from a situation where EVs are powered by renewable electric-
ity. Regional policy-makers should monitor marginal emissions factors in their regions, and
national and international policy-makers should acknowledge the spatial heterogeneity in po-
tential benefits and costs of promoting EVs. For example, at the moment it is counterproductive
to subsidize EVs in regions where coal is on the margin, such as the midwest U.S. Moreover,
arguments relying on economies of scale, learning-by-doing or market transformation must be
tempered by the possibility that environmental damages of EVs when fueled by coal exceed
the damages from ICEs. Scale-related benefits, which we discuss in section 3.2, will be most
efficiently achieved by promoting EVs in areas where they provide benefits rather than costs.


3.1.2   Local Pollution
Combustion of fossil fuels contributes, directly and indirectly, to the stock of harmful pollutants
in the air. These pollutants inflict damage to valuable resources such as human health, the
built infrastructure, crop yields and the ecosystem. Human exposure is the primary driver of
damages, and this leads to two main factors that affect the extent of local pollutant damage: the
quantity and type of fuel combusted and its proximity to population centers in relation to wind
patterns. These two factors suggest considerable potential differences in the local emissions
impacts of gasoline-powered cars as compared to EVs. Combustion of gasoline occurs at the
location of the car when it is driven, thus exposing the population to pollutants in proportion
to population and traffic density. In contrast, the combustion associated with EV propulsion is
disconnected from travel in both time and space.
    As with carbon emissions, the local pollution associated with charging an EV depends on
the emissions of the marginal generating unit, the unit that would not have otherwise been gen-


                                                 9
     erating electricity had the EV not been plugged in. Typically in the United States, the marginal
     generation source will be coal or natural gas due primarily to the ability to expand produc-
     tion on demand. In 2018, roughly 63 percent of electricity in the United States was generated
     from either coal or natural gas, down from 70 percent in 2014.12 To the extent EV-induced fos-
     sil generation occurs in close proximity to population centers, it may expose people to health
     damages that exceed those from driving gasoline-powered cars. But, due to the spatial integra-
     tion of electricity markets, the marginal generating unit could be geographically distant from
     the EV as well. So, the maximum local pollution benefit to driving an EV (relative to ICE) will
     occur when the car is located in an already-polluted and densely populated area, and where
     the marginal electricity generating unit is either clean (e.g. dammed hydro or natural gas) or
     located far from population centers.
         This intuition is reflected in Holland et al. (2016), who assess the local environmental ben-
     efits of EVs relative to ICEs. Large benefits accrue to driving EVs in cities where the ambient
     air quality is poor and where the electricity grid is powered by relatively clean electricity (e.g.
     Los Angeles, California). Where coal is likely to be on the electricity generation margin and is
     upwind of population centers, driving EVs can actually increase net local pollution (e.g. the
     entire U.S. midwest, northeast and southeast).
         Pollution has also been linked to many potential channels of social harm, including de-
     creased labor productivity (Graff Zivin and Neidell (2012) and Chang et al. (2016)) and im-
     paired cognitive performance (Archsmith et al. (2018)). It is challenging to incorporate all chan-
     nels in analyses such as Holland et al. (2016). Nonetheless, policymakers have long recognized
     the importance of pursuing reductions in ambient air pollution. These efforts have combined
     with market forces to contribute to substantial changes in the composition of the electricity
     generation sector in recent years. Relative to past, recent estimates suggest a reduction in the
     local pollution impacts of electricity production (Holland et al. (2020)). This research suggests
     that, even in the very recent past, the relatively poor record of local pollution from upstream
     EV emissions is improving. As the electricity grid continues to become cleaner, EVs will as
     well. However, criteria pollution rates from ICEs is not static either. Fuel economy is improv-
     ing conditional on vehicle mix, although composition of the fleet continues to shift towards
     more fuel-intense vehicles (SUVs and light trucks).
         Despite EVs receiving the label "zero-emissions", that is currently true only at the tailpipe,
     even after accounting for the rapid growth in renewable electricity generation. Policy-makers
     must consider both tailpipe emissions and the effects of EV-induced upstream combustion
     when assessing the extent of true local damages. EVs should be promoted on the basis of local
     pollution benefits to the extent that overall harm is reduced by the shift from ICEs to EVs.
     This may at times place the incentives of local policymakers (who care about local pollution
     in their city) at odds with those of regional policymakers (who care about the air quality near
     a potentially-large number of upstream electricity generation facilities). Moreover, optimal
     policy will vary over time and space according to the composition of the grid and the proximity
     of people to emissions sources. Local pollutant benefits of EVs are greatest in dense urban
     centers where the electric grid is clean such as Los Angeles and other cities in the western
     U.S. In contrast, in locations where the marginal unit of electricity comes from more pollution-
     intensive sources or from sources upwind of major urban areas, local pollution benefits are low
12 U.S.   Energy Information Administration



                                                     10
      or even negative.


      3.1.3   Congestion and Accidents
      Drivers exert additional negative externalities by increasing congestion or through accidents.
      While both externalities relate primarily to vehicle miles travelled, congestion externalities are
      magnified in heavily trafficked routes during congested periods of time and the externalities
      imposed by a driver is positively correlated with the weight of the vehicle driven.13 To a first-
      order approximation, replacing an EV with an comparable ICE should have relatively little
      overall impact on the externality. But, some policies designed to encourage EV adoption, such
      as single-occupancy access to HOV (carpool) lanes, might impose externalities by reducing the
      utility of these lanes. In addition, there is growing evidence of portfolio effects, as suggested
      by Archsmith et al. (2017), within a household's set of vehicles. If marginal households pur-
      chasing EVs also tend to purchase larger vehicles in an attempt to diversify the portfolio of
      vehicles-owned, incentives to encourage adoption may increase the dispersion of the vehicle
      fleet weight distribution and increase accident externalities.


      3.1.4   Energy Security
      We follow Metcalf (2014) by defining energy security as "the ability of U.S. households and
      businesses to accommodate disruptions of supply in energy markets."14 Energy security ad-
      vocates express concerns about the level of imported energy, mainly crude oil. Traditionally,
      there are two sources of these concerns. First, much of the global crude oil supply comes from
      nation states with geopolitical interests that may be in conflict with or not well-aligned with
      U.S. interests. Concerns arise from the idea that U.S. oil purchases enrich these potential ad-
      versaries, and that the pursuit of U.S. interests will be compromised as a result. Second, there
      is a precautionary concern relating to potential wartime scenarios. In the event of a global con-
      flict, the U.S. may not have control over valuable key energy inputs, and therefore would be
      practically or strategically impaired by supply disruptions. Separately, energy security is often
      also bundled into advocacy narratives that favor clean energy technologies despite there being
      no a-priori reason why energy security interests are furthered by clean energy, or vice versa
      (Borenstein (2012)).
           Widespread substitution away from gasoline-powered vehicles towards EVs would reduce
      reliance on crude oil in favor of electricity and, by extension, the inputs that generate electric-
      ity. Implications for U.S. energy security are in flux as a result of the U.S. becoming a major oil
      and gas producer. In 2017, the U.S. energy production was roughly 90 percent of energy con-
      sumption, and net U.S. energy imports reached their lowest levels since 1982 and are rapidly
      declining.15 As a result, energy security interests may now be less relevant than ten or twenty
      years ago or, to the extent they remain relevant, they may be at odds with the interests of
      domestic oil and gas producers. We briefly mention several interesting considerations at the
      nexus of energy security and EV-induced demand reductions for gasoline in the U.S.
  13 Weight-based  externalities are well documented in Anderson and Auffhammer (2013), Jacobsen (2013), and Bento
et al. (2017)).
   14 The Congressional Budget Office 2012 adopts a similar definition, from which Metcalf's is derived.
   15 https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/?page=us_energy_home,               https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/
detail.php?id=35532


                                                       11
          Domestic considerations. The shale revolution has transformed the way that the U.S. in-
      teracts with global oil markets. For the last several decades, the U.S. has imported between
      five-to-ten million barrels per day (BPD) of crude oil and, until very recently, has exported
      roughly zero.16 Since 2014, U.S. crude oil exports have increased from nearly zero to over three
      million BPD, while at the same time maintaining import levels at roughly 7 million BPD. The
      U.S. is therefore becoming increasingly petroleum-independent. It remains both an importer
      and exporter of petroleum because different refiners specialize in processing particular crude
      streams, and there are substantial differences in the type of crude available in different loca-
      tions. The U.S., for example, tends to produce light crude but has substantial refinery capacity
      intended for heavy crude. Changes in refining technology in recent decades have shifted the
      fraction of imports towards Canada and Mexico, and away from the Middle East. Nonethe-
      less, heavy and light crude are traded in a global marketplace that links their prices according
      to supply, demand and the ability to substitute between them.
          As VMT shifts away from gasoline and towards electricity as the power source, it reduces
      domestic demand for gasoline, a co-product produced by refining petroleum. This will create
      both level and compositional pressures in the market. At a time when petroleum supply in the
      U.S. is expanding, a decline in oil demand will cause the U.S. to import less and export more,
      placing downward pressure on the global oil price. This highlights the contrasting effects on
      energy security proponents (who would applaud such a shift) and owners of crude oil reserves
      (whose assets are worth less in such a scenario).
          The compositional implications are also potentially interesting. Conditional on refinery
      design, the refining process will convert crude inputs into products such as lubricants, jet fuel,
      diesel, gasoline, etc. in roughly fixed proportions. As demand for one of these co-products
      shrinks, the quantity margin of adjustment is constrained due to the Leontief nature of refining
      outputs. One might then expect either a glut of gasoline at very low prices and/or an increase
      in the price of the other co-products (or both).
          Global considerations. The global implications of the current energy boom in the U.S. are
      expansive. One of the primary concerns articulated by energy security advocates relates to
      geopolitical stability, and it is unclear to these authors whether a glut of crude accompanied by
      very low global oil prices improves or diminishes stability. On one hand, under that scenario
      oil-rich countries would experience a significant decline in their financial resources. This may
      inhibit their ability to pursue interests that conflict with those of the U.S. On the other hand,
      one could argue that the wealth derived from oil resources has facilitated political stability
      within oil-rich countries. In a counterfactual world with lower oil prices, these countries may
      find it increasingly difficult to meet the expectations of their citizens, potentially planting seeds
      of civil unrest along the lines of what led to the Arab Spring.17
          While admittedly outside of the scope of energy security, there may also be global environ-
      mental consequences stemming from this U.S. shift. As global oil prices fall, cleaner energy
      substitutes will become increasingly (relatively) expensive. Fast-growing emerging economies
      faced with a decision between these energy alternatives will increasingly be tempted to choose
      oil-derived fuels. This "macroeconomic rebound effect" is discussed in Gillingham et al. (2016)
  16 For a sense of scale, the U.S. consumed an average of just over twenty million BPD of petroleum in 2018 and is

steadily increasing.
  17 While many of the grievances of Egyptian protesters centered on political freedom and state abuse, economic

factors (high unemployment, food-price inflation and low wages) played an important role.


                                                        12
in the context of energy efficiency standards, and the logic extends to this setting.


3.2     Stock-based "extensive" externalities
The stock of EVs or charging stations might also generate external benefits, such as learning-
by-doing, knowledge spillovers in production, or network effects related to charging infras-
tructure. These types of benefits are notoriously hard to separate from economies of scale that
arise from contemporaneous production or models of graduate technological diffusion without
meaningful externalities. Yet, economics provides some guidance as to the conditions under
which they are likely to be relevant for EV policy. Broadly, we categorize these spillovers along
two dimensions: (a) whether the benefits that accrue can be appropriable by the firm, and (b)
whether the benefits arise from the global stock of vehicles or the stock of vehicles operating in
a local region.
    We focus our attention on four potential ways in which the production volumes might
generate impacts: (1) network externalities related to the stock of EVs and the charging station
network, (2) learning-by-doing and within-firm economies of scale, (3) spillovers in production
knowledge within the industry, and (4) spillovers arising from the use of shared (e.g., battery)
technology.


3.2.1    Learning-by-doing and within-firm economies of scale
Learning-by-doing reflects potential benefits from experiential learning on a firm's production.
In the classic sense, learning-by-doing describes a number of different mechanisms that share
the same outcome; as the firm's cumulative production experience increases, its future produc-
tion costs fall. The firm might refine its production process; its workers might become more
skilled; or it might develop gradual expertise in managing inputs. In each of these cases, as the
firm's cumulative experience in the past allows it to produce units at lower cost in the future.
     Learning-by-doing is distinct from economies of scale, whereby a firm's production costs
decline with contemporaneous output. With economies of scale, the cost reduction might arise
from higher volumes allowing the firm to, for instance, better manage inventories or negotiate
more aggressively over the cost of inputs.
     Empirically separating economies of scale from learning-by-doing is challenging. In many
settings with falling costs, production increases over time as does cumulative production ex-
perience. To our knowledge, no one has quantified the extent of learning-by-doing for EV
manufacturers, although learning-by-doing has been documented in other manufacturing in-
dustries, most notably by Benkard (2000) in the context of aircraft manufacturing.
     Despite the difficulty in empirically distinguishing the two mechanisms, learning-by-doing
and economies of scale share an important feature for policy. The benefits of both accrue in-
ternally to the firm. If a firm's cumulative experience or contemporaneous production rises,
it is able to reap the benefits of lower costs. Here, there are no external benefits that are left
uncaptured by the firm making production decisions that might naturally motivate subsidy to
encourage (in this case) production. So long as the firm has access to well-functioning capital
markets and there are no other market failures that prevent the firm from capturing the bene-
fits, learning-by-doing and within-firm economies of scale are not market failures and thus do
not justify intervention from the perspective of economic efficiency.


                                               13
3.2.2   Spillovers across firms
In contrast to learning-by-doing, spillovers reflect benefits from production or cumulative ex-
perience that extend beyond a firm's boundaries. Importantly for policy, spillovers generate
benefits external to the firm, and hence might justify policy to encourage production or adop-
tion. However, the nature of the spillovers plays a central role in whether government inter-
vention is appropriate and, if so, the appropriate magnitude of such an intervention. In what
follows we distinguish between spillovers in production techniques that accrue within the EV
manufacturing sector and spillovers that accrue as a result of shared technology across differ-
ent end-uses (e.g., lithium-ion batteries).
    Productivity gains associated with production of vehicles may arise from labor specializa-
tion, agglomeration of EV manufacturers and parts manufacturers or cumulative production
experience. As with within-firm learning-by-doing, empirical quantification of these benefits
is difficult. Nonetheless, even in cases where the benefits from labor specialization might be
large, estimates of the impact of cumulative industry experience are modest. Thornton and
Thompson (2001) estimates the within-firm benefits of experience exceed the external benefits
of cumulative industry experience by an order of magnitude for liberty ships, a setting where
we might expect the benefits of labor specialization to be relatively large. While knowledge
spillovers in production might also exist within the auto industry, to the extent that labor spe-
cialization or production expertise arise from the production of all vehicles, the benefits of this
set of spillovers have likely been captured over the past century of manufacturing experience.
    Meaningful spillovers may plausibly arise as a result of either innovation or "external
economies of scale" described by Bartelme et al. (2018) for shared technologies, such as bat-
teries. Transportation is the most quickly growing sector of the battery market, and in recent
years has rapidly outstripped consumer electronics as the main user of Lithium-Ion batteries.
Focusing on just that battery technology , Tsiropoulos et al. (2018) documents a 26% annual
growth rate over 2010 - 2017, with the lion's share of the growth coming from the transporta-
tion sector. In 2010, virtually all Lithium-Ion battery production (measured in total battery
capacity) was for consumer electronics. In 2017, 60% of Lithium-Ion battery production was
deployed in EVs. At the same time, production costs have fallen significantly, from over $400
per kWh of storage capacity in 2013 to under $200 per kWh in 2017. Future projections, summa-
rized in Tsiropoulos et al. (2018), disagree as to specific date when EVs might reach cost-parity
with internal combustion engines (anticipated a price of roughly $90 per kWh), but even the
least optimistic forecasts suggest cost parity within the next 15 years.
    Battery production and use, spurred by deployment in EVs, may plausibly foster inno-
vation in battery chemistry, characteristics or costs. These innovations might consequently
increase the value of batteries for EV manufacturers or for manufacturers that use recharge-
able batteries for other uses, such as consumer electronics. In fact, there is a long history of
beneficial innovations within the battery industry, whereby innovations that improve battery
operation for one use are subsequently adapted for other uses. Despite the needs of different
battery-powered electronics, many common innovations, such as energy density, the ability to
quickly recharge and battery longevity are valued for many different uses. Central to argu-
ments justifying intervention on these grounds is that the benefits of such innovation accrue
external to the firm identifying the innovation. If battery producers are able to capitalize the in-
novation through intellectual property, they face efficient incentives to engage in research and


                                                14
       development. Even if the capture of intellectual capital is imperfect, it is unclear whether offer-
       ing incentives for EV adoption are the most cost-effective strategy for stimulating battery (or
       other technological) innovation - inframarginality of EV buyers blunts the efficacy of incentives
       to stimulate innovation.


       3.2.3    Charging Infrastructure and Efficiency
       Network effects arise when increases in the existing stock of a good leads to an increase in the
       value of the good to prospective consumers. Network effects may be "direct" or "indirect".
       In the context of EVs, direct network effects exist if the marginal utility of an EV owner is
       increasing in the number of other EV owners, whereas indirect network effects might arise
       through the availability of an important complementary good: charging infrastructure.
           Charging infrastructure takes two forms. Level 2 chargers supply 220V and can allow for
       charging at a rate of up to nearly 20kW, though most Level 2 charging stations max out at a
       third of that level. The fixed cost associated with installing these stations is modest (on the or-
       der of several thousand dollars) as are distribution utility requirements to update transformer
       and delivery infrastructure. Level 2 chargers are already commonplace ­ as a point of refer-
       ence, roughly 57,000 level 2 charging stations have been built in California. They are typically
       constructed in locations such as parking lots, commercial and retail locations and multi-unit
       apartment buildings. In contrast, fast-charging (or Level 3) stations supply the fastest re-charge
       available today. They cost in the range of $100,000 and can provide a nearly full charge in un-
       der 30 minutes. Fast-charging stations are more likely to be built along highways to facilitate
       longer-distance trips between cities.
           It is unclear whether market failures arise in this context. As in the case of learning-by-
       doing, network effects do not inherently imply a market failure. Just as firms might appropriate
       the benefits of learning-by-doing, benefits of network effects may also be captured by firms.
       For example, Microsoft benefited from enormous network effects, but the market failure that
       arose was due to market power, not the inability of Microsoft to internalize the benefits of the
       network effects. In this setting, one such example is Tesla's charging network. Tesla's network
       for fast-charging stations provides a unique benefit to buyers of Tesla vehicles, and as such,
       Tesla has every incentive to build out the charging station network optimally.
           However, network externalities may arise when multiple technology platforms exist (such
       as the different charging standards used by EV automakers), or if market participants are un-
       able to internalize the benefits that arise from the network effects. In the case of the former,
       there are currently three "standards" for fast-charging connectors adopted by EV automakers:
       CHAdeMO, Combined Charging System (CCS) and Tesla.18 To the extent that standards are
       incompatible, governments have long played a regulatory role in aligning standards.19 Yet,
       in some cases, market forces create strong incentives to achieve compatibility and obviate the
       need for government intervention.20 For EVs, automakers want to design vehicles that are ei-
       ther compatible with a prevailing standard or to offer adapters to allow their vehicles to used
       across charging platforms. As one such example, the version of the Tesla Model 3 sold in Eu-
  18 Broadly, Asian automakers have used CHAdeMO and U.S. legacy and European automakers have used CCS.
  19 Classic examples include voltage regulation and infrastructure standards for electric utilities.
  20 Li (2017) simulates the welfare impacts of standardizing the charging platform, finding that standardization in-

creases welfare through both increased adoption and a more cost-effective charging network.



                                                         15
rope is built with a CCS connector so as to allow owners to take advantage of the existing
fast-charging network.
    Market participants can be expected to internalize the benefits of network effects so long as
there are low barriers to entry and firms are able to achieve sufficient scale. To illustrate this
point, consider the case of a firm owning a single fast-charging station along an interstate. The
number of EVs (and the profits of that charging station) depend on the density of the broader
network, and specifically, on whether there are other firms that build fast-charging stations
along the same interstate. Here, a meaningful network externality might exist. Yet, a large well-
capitalized entrant will build at a scale that internalizes these network effects by, for example,
constructing a string of fast-chargers along a route. Market forces will strongly push towards
the latter outcome. Tesla's supercharger network provides one such example. Economists do
not traditionally view economies of scale as a market failure as firms have every incentive to
achieve necessary scale. Simply the presence of network effects in this industry are neither
necessary nor sufficient conditions for market failure.
    However, there may well be multiple equilibria in this industry, which has implications for
potential market failure. Consider the discussion in the previous paragraph as being local (in
an equilibrium sense) to current supply and demand conditions. An alternative equilibrium
may exist which a far higher level of both EV adoption and charging infrastructure. A market
failure exists if welfare is higher at the alternative equilibrium and if a hurdle exists that in-
hibits the market from reaching that alternative. We can't reject whether such a high EV - high
charging equilibrium exists, and indeed, it very well may. However, there is little empirical
guidance to inform us as to whether welfare is higher or lower in such an equilibrium. The
environmental benefits would certainly be high, but the cost to build out the charging network
and transform the electric grid will also be high. The relative magnitude of these costs and
benefits is highly uncertain. One source of uncertainty comes in the form of foreclosing future
potential climate solutions. Over-building infrastructure will reduce the expected benefits of
exploring alternative transportation emissions mitigation pathways, such as hydrogen, direct
air capture, cellulosic ethanol, other yet to be identified technologies or even re-envisioning the
role of cars in the urban environment.


4    Current Policies and Economic Efficiency
EVs exist at the intersection of transportation, energy and environmental policy, and as such,
EV policies attempt to address potentially-numerous objectives. In this section, we discuss
how the interconnected transportation, environmental and energy policy landscapes relate to
the private and public economics of EVs. We will assert that market failures are the legiti-
mate justification for government interventions that strive to improve market outcomes. We
will describe many of the most prominent EV-related policies and then discuss the extent to
which they can (or cannot) be justified on the grounds of correcting market failures. Distribu-
tional objectives are also important, and although they fall outside of the purview of economic
efficiency, we will touch on them as well.
    We begin by discussing optimal policy from the perspective of addressing market failures
from the previous section that might justify intervention. We then provide an overview of the
current policies in place and highlight how the suite of existing policies spur, or in some cases


                                                16
      hinder, EV adoption and affect the economic efficiency of outcomes.
          As described above, externalities arise when decision makers do not internalize the full
      social costs (or benefits) of the decisions they make. Typically, economists focus on pricing as
      the most direct way to correct externality-driven market failure, with the goal of inducing the
      decision-maker to incorporate the social costs or benefits associated with different courses of
      action into his or her decision. Before discussing the role that taxes and subsidies might play in
      addressing potential externalities, we highlight three broader lessons that are common across
      the externalities from the previous section.
          First, an externality only arises when the benefits of an agent's decision accrue to other par-
      ties. If the agent is the residual claimant on the benefits of deploying an additional EV, there is
      no externality-based market failure and no justification for a production or sales subsidy. For
      example, if learning-by-doing in production accrues entirely within the boundaries of the firm,
      then a forward-looking firm will anticipate the benefits and fully-internalize the additional
      learning benefit from production. Similarly, one commonly stated rationale for subsidies are
      to help automakers achieve necessary economies of scale in production. However, absent a
      clearly articulated reason why a sufficiently-capitalized firm wouldn't avail itself of economies
      of scale, there is no market failure that would justify subsidies. In contrast, if the learning-by-
      doing creates spillovers outside the firm, arising perhaps from a labor force that moves between
      automakers or intellectual property that benefits all automakers, subsidies might play an im-
      portant role in leading firms to produce the socially optimal quantity. Network externalities
      create similar spillovers if, as fleet size increases, charging station infrastructure is further de-
      veloped. Here the private economics of the consumer's decision fail to capture the broader
      benefits from a growing EV fleet.
          The second point related to the intertemporal nature of subsidies. As discussed above,
      network externalities and production spillovers on the extensive margin, to the extent they are
      relevant, likely exhibit diminishing marginal returns.21 This suggests that if initial subsidies are
      justified, the subsidies should taper as the external benefits of production or purchase diminish
      in magnitude.
          Finally, the externalities described above vary with regards to their spatial scope. For those
      where the externality extends across a wide set of geographies or firms, a one-size fits all pol-
      icy might be appropriate. For example, if meaningful spillovers exist with respect to produc-
      tion experience or intellectual capital, it doesn't necessarily matter whether EVs are produced
      in location A or location B. But, for others, local variation in the external costs or marginal
      benefit of abatement suggest decentralized policy might be much more effective. Network
      externalities depend on the local confluence of EVs and charging stations, and in such a case
      decentralized policy is likely a better match with the local externalities created by EV fleet ex-
      pansion. As an illustration, if the effects of adding additional charging stations or EVs in a
      "saturated" market like the San Francisco Bay Area are modest, resources that encourage firms
      or consumers in these areas to further expand EV adoption might be unjustified on network
      externality grounds. Or the addition of an EV to a location where the external costs of local
      pollution are relative high might be preferable from a welfare perspective.
   21 Benkard (2000) and Thornton and Thompson (2001) document diminishing marginal returns in aircraft and ship-

building manufacturing to experiential learning. Similarly, early adoption of EVs might spur charging station invest-
ment (and vice versa as suggested by Li (2017) and Springel (2017)), but the marginal external benefits decline as fleet
size increases or charging stations become pervasive, the external benefits decline.


                                                          17
              In light of the three points above, we can evaluate the role of policy to address externalities
          on the "intensive" and "extensive" margins. Externalities on the intensive margin arise from
          how much an EV is driven, and when and where that driving occurs. Pollution externalities
          are a function of the relative pollution intensities of EVs and traditional vehicles.22 Although
          the GHG contribution of a conventional vehicle is space-invariant (the same ICE vehicle emits
          the same amount of carbon whether it is located California or Minnesota), the GHG contribu-
          tion of an EV depends on the marginal carbon-intensity of electricity generation in that area.
          Likewise, the impacts of local pollutants depend on the size of the impacted population. In
          the simplest case, if consumers are well-informed, the most direct intervention would be to tax
          the externality-generating outcome at marginal external cost, since these costs would vary, so
          does the optimal price. In the case of a carbon externality, we would tax gasoline and elec-
          tricity based on their relative carbon-intensity. In doing so, the "tax" on electricity used by an
          EV would not only reflect carbon-intensity of the regional electricity grid, but also diminish
          as the electric grid shifts toward lower-carbon forms of generation. Local pollutants suggest
          localized policy to tailor the fuel taxes the externalities imposed on the local community. For
          local pollution, the two products would be taxed at the marginal external costs generated by
          either the tailpipe emissions from the conventional vehicle or the emissions from the marginal
          electricity generating plant, again varying locally depending on the population impacted.
              The optimality of a tax as a policy instrument assumes that consumers are well-informed
          about fuel prices and forward-looking with respect to fuel costs when choosing what type of
          vehicle to purchase. Although recent evidence suggests that conventional vehicle buyers are
          aware of gasoline prices and forward-looking (incorporating future fuel costs) when deciding
          which vehicle to purchase23 , Ito (2014) describes consumers who are aware of the average elec-
          tricity price they face, but poorly understand increasing marginal block prices often employed
          by regulators. If consumers consider the average price of electricity rather than the marginal
          price of electricity or misperceive the costs of fueling an EV, they may over- or under-estimate
          the costs of operation of an EV, leading to over- or under-utilization. To date, we do not have
          clear empirical evidence as to whether EV buyers are forward-looking to the same degree as
          buyers of conventional vehicles.
              Subsidies to the upfront purchase price of EVs play a similar role Pigouvian taxes on elec-
          tricity and gasoline prices. To the extent that there are externalities that arise on the "extensive"
          margin from the stock of EVs on the road, efficient policy justifies the use of a tax or subsidy to
          the upfront purchase price. As with the "intensive" externalities described above, the nature
          of the externality affects whether a common policy or local policy is preferable, depending on
          whether the marginal societal costs or benefits vary by geography. For instance, the local na-
          ture of network externalities suggest a decentralized approach preferable to a one-size fits all
          approach.
              Yet, subsidies to the upfront purchase price may also play an important role in addressing
          externalities on the "intensive" margin, by inducing consumers to select fuel efficient vehicles.
          In particular, if consumers are poorly informed or underestimate the savings associated with
          operating an EV, they may be less willing to accept the higher upfront cost of an EV as com-
          pensation for future savings. As noted in Allcott et al. (2014), taxing electricity and gasoline at
  22 Asnoted by Davis (2019), to the extent that fuel taxes generate tax revenue earmarked for road infrastructure, one
might also imagine taxing the mileage of EVs to reflect the wear imposed by the EV on roadways.
 23 Busse et al. (2013), Sallee et al. (2016)



                                                           18
their marginal external costs may not lead to the first-best outcome. To the extent that buyers
are myopic, they will tend to adopt fewer EVs than if they were forward-looking. Even if the
price of electricity and gasoline reflect the full social costs of the use of the fuels, consumer
myopia would generate a externality on the extensive margin equal to the net present value of
the stream of externalities generated on the intensive margin, potentially justifying subsidies
to the upfront EV price.
    We now turn our attention to various policies that are in place in the U.S. to promote supply
and demand in the EV market. These policies pursue a wide range of goals, with some stating
more or less clearly precisely what market failure the policy seeks to address. State and federal
tax credits (in concert with non-monetary incentives) encourage consumer adoption. Califor-
nia's Zero-Emission-Vehicle (ZEV) Mandate and CAFE standards create incentives to promote
supply. Indirect network externalities associated with charging infrastructure investments are
addressed through direct subsidies for construction of charging stations. We discuss this policy
landscape briefly with the goal of identifying the stated rationale when possible, and ascertain-
ing the extent to which those stated or presumed rationale can be justified by market failure.
A general principle in what follow is that policies that are not justified by a market failure lead
to costly distortions and imply that the same environmental and market outcomes could be
achieved at a lower cost. In our view, the aspiration to cost-minimize ought to be central to any
environmental policy that policy-makers wish to scale or see replicated elsewhere.


4.1   EV Purchase Incentives
State and federal tax credits are motivated by the fact that, both currently and for the antici-
pated future, the upfront cost to purchase an EV is higher than the upfront cost to purchase a
comparably-sized gasoline-powered vehicle. State and federal subsidy programs are the pri-
mary policies aimed at influencing the consumer purchase decision. Federal subsidies of up to
$7,500 per new EV were made available as part of the American Clean Energy and Security Act
of 2009. These subsidies are tied to battery capacity and are capped at the manufacturer level,
with up to $1.5 billion in tax credits available for consumers of each manufacturer, phasing-out
after an automaker sells 200,000 electric vehicles. A wide array of state and local incentives
have been available, with the most typical being rebates or tax credits, high-occupancy vehicle
lane access, and/or free or subsidized charging (more on this in the next subsection). Through
2017, roughly 700,000 EVs claimed a total of an estimated $4.7 billion in federal subsidies have
been paid to EV buyers nationwide. The future status of these subsidies is being debated
presently both at the federal level (where some favor eliminating subsidies and some favor
expansion), and at the state and local level.
    State governments have also been active in setting up financial incentives for EV adop-
tions. By 2014, over half of the states had some sort of EV incentives in place. These ranged
from point-of-sale subsidies to high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lane stickers, sales tax waivers,
registration fees (waivers or taxes), parking preferences, charging infrastructure subsidies and
more. The largest state program in the U.S. is the California Clean Vehicle Rebate Project,
which offers new EV buyers $1,500-$2,500. In 2016 it put in place means-testing to stimulate
lower-income EV adoption. In addition, some funds generated by the low carbon fuel standard
(LCFS) are redirected to California electric utilities to subsidize EVs.
    From the standpoint of economic efficiency, subsidies address two potential sources of mar-


                                                19
      ket failure, stock-based externalities arising from network effects or spillovers and (potentially)
      the present discount value of usage externalities if buyers are not forward-looking with re-
      gards to future energy costs. Not withstanding concerns of economic efficiency, empirical re-
      search finds that subsidies can be effective at stimulating demand for alternative fuel vehicles.
      Gallagher and Muehlegger (2011) show that demand for hybrid vehicles was dramatically in-
      creased by the presence of sales tax waivers. In low- and middle-income subpopulations, subsi-
      dies appear to be effective as well (Muehlegger and Rapson (2018)). These results are consistent
      with estimates of the EV demand elasticity, which in all studies (to our knowledge) exceed -1
      (Li et al. (2017), Li (2017) and Springel (2017)).
          The extent to which subsidies induce "additional" EV purchases is an important determi-
      nant of cost-effectiveness and welfare effects of a subsidy policy. In the case of most EV subsidy
      programs, both subsidy-induced EVs and those that would have been purchased irrespective
      of the presence of a subsidy are subsidy-eligible. There is no foolproof way to target subsidies
      only towards buyers for whom the subsidy is the determining factor in a purchase decision.
      Due to this information asymmetry, the cost per additional (subsidy-induced) vehicle depends
      on the size of the market that would have been realized in a subsidy-free world, which is un-
      observable. The demand elasticity summarizes much of what is needed to predict what would
      have happened in this alternate, subsidy-free world. On one hand, a high demand elasticity
      will induce more EV purchases for a given amount of subsidy, thereby implying a higher de-
      gree of additionality than if demand were less elastic. On the other hand, as the proportion
      of subsidy-induced vehicles grows, the implication is that in a subsidy-free world the size of
      the EV market would have been that much smaller. To the extent subsidies are larger than the
      socially-optimal value, an expansion of subsidy-induced demand reduces welfare.
          To demonstrate these points, we consider the implied proportion of EVs sold under the
      existing federal and California subsidy regimes that is additional.24 Table 1 present these esti-
      mates. In Panel A we report the implied fraction of battery electric vehicles (BEVs) that were
      "additional" under different assumptions about the demand elasticity. Consistent with intu-
      ition, more elastic demand corresponds to a higher fraction of the market that is subsidy in-
      duced. An elasticity of -1.5 implies that the vast majority of BEVs would have been purchased
      even had the subsidies not been present. This is particularly true for Teslas. At the higher end
      of the elasticity range, -3.5, it still appears that most Teslas were likely not subsidy-induced
      purchases; but 64-77 percent of non-Teslas were. The other side of this coin is the implied sub-
      sidy per induced BEV, which decreases as demand becomes more elastic (moving left to right
      in the table). If most BEVs would have been purchased irrespective of subsidies, the implied
      subsidy cost per subsidy-induced purchase must be large. If 80 percent of Teslas in California
      would have been purchased without subsidies (and assuming 100 percent subsidy uptake),
      then the average subsidy expense per subsidy-induced Tesla would be over $50,000. Even at
      higher elasticities, the effective cost per subsidy-induced BEV substantially exceeds the face
      value of the subsidy itself.
          Setting aside efficiency considerations, many policymakers and industry enthusiasts are
      interested in how to achieve various EV adoption goals (e.g. 1.5 million EVs on the road in
  24 The main elements of this calculation are data on actual EV purchase prices, California and federal EV subsidy

amounts (which we assume to be $2,500 and $7,500 for California and federal subsidies, respectively), and data on the
number of EV sales. We perform the calculations separately for Teslas to acknowledge the fact that Teslas are much
more expensive than the vast majority of other EVs sold during the period of our data (before the end of 2018).


                                                         20
    California by 2025). Archsmith et al. (2021) estimates the relative importance of up-front pur-
    chase prices versus non-monetary EV attributes, such as battery range, the availability of EV
    pickup trucks, and charging station density. They concludes that EV market share in 2035 will
    be determined more by non-monetary factors than by subsidies. In their analysis, the first $500
    billion in cumulative nationwide EV subsidies is associated a 7-10 percent increase in EV mar-
    ket share in 2035, an effect that diminishes as subsidies increase. For those aspiring to achieve
    upwards of 50 percent EV market share by that time, subsidies may help but will likely play a
    secondary role to more intrinsic determinants of demand.


    4.2    Policies Affecting Intensity of Use
    As of this writing, there is an active debate about how much EVs are driven. Electric vehicle
    miles traveled (eVMT) is a measure of the utility that drivers of EVs receive and speaks directly
    to the potential environment benefits provided by EVs. The absence of direct measurement and
    data collection leaves researchers and policy-makers only with indirect approaches to estimate
    eVMT. Survey responses are inconclusive. Responses from the 2017 National Household Travel
    Survey indicate that EVs are driven just over half as many miles per year as gasoline cars
    (Davis (2019)). Surveys from California produce an estimate of eVMT that is more-or-less the
    same as gasoline cars (Hardman et al. (2018)). The current alternative to surveys combines
    household-level electricity billing data with address-level vehicle registration data to estimate
    household charging load. Using that approach, and adjusting for fuel economy and away-
    from-home charging, Burlig et al. (2021) estimate that eVMT in Northern California from 2014-
    2017 is roughly 6,700 miles per year. That result aligns closely with Davis (2019), but there is
    more to learn. Factors such as selection into EV ownership, improvements in battery range,
    geographic variation, and the degree to which EVs are substitutes (versus complements) to
    gasoline cars are poorly understood and may all affect the intensity of use of EVs.
        Relative to the popularity of up-front purchase incentives, fewer policies directly target the
    operational costs of driving an EV. Rather, the operational cost savings of driving an electric ve-
    hicle are strongly influenced by regulated electricity prices and gasoline taxes (and, of course,
    the underlying demand for transportation). The former are set with many objectives in mind,
    including cost recovery, encouraging residential solar PV adoption, and achieving redistribu-
    tional objectives. Gasoline prices, to the extent they are influenced by the government, are set
    primarily with an eye towards funding transportation infrastructure. Anticipated fiscal short-
    falls, due to declining gasoline consumption, have led a number of states to levy registration
    charges on electric vehicles and for state governments to form committees to consider mileage
    fees. Legislation on mileage tax pilot program has been enacted in California, Indiana and
    Oregon and is currently pending in Hawaii, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and New York.25
    Beginning in 2020, Electric vehicle drivers in Utah will elect to pay either an annual registration
    fee or an mileage-based road charge.26
        Setting socially-optimal incentives on the intensive margin requires setting Pigouvian taxes
    equal to the marginal external costs of gasoline and electricity. This would imply that the pri-
    vate savings from electric vehicle operation would equal the marginal external benefits per
    mile of an electric vehicle relative to a conventional vehicle. Figure 4 plots state-level per-mile
25 http://www.ncsl.org/research/transportation/ncsl-transportation-funding-finance-legis-database.aspx
26 https://www.udot.utah.gov/main/f?p=100:pg:0:::1:T,V:5090



                                                     21
fuel cost savings against the environmental benefits or costs calculated from Holland et al.
(2016) for two comparison pairs. Panel A compares the Ford Focus Electric with Ford Focus
ICE and Panel B compares the Nissan Leaf with the Toyota Prius. Perfect alignment of pol-
icy with Pigouvian taxes would imply equality between the private savings and the relative
environmental benefits. Although there is a positive correlation between the private savings
and environmental benefits, the private savings depart substantially from those that would
induce efficient usage. As an example, the private savings for electric vehicle drivers in Cali-
fornia are lower than the privates savings for EV drivers in North Dakota, despite the fact that
using an electric vehicle rather than a conventional vehicle generates environmental benefits
in the former and environmental costs in the latter. More generally, Holland et al. (2016) note
that in most parts of the country, electric vehicles impose environmental costs relative to con-
ventional vehicles. Yet, with the exception of a handful of Northeastern states, electric vehicle
drivers enjoy savings relatively to drivers of conventional vehicles (when the Prius is used as
a comparison vehicle).


4.2.1   Electricity Prices
Electricity is the "fuel" of EVs, and so the cost of traveling a mile in an EV is directly linked
to the price paid for electricity. A vast literature exists already describing efficient electricity
pricing, and we will not revisit it all here. However, some aspects that discussion are relevant
to understanding why the cost of operating EVs is so dramatically different in some places
than in others.
    Recall from Figures 2 and 3 that electricity prices exhibit substantial variation from location
to location. Even within a single state, California, households living just a mile apart may pay
electricity prices that differ by as much as 400 percent. These differences exist because electric-
ity prices are set through a regulated rate-setting process that accommodates many different
ways of recovering costs. The rate-setting process is guided by several objectives. The costs
of building and maintaining the electric grid must be covered, and these fixed costs comprise
a large fraction of the total costs of an electric utility. (Indeed, the magnitude of fixed costs
relative to variable costs is the reason why electric utilities are a natural monopoly and subject
to regulation in the first place.) Regulators typically also seek to protect consumers. To some,
this may mean minimizing the average price per kilowatt-hour consumed; to others, it may
mean providing electricity from the cleanest possible sources; and to others still, there may be
a distributional motivation, such as to keep prices low for low-income consumers.
    These oft-competing priorities have different implications for retail electric prices. Where
(variable) retail prices are high, it is typically because fixed costs are being recovered via volu-
metric charges. Some utilities charge a fixed monthly fee that must be paid irrespective of how
much electricity is consumed. The price per kilowatt-hour in those districts is typically lower
since it comes closer to reflecting the wholesale costs of generating and delivering electricity.
Many utilities, for example investor-owned utilities in California, recover fixed costs through
volumetric charges and also have increasing block rates such that high users pay higher prices
on the margin. These differences lead to dramatic variation in how much it costs to charge an
EV battery.
    Many of the efficiency considerations relating to electricity pricing are explored in detail in
Borenstein and Bushnell (2018). We will not revisit them in depth here except to restate the


                                                22
main observation: efficient electricity pricing is achieved when the price of electricity is equal
to its social marginal cost. That is, the price must equal the cost of generating electricity plus
(or minus) the societal costs associated with things like pollution damages (or benefits). Notice
that this efficiency rule does not depend on how the energy is ultimately used. The efficient
price reflects all of the upstream economic considerations and any downstream externalities.
    It follows that charging different prices for different end-uses of electricity is inefficient.
This observation is at odds with the apparent preference that regulators exhibit for charging
different electricity prices depending on the end-use. Electricity customers with solar PV on
their rooftops face a different electricity rate structure than their no-solar neighbors. Owners
of EVs in many jurisdictions have access to electricity rates that are only available to customers
who own EVs. This is inefficient. If EV owners are allowed to consume cheaper electricity
than other consumers, there will either be over-consumption of EV miles-traveled or under-
consumption of other electricity powered goods. The aspiration should be electricity that is
priced to reflect its social marginal cost for all of its potential end uses.


4.3   Supply-Side Incentives
The federal and state governments also use a suite of policies to encourage automakers to of-
fer electric vehicles. The Zero Emission Vehicle (ZEV) mandate was adopted in 1990 by the
California Air Resources Board as part of a suite of policies intended to reduce transporta-
tion sector emissions. The ZEV Mandate sets a manufacturer-level target for percent of sales
required to be ZEV. Over time, the mandate was adjusted to accommodate cost realities and
technical challenges, reflecting an intention to help to stimulate commercialization on the mar-
gin. While the overarching goal appears to be environmental, the intermediate goals allude to
potential market failures on the supply side.
    Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards require that car manufacturers meet a weighted
average level of fuel economy. CAFE was first enacted in the U.S. in 1975, shortly after the
OPEC oil embargo. Initially, CAFE standards sought to reduce dependence on foreign oil,
reflecting aspirations to improve energy security. In recent years the stated rationale has ex-
panded to include environmental and paternalistic objectives. The vast majority of the cost-
benefit justification of recent CAFE rules relies on an assertion that consumers are myopic and
therefore make privately sub-optimal car purchase decisions. Most of the remaining stated
benefits come from environmental improvements, and one might reasonably assume that the
apparent desire to correct for behavioral anomalies in this context is as much motivated by
an intention to improve environmental outcomes as it is to improve private outcomes. In the
2012 CAFE rules, EVs are assigned credits according to their MPG-equivalent rating, allowing
electric fuel economy to be compared to that of ICEs. In the 2016 rules, EVs began to earn
multipliers in the CAFE formula.
    Both of these supply-side incentives act to reduce the cost of EVs and increase the cost
of ICEs. In many ways, supply-side policies might create similar incentives on the extensive
margin to up-front EV subsidies, by lowering the effective price of EVs relative to comparable
ICEs. Supply-side policies offer an advantage over up-front subsidies in that they are designed
to be self-funded and, therefore, not require government fiscal support. However, the incen-
tives they create do not mimic those of an optimal Pigouvian tax on energy. The optimal tax
would reduce miles travelled as well as the number of cars on the road, and give automakers


                                                23
      the proper incentive to invest in vehicle efficiency. Supply-side incentives do nothing to align
      private and social costs on the intensive margin nor do they yield the optimal number of cars
      on the extensive margin. However, by shifting automakers to supply EVs, they may stimulate
      innovation as well.


      4.4    Charging Infrastructure Incentives
      The vision to extend EV ownership to all confronts the obstacle of access to EV charging for
      people without driveways and garages, and for drivers needing to take trips whose distance
      exceeds the battery range. Significant resources are being deployed to stimulate construction
      of EV charging infrastructure. As of mid-2018, 17 states provided subsidies to reduce the cost
      of chargers for installers. These incentives again range from tax exemptions to subsidies. Volk-
      swagen is directly and indirectly (via the diesel scandal settlement) funding significant invest-
      ments in charging infrastructure. The largest portion of these are being allocated to California,
      where settlement funds from NRG are also being used.27 The California Public Utilities Com-
      mission (CPUC) is at present considering a variety of infrastructure buildout plans by investor-
      owned utilities and much of the $157 billion currently earmarked by the Biden administration
      for EVs will be directed towards charging infrastructure.
          From an efficiency perspective, as described above, much of the necessary investment in
      charging infrastructure is likely to happen through market forces. Yet, subsidies for charging
      infrastructure may still play a role if they are more cost-effective at stimulating EV adoption
      than direct purchase subsidies. Several economics papers have attempted to empirically quan-
      tify the effect of charging infrastructure on EV demand (see e.g., Li (2017), Springel (2017),
      and Li et al. (2017)). This is a particularly challenging empirical problem as there are two
      possible directions of causality: dense charging infrastructure may stimulate EV adoption,
      but a high market share (or anticipated market share) of EVs might induce higher invest-
      ment in charging infrastructure. The best evidence to date (Li et al. (2017), Springel (2017),
      and Li (2017)) attempts to disentangle these effects using grocery stores, EV subsidies and
      government-sponsored infrastructure subsidies as instruments, respectively. These papers
      have been highly influential in guiding EV policy, as they find large impacts of charging station
      density on adoption, and stimulating adoption tends to be a primary objective of policymakers
      at present. That said, the exclusion assumption in these papers is that these instruments are
      uncorrelated with unobservable determinants of EV demand. Moreover, these papers analyze
      the EV industry during its earliest stages. If the network effects from each new charging station
      diminish as density increases, incentives are most valuable at the early stages of market devel-
      opment. Li (2017) offers empirical evidence of diminishing marginal benefits - a 10 percent
      increase in level 2 charging stations is associated with a 0.8 to 1.2 percent increase in the likeli-
      hood of adoption. Finally, there is growing evidence that the majority of day-to-day charging
      occurs at home, rather than at public charging stations.28 While this doesn't necessarily speak
      to the utility of expanding the fast-charging network, it calls into question the public benefit
      of deploying government resources towards more public level 2 charging stations. Our view
   27 https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/General.aspx?id=5936

https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/vw_info/vsi/vw-zevinvest/vw-zevinvest.htm
   28 Survey evidence in Dunckley and Tal (2016) documents that the vast majority of EV owners in California charge

either entirely at home (50 percent) or at home and work (20 percent).



                                                        24
is that there remains a high marginal benefit of designing future charging station rollouts in
a way that facilitates ex-post program evaluation. This will help to provide random or quasi-
random variation with which to identify the causal effect of charging stations on EV adoption
in the current environment. Ideally, it would help to quantify the costs and benefits of different
types of charging infrastructure (e.g., level 2 vs. fast-charging) as well as the costs and bene-
fits of different location choices (e.g., public urban, public interstate, and charging stations at
multi-unit dwellings).


5    Conclusion
The multi-faceted EV policy landscape reflects the complexity of the transportation and energy
sectors in the economy. EV policies are often crafted to pursue a wide array of social and en-
vironmental objectives. In this paper we review the economic intuition behind various market
failures and policy objectives, and explore how these align with the articulated goals of existing
policies. What we find is a mixed bag. Many market failures are location- and time-specific,
and addressing them with a one-size-fits-all policy (such as the federal EV subsidy) is unlikely
to create efficient incentives for EV adoption, use, or environmental benefits.
    Benefits from EV-induced pollution reductions exhibit substantial spatial heterogeneity based
on regional differences in electricity grid composition. These benefits are thus likely to increase
over time, in step with grid decarbonization. A clear implication is that EV subsidies cannot be
justified based on environmental benefits in regions where coal electricity generation persists.
Over time, as electricity is decarbonized, the net benefits of EVs will change, and a sensible
time-profile would reflect these realities.
    Extensive margin externalities also vary over time and space. Non-internalized learning-
by-doing in production or (non-internalized) network effects relating to charging infrastructure
may justify policy intervention in the early stages of EV market development; but intervention
based on these market failures will optimally diminish over time. On the margin, this would
imply near-term subsidies where current network externalities might be significant. However,
at the time of this writing, the level of apparent conviction about the need to subsidize charging
infrastructure seems out of step with theory and evidence. While network effects undoubtedly
exist in the realm of charging infrastructure, it is far less clear that these effects are external. It is
likely that a well-capitalized firm would internalize network effects in charging infrastructure,
as demonstrated by Tesla's supercharger network. This observation offers a note of caution for
policymakers considering the promotion of investments in irreversible infrastructure.
    Finally, the growing prominence of social and environmental justice goals in environmental
policy is noteworthy. While these authors admit a preference for more equitable outcomes in
the economy, cost-efficacy is also an important consideration. Artificially stimulating demand
for EVs in an area where the private benefits are low creates a distortion that is disproportion-
ately large relative to alternatives. Those EV owners would be better off if they were to receive
the cash equivalent of the EV subsidy, rather than the subsidy itself. In an economy with scarce
resources and a vast array of policy objectives, policy-makers should seek to identify ways to
deploy public resources that maximize net benefits, which requires avoiding the creation of
conflicting incentives.




                                                  25
References


Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny, "Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, December 2014, 96 (5), 779­795.

  , Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky, "Energy policy with externalities and in-
  ternalities," Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 112, 72­88.

Anderson, Michael L and Maximilian Auffhammer, "Pounds that kill: The external costs of
  vehicle weight," Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 81 (2), 535­571.

Archsmith, James, Alissa Kendall, and David S Rapson, "From Cradle to Junkyard: Assess-
  ing the Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Benefits of Eletric Vehicles," Research in Transportation
  Economics, 2015, 63 (3), 397­421.

  , Anthony Heyes, and Soodeh Saberian, "Air Quality and Error Quantity: Pollution and
  Performance in a High-Skilled, Quality-Focused Occupation," Journal of the Association of
  Environmental and Resource Economists, 2018, 5 (4), 827­863.

Archsmith, James E, Erich Muehlegger, and David S Rapson, "Future paths of electric vehi-
  cle adoption in the United States: Predictable determinants, obstacles and opportunities,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2021.

Archsmith, James, Kenneth Gillingham, Christopher R Knittel, and David S Rapson, "At-
  tribute substitution in household vehicle portfolios," Technical Report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research 2017.

Bartelme, Dominick, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare,
  "Economies of Scale and Industrial Policy: A View from Trade," Technical Report 2018.

Benkard, C Lanier, "Learning and forgetting: The dynamics of aircraft production," American
  Economic Review, 2000, 90 (4), 1034­1054.

Bento, Antonio, Kenneth Gillingham, and Kevin Roth, "The effect of fuel economy standards
  on vehicle weight dispersion and accident fatalities," Technical Report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research 2017.

Borenstein, Severin, "The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity Generation,"
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 67­92.

  and James B Bushnell, "Do Two Electricity Pricing Wrongs Make a Right? Cost Recovery,
  Externalities, and Efficiency," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Burlig, Fiona, James Bushnell, David Rapson, and Catherine Wolfram, "Low energy: Esti-
  mating electric vehicle electricity use," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2021, 111, 430­35.

Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer, "Are Consumers My-
  opic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases," American Economic Review, 2013, 103
  (1), 220­256.

Chang, Tom, Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, and Matthew Neidell, "Particulate Pollution and
  the Productivity of Pear Packers," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2016, 8 (3),
  141­169.

Davis, Lucas, "How Much Are Electric Vehicles Driven?," Applied Economics Letters, 2019, 6 (1),
  1­6.


                                              26
Dunckley, J and G Tal, "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Multi-State Market and Charging Survey,"
 EVS29, 2016, pp. 1­12.

Gallagher, Kelly Sims and Erich Muehlegger, "Giving green to get green? Incentives and
  consumer adoption of hybrid vehicle technology," Journal of Environmental Economics and
  management, 2011, 61 (1), 1­15.

Gillingham, Kenneth, David S Rapson, and Gernot Wagner, "The Rebound Effect and Energy
  Efficiency Policy," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2016, 10 (1), 68­88.

Hardman, Scott, Alan Jenn, Gil Tal, Jonn Axsen, George Beard, Nicolo Daina, Erik Figen-
  baum, Niklas Jakobsson, Patrick Jochem, Neale Kinnear et al., "A review of consumer
  preferences of and interactions with electric vehicle charging infrastructure," Transportation
  Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 2018, 62, 508­523.

Holland, Stephen, Erin Mansur, Nicholas Muller, and Andrew Yates, "Are There Environ-
 mental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance of Local Factors," American
 Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3700­3729.

Holland, Stephen P, Erin T Mansur, Nicholas Z Muller, and Andrew J Yates, "Decomposi-
 tions and policy consequences of an extraordinary decline in air pollution from electricity
 generation," Technical Report 4 2020.

Ito, Koichiro, "Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
   electricity pricing," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 537­63.

Jacobsen, Mark R, "Fuel economy and safety: The influences of vehicle class and driver be-
  havior," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (3), 1­26.

Li, Jing, "Compatibility and Investment in the U.S. Electric Vehicle Market," Working Paper
   2017.

Li, Shanjun, Lang Tong, Jianwei Xing, and Yiyi Zhou, "The market for electric vehicles: indi-
   rect network effects and policy design," Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
   Economists, 2017, 4 (1), 89­133.

Metcalf, Gilbert E., "The Economics of Energy Security," Annual Review of Resource Economics,
 2014, pp. 155­174.

Muehlegger, Erich and David S Rapson, "Subsidizing Mass Adoption of Electric Vehicles:
 Quasi-Experimental Evidence from California," Technical Report, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research 2018.

Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan, "Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel
  Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations," Journal of Public
  Economics, 2016, 135, 61­73.

Springel, Katalin, "Network Externality and Subsidy Structure in Two-Sided Markets: Evi-
  dence from Electric Vehicle Incentives," Working Paper 2017.

Tamayao, Mili-Ann, Jeremy Michalek, Chris Hendrickson, and Ines Azevedo, "Regional
  Variability and Uncertainty of Electric Vehicle Life Cycle CO2 Emissions Across the United
  States," Environmental Science & Technology, 2015, 49, 8844­8855.

Thornton, Rebecca Achee and Peter Thompson, "Learning from experience and learning from
  others: An exploration of learning and spillovers in wartime shipbuilding," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2001, 91 (5), 1350­1368.



                                                27
Tsiropoulos, I, D Tarvydas, and N Lebedeva, "Li-ion batteries for mobility and stationary
  storage applications," Joint Research Center Science for Policy Report, 2018.

Zivin, Joshua Graff and Matthew Neidell, "The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity,"
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3652­3673.

  , Matthew Kotchen, and Erin Mansur, "Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of Marginal
  Emissions: Implications for Electric Cars and Other Electricity-Shifting Policies," Journal of
  Economic Behavior & Organization, 2014, 107, 248­268.




                                              28
Figure 1: Implicit variable cost savings per mile for EV relative to ICE




 The graph compares the per mile variable fuel cost of the 2019 Nissan Versa (ICE) to
 that of contemporary Nissan Leaf (62 kWh battery). The Nissan Leaf runs 100 miles
 on 31kWh and the selected Nissan Versa earns 34 MPG according to the official esti-
 mates by the US Department of Energy. State-level marginal electricity prices were
 calculated using the estimates from Borenstein and Bushnell (2018) using total sales
 at the ZIP code level as weights. Retail gasoline prices (Regular) were calculated
 from monthly averages posted by AAA.




                                         29
              Figure 2: Annual Fuel Saving by Nissan Leaf




The graph compares the annual fuel cost difference of a 2019 Nissan Leaf to various
popular ICEs. The Nissan Leaf (62kWh battery pack) runs 100 miles on 31kWh, as
compared to the fuel economy of the selected 2019 Toyota Prius (52 MPG), Toyota
Camry (32 MPG), Mercedes E-Class (23 MPG) and Ford F150 (21 MPG) according
to the official estimates by the US Department of Energy. The retail gasoline price is
assumed to be $3.00 per gallon.




                                         30
 Figure 3: Annual Fuel Saving by Nissan Leaf: California Utilities




The graph compares the annual fuel cost of the 2019 Nissan Versa (ICE) to that
of contemporary Nissan Leaf (62 kWh battery). The Nissan Leaf runs 100 miles
on 31kWh, and the selected Nissan Versa earns 34 MPG, according to the official
estimates by the US Department of Energy. Dots represent savings by year for a
driver living in LA, buying electricity from Southern California Edison and gasoline
from LA-Long Beach.




                                        31
   Figure 4: Private Fuel Cost Savings vs Environmental Benefits




               Panel (a): Ford Focus Electric vs Ford Focus ICE




                    Panel (b): Nissan Leaf vs Toyota Prius
The scatter plots compare the per-mile fuel cost savings and per-mile pollution ben-
efits or damages for a Ford Focus Electric and Ford Focus ICE (Panel A) and a Nis-
san Leaf and Toyota Prius (Panel B). Per-mile fuel cost savings calculated by authors
based on state-level marginal electricity prices from Borenstein and Bushnell (2018)
weighted by total sales at the ZIP code level, and retail regular-grade tax-inclusive
gasoline prices posted by AAA. Pollution damages are calculated based on esti-
mates from Holland et al. (2016).




                                         32
Table 1: Subsidy Additionality




              33
