                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INTANGIBLES, MARKUPS, AND THE MEASUREMENT OF PRODUCTIVITY
                               GROWTH

                                         Nicolas Crouzet
                                         Janice C. Eberly

                                       Working Paper 29109
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29109


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




This paper was prepared for the 2020 JME-SNB-SCG conference, held on October 15, 2020. We thank
Susanto Basu, Antonio Ciccone and John Fernald, our formal discussants, Ricardo Reis, our editor,
seminar participants at the 2021 SI Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, and an anonymous
referee for comments that greatly helped improve the paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicolas Crouzet and Janice C. Eberly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Intangibles, Markups, and the Measurement of Productivity Growth
Nicolas Crouzet and Janice C. Eberly
NBER Working Paper No. 29109
July 2021
JEL No. D24,D4,E01,E22,G31

                                            ABSTRACT

In recent years, measured TFP growth in the US has declined. We argue that two forces contributed
to this decline: the mismeasurement of intangible capital, and rising markups. Markups affect input
shares, while intangibles omitted from measures of investment affect measured capital growth, each
potentially generating downward bias in measured TFP growth. Most importantly, when both forces
are simultaneously present, their effects reinforce each other and amplify the downward bias in measured
TFP growth. Using input-output data, we estimate that this mechanism could account for one-third
to two-thirds of the decline in measured TFP growth.


Nicolas Crouzet
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
n-crouzet@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Janice C. Eberly
Department of Finance
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eberly@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1     Introduction

Productivity is an enduring challenge in the U.S. economy and its measurement. Post-
financial crisis, slow growth was initially put down to scarring or the aftermath of the crisis
itself. But later work traces the explanation to weak productivity (Fernald et al., 2017).
Moreover, they and others date weak productivity earlier than the financial crisis. That is,
the weak growth in the U.S. economy following the financial crisis has its roots in a much
earlier productivity slowdown. In this paper, we show how the presence of intangible capital
and market power, which have also grown over this time period, leads to underestimates
of productivity growth. The eect of either alone is relatively small, but together -- as in
Crouzet and Eberly (2020) -- their eect is magnified. Empirically reasonable values of
markups and unmeasured capital can account for about half of the measured productivity
slowdown in the 2000s.
    The US productivity slowdown has been extensively debated and researched, focusing on
whether it is a measurement problem or a real phenomenon, and if it is real, what has caused
productivity to decline -- especially when innovation seems so prevalent. While there are
many reasons for productivity to be mismeasured, especially given the methodological and
data challenges, most candidate explanations cannot generate the sustained magnitudes seen
in the data. For example, Byrne et al. (2016) take into account mismeasured IT capital and
nonmarket consumption (among other factors). These factors have an eect on measured
productivity by changing the level of output, but they cannot account for more than a tiny
fraction of the magnitude of slowing productivity growth over time.
    Research has instead focused on how productivity growth can be so low in the face of
apparently enormous innovation in digital technologies and the internet. Prominent among
this work is Robert Gordon's research and book (Gordon, 2017) on "The Rise and Fall of
American Growth," arguing that recent innovation has not had the productivity enhancing
impact of historical breakthroughs. Impact on the scale of penicillin, he argues, for example,
has not occurred in the era of digital innovation.
                                              1
   Concurrent with this work on low productivity, research has expanded into explaining
related aspects of the puzzle, such as the low level of investment in the US economy. Low
capital investment is consistent with low productivity, but not consistent with observed high
firm valuations and profitability, which would instead suggest that the returns to capital
investment are high. A growing literature on the growth of market power in the U.S. economy
(De Loecker et al., 2020) oers one explanation, since firms have less incentive to expand
capacity when they have market power (Guti´
                                          errez and Philippon, 2017).
   At the same time that productivity has fallen and market power appears to have risen,
intangible capital has also become a larger share of firms' capital stocks while physical
capital investment has declined (Alexander and Eberly, 2018). Crouzet and Eberly (2019)
show that intangibles can explain 30 to 60 percent of the decline, when looking at firm-
level and industry-level data, respectively. These explanations are not mutually exclusive
and actually reinforce each other, as in Crouzet and Eberly (2020), and the interaction of
intangible capital with markups from market power can explain much the decline in observed
investment in the U.S.
   This paper brings market power and intangible capital together to examine the puzzle
of low US productivity. Both phenomena violate the standard assumptions of productivity
measurement.
   We first show, in Section 2, how market power and omitted intangible capital would
appear in an extension of a standard and general productivity measurement framework. We
allow for purchases of some capital goods to be incorrectly classified as intermediates in the
national accounts, instead of being treated as final spending and accordingly capitalized.
Omitted intangible investment is one example, but our treatment is more general.
   In this framework, markups alone generate a downward bias in TFP growth. They imply
that the measured labor share is an overestimate of the true elasticity of output with respect
to labor. When capital is growing faster than labor, this biases downward measures of TFP
growth. However, this bias is not quantitatively large, even in extreme cases.

                                              2
   Omitted intangibles alone could also bias measured TFP growth: if the true stock of
unmeasured capital is growing more slowly than the measured stock, measured TFP growth
will be biased downward. In addition, omitting intangible investment makes the level of
GDP too low, relative to true GDP; therefore, the measured labor share is higher than the
elasticity of output to labor. This upward bias in the measured labor share can be large
and increases with the amount of intangible investment omitted from GDP calculations.
However, an upward bias in the labor share seems surprising empirically, since the measured
labor share has been declining since at least the late 1990s.
   Combining markups with omitted intangibles osets this labor share eect, while preserv-
ing the potential for a negative bias in productivity growth. As discussed above, markups
tend to make the measured labor share lower. Su ciently high markups can then allow the
framework to be consistent with both a large and growing amount of omitted intangible
investment and a low measured labor share -- potentially lower than the true elasticity of
output to labor, thus adding to the overall TFP bias.
   Aside from these two sources of measurement bias -- the capital growth bias, and the
labor share bias --, a third source of bias is that GDP growth itself might be mismeasured.
This is the bias emphasized by many previous studies. To the extent that omitted intangible
investment is growing faster than measured GDP, the true growth rate of GDP might be
higher than its measured counterpart, leading to underestimates of true TFP growth.
   In Section 2, we therefore develop further results using the balanced-growth version of a
model to quantify the eects of the two main mechanisms that we are interested in: markups
and omitted intangible capital.
   This specialized framework has two key insights. First, while in the model, the level of
output is mismeasured -- it is too low --, its growth rate is correctly measured, because
omitted and measured investment, in nominal terms, grow at the same rate on the balanced
growth path. Thus, in our framework, mismeasurement of GDP growth is not a source of
bias in productivity growth by construction, whereas it is the focus of much previous work.

                                              3
   Second, and most important, the model helps clarify under what conditions mismeasure-
ment in the growth rate of capital may lead to underestimating TFP growth. Specifically,
we show that this will occur when the price of unmeasured investment grows su ciently
quickly relative to the price of measured capital. This mechanism, on its own, can lead to a
substantial downward bias in measured TFP growth, which we characterize analytically.
   In Section 3, we then use data on omitted intangibles, in the balanced growth framework,
to quantify the size of the combined biases in measured TFP growth. We use the annual
Input-Output tables for the 1997-2018 period to measure annual expenditures on 61 com-
modities or services that are treated as intermediate purchases in national accounting. We
then examine those for which reclassifying intermediate purchases as final expenditure on
capital goods would have the largest impact on GDP.
   Several service groups stand out. Professional, Scientific and Technical services, Admin-
istrative and Support services, and Management services, lead to large upward adjustments
in measured GDP. We argue that purchases of these services could plausibly represent in-
vestment in what the literature has called organization capital (Atkeson and Kehoe, 2005;
Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou, 2013): expenditures on workforce human capital, distribution
systems and logistics, product design, and customer and brand capital. Importantly, since
1997, the price of these services rose faster than the deflator for personal consumption ex-
penditures, consistent with the necessary condition, implied by the model, under which
unmeasured capital would lead to a downward bias in TFP growth.
   Using these data and our balanced growth model, we then estimate that the combination
of markups and omitted intangibles can explain between one-third and two-thirds of the
decline in U.S. productivity from the pre-1997 to the post-1997 period. Table 1 shows that
productivity growth measured using the standard Solow residual, declined by 49bps, from
1.11% to 0.62% per year.1 Our corrected measure of TFP growth, which adjusts for both
intangibles and markups, instead declines from 1.11% to 0.95%, or only about one-third as

   1
       Appendix A.2.1 provides more details on the construction of these figures.
                                                      4
much. Importantly, we also show that measurement bias was likely much smaller in the
1947-1996 period, a period which pre-dates the rise in both intangibles and in markups.2
    Our results thus suggest that the decline in TFP growth was, at least in part, the reflection
of growing mismeasurement driven by structural changes in the economy -- the rise in
markups, and the increasing importance of intangibles. Because total GDP growth, in our
framework, is not mismeasured, this result has implications for understanding sources of
GDP growth. For example, since our adjusted measures suggest that more of total GDP
growth since the 2000s was driven by TFP growth, investment-specific technical change
might have contributed less to GDP growth than previously thought.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 analyzes theoretically the biases
that omitted intangibles and markups case generate in the measurement of GDP growth,
starting with a general growth accounting framework, and then specializing the analysis to
a balanced growth model. Section 3 applies this framework to the data, using measures of
intermediate expenditures that should potentially be reclassified as intangible investment.
Section 4 concludes.


Related research and contribution Our work first relates to the literature on the mea-
surement of productivity growth (Solow, 1957; Jorgenson and Griliches, 1967; Hall, 1968;
Basu and Fernald, 2001). The closest papers in this literature study the rise in intangible
capital. In particular, Corrado et al. (2009) also study how including omitted intangibles
aects measures of GDP growth, labor productivity, and TFP growth. Our work comple-
ments theirs by first providing a general framework for describing biases in measured TFP
growth, allowing in particular for markups; and, empirically, we focus on organization cap-

   2
     Because our goal is to study the impact of misclassification of intangibles on TFP growth, we use a
sample split coinciding with a breakpoint for the trend in misclassified intangible investment relative to
GDP. We use the year 1997 because the ratio of unadjusted GDP to GDP adjusted for omitted intangibles
stabilized around that year, after a long period of decline, as highlighted in the top panel of Figure 3. In
Section 3.4 and Appendix A.2.4, we discuss how our results change if we use dierent breakpoints. We
generally find positive but smaller eects for later breakpoints; for instance, with a breakpoint in 2000,
markups and intangibles explain one-half of the observed decline in TFP growth, instead of two-thirds with
the 1997 breakpoint.
                                                     5
ital (Atkeson and Kehoe, 2005; Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou, 2013), whereas Corrado et al.
(2009) primarily focus on R&D capital. Heterogeneous price trends between these two types
of intangible capital largely explain why we reach dierent conclusions on the sign of the
bias in measured TFP growth created by intangibles. Our paper also closely relates to Basu
et al. (2003), who study how unmeasured investments in capital that is complementary to
information technology (IT) capital could aect TFP growth. We discuss the dierences
with that paper in more detail in Section 2.2.2.
   As mentioned in the introduction, there is a recent literature focusing on the decline in
measured TFP growth (Cette et al., 2016; Fernald et al., 2017; Byrne et al., 2016). We
contribute to this literature by arguing that growing mismeasurement due to intangibles and
markups can explain a sizable fraction of this decline. In particular, Byrne et al. (2016) also
re-estimate productivity growth for the US after 2005 including mismeasured intangibles.
They find a relatively small eect. Our approaches dier in three main ways. First, they do
not allow for markups, whereas our analysis shows that including them substantially increases
the impact of mismeasured capital on TFP growth. Second, their measures of intangibles
are drawn from Corrado et al. (2016), who rely on data beyond the use tables (including
compensation of non-production workers) to estimate intangible investment. By contrast, we
focus on the use tables to measure intangible investment, but also leverage the corresponding
price indices for services and commodities. These price indices have been rising faster than
those of measured capital goods, which contributes to the downward bias in TFP growth.
Finally, their analysis is o the balanced growth path and allows for mismeasurement of GDP
growth, whereas we focus on a balanced growth path where output growth (in consumption
units) is correctly measured.
   As noted above, our work also relates to the literature on investment-specific technical
change, and in particular, to papers in this literature focusing on its impact on long-run
growth (Greenwood et al. 1997). As noted, our results indicate that omitting some intan-
gibles from measures of the capital stock can lead to overestimates of the contribution of

                                              6
investment-specific technical change to GDP growth -- and, as a result, to underestimates
of the contribution of TFP growth. Ongoing work by Gourio and Rognlie (2020) also argues
that existing measures may overstate the trend decline in the relative price of investment
goods, but they highlight issues of aggregation across existing measures of heterogeneous
capital goods, while we explore the possibility that investment in certain types of capital is
not well measured.
   Our results also connect with the recent literature on the implications of rising rents.
Consistent with our findings, this literature documents a significant rise in the pure profit
share and in markups, especially after 2000 (Barkai, 2020). We show that rising markups
also have quantitatively sizable implications for measuring of TFP growth.
   Finally, recent work has highlighted how, when intermediate input use is not symmetric
across industries or firms and firms have markups, aggregate TFP may also include terms
reflecting allocative (in)e ciencies. This is highlighted, in particular, by Basu and Fernald
(2001) and Baqaee and Farhi (2020). In our framework, aggregate TFP, absent markups
and absent the measurement issues we highlight, is equal to aggregate technology, so there
is no scope for allocative ine ciency. These asymmetries could augment our mechanism by
providing a separate way in which factor use may depress measured TFP. Relatedly, Bils et al.
(2020) study how mismeasurement in revenue and inputs can aect the allocative e ciency
component of TFP. Our analysis diers from theirs in several dimensions. First, their focus is
on the misallocation component of TFP, and how it compares across countries. In our paper,
we do not study the contribution of misallocation to aggregate TFP, in the sense that there
is no wedge between the marginal revenue product of inputs and their marginal cost. Second,
their focus is on dierences in the level of sectoral TFP; instead, our focus is on the growth
rate of aggregate TFP. Finally, while they consider mismeasurement that is random (and
similar to classical measurement error), in our paper, mismeasurement is due to investment
expenditures being misclassified as intermediate purchases. This is important because in our
case, mismeasurement can be addressed by reclassifying intermediate expenditures.

                                              7
2       Theory

This section studies conditions under which Solow residuals can be biased downward relative
to true TFP growth. We focus on markups, omitted intangibles, or the combination of the
two, as a source of such bias. Throughout the paper, we use a value added production
function. Appendix A.1.2 shows that our results on the value added Solow residuals hold in
a model where the underlying production function uses intermediate inputs.3


2.1     General results

We start by deriving results on measurement bias that rely on minimal assumptions.


2.1.1    The standard methodology

The Solow residual (Jorgenson and Griliches, 1967; Basu and Fernald, 2001) is defined as:

                                dZ^t   dY^t            dL^t                 dK^t
                                     =          s
                                                ^L,t          (1   s
                                                                   ^L,t )                                 (1)
                                 ^t
                                 Z     Y^t              ^t
                                                        L                    ^t
                                                                             K

       ^t /Y
where dY   ^t growth rate of real output, dL
                                           ^ t /L
                                                ^ t and dK
                                                         ^ t /K
                                                              ^ t are the growth rates of real
                                            ^ tL
                                            W  ^t                                           ^t = P
                                                                                                 ^t Y
                                                                                                    ^t
capital and labor inputs, and s
                              ^L,t =         N^t    is the labor share of value added, with N
denoting nominal value added.4 In words, measured TFP growth is the gap between the
growth rate of real output, and a weighted sum of the growth rates of capital and labor
inputs.5 The input weights are payments to each input relative to total value added, with the

    3
      The Appendix also explores the link between TFP growth and the gross output Solow residual.
    4
      Throughout the paper, we use the hat notation in reference to measured variables. This helps distinguish
them from their unbiased values, which we denote without the hat. Additionally, we use the notation dXt /Xt
for the continuous-time growth rate X   t /Xt = limdt!0 (1/dt)(Xt+dt Xt )/Xt . In discrete-time data, we
approximate it using the log-growth rates log(Xt+dt /Xt ).
    5
      Throughout, we express output in units of consumption, so that Pt represents the price of consumption
goods. We follow this convention in order to be consistent with the model we study later in this section.
Correspondingly, in all our empirical measures of Solow residuals, output is expressed in consumption units.
We provide details on measures of output growth in consumption units, and a comparison with chained GDP
growth, in Appendix A.2.1; the two measures imply similar declines in Solow residuals after 1997, as shown
in Appendix Table A2. Appendix A.1.1.3 discusses the biases which using chained GDP growth would add
to our basic exercise. See also Oulton (2007) for a discussion of chained GDP Solow residuals in models
where the price of investment relative to consumption goods is not 1.
                                                        8
labor share sL,t measured directly from payments to labor, and the capital share computed
as a residual. Such a measure produces an unbiased estimate of TFP growth under four
assumptions:

       A1 : Production follows Yt = Zt F (Kt , Lt ), where F is homogeneous of degree 1.

                                                     ~ t s.t. Zt F (Kt , L
       A2 : Labor input is given by: Lt = arg min Wt L                   ~ t)          Yt .
                                                       ~t
                                                       L


       A3 : The price of output is equal to its marginal cost: Pt = M Ct , where M Ct
                                                                           ~ t)
            is the Lagrange multiplier on the output constraint Zt F (Kt , L                  Yt .

       A4 : There is no measurement error in growth rates for inputs and output,
             ^ t /X
            dX    ^ t = dXt /Xt for X 2 {Y, K, L}, and there is no measurement error

            in levels for the labor income share: s
                                                  ^L,t = sL,t .

Under A1, growth in total factor productivity is given by:

                                dZt   dYt                     dKt         dLt
                                    =            (1   L,t )         L,t       ,                          (2)
                                Zt     Yt                     Kt          Lt

where L,t is the elasticity of output with respect to labor. Under A2, L,t is related to the
labor cost share by:
                                             FL (Kt , Lt )Lt   W t Lt
                                    L,t =                    =          .                                (3)
                                              F (Kt , Lt )     M C t Yt

Under A3, the labor cost share is equal to its income share:

                                             W t Lt     W t Lt
                                     L,t =            =        =s
                                                                ^L,t .                                   (4)
                                             M C t Yt   Pt Yt

Therefore, the elasticities in Equation (2) can be derived from the labor income share.6
Finally, under A4, all the variables involved in the right-hand side of Equation (2) are
correctly measured, so that the resulting TFP growth measure is unbiased.

   6
      An alternative approach is to directly measure cost shares, which are correct measures of output elas-
ticities even with markups, but this requires proxies for the (generally unobservable) user costs of capital.
                                                      9
2.1.2      Bias due to markups
                                             Pt
Assume that A3 is relaxed, and let: µt =         . We will consider the situation where the
                                            M Ct
price-cost markup is larger than 1, so there may be pure profits: µt 1.7 In this case, the
                                                                            ^L,t  µt s
measured labor share is an underestimate of the output elasticity of labor: s        ^L,t = L,t .
                                            1
Additionally, A1 implies that L,t  1; µt  s
                                          ^L,t . We then have the following result.

Result 1. When µt              1, the bias in measured TFP growth is given by:

                          ^t                                                        
                        dZ       dZt                                    dKt   dLt
                                            t   =    ^L,t (µt
                                                     s          1)                     .             (5)
                         ^t
                         Z       Zt                                     Kt    Lt

Moreover, when dKt /Kt > dLt /Lt , t  0, and the bias is bounded (in absolute value) by
                             
                     dKt dLt
| t |  (1 s  ^L,t )           , with the upper bound reached when L,t = 1, i.e. only labor
                     Kt  Lt
is used in production.

   With markups, the true elasticity of output to labor, L,t , is higher than the measured
labor income share s
                   ^L,t . As a result, the true elasticity of output to capital, 1         L,t , is lower
than 1      s
            ^L,t , the (residual) capital income share. When capital grows faster than labor (the
empirically relevant case, as indicated by Table 1), the latter eect dominates, and the Solow
residual is biased downward.
   Figure 1 reports time series for measured and adjusted TFP growth, and Appendix Table
A1 reports estimates of the size of this bias. First, we assume that the true elasticity of output
to labor is 1, so that the bias is at its upper bound. In this case, measured TFP growth is
approximately ¯ t = 0.80% lower than true TFP growth. However, this gap is roughly the
same in the pre- and post-1997 periods and cannot explain a substantial decline in estimated
                                                                           ¯
TFP growth. Using a more plausible Cobb-Douglas labor share, so when L,t = s
                                                                           ^L,t = 0.68,
the pre-1997 average of the labor income share, the bias is only ¯ t = 0.09% on average in
that case. Moreover, the increase in ¯ t from pre- to post-1997 is positive but small -- less
than 1/5th of the observed decline in measured TFP growth.
   7
       Note that µt a value-added markup, as M Ct is the marginal cost of value added.
                                                     10
2.1.3   Bias due to omitted intangibles

Assume now that A3 holds, but A4 is relaxed: there is measurement error in input and
output quantities because of omitted intangible capital. Let Bt denote nominal investment
expenditures contributing to the growth of the stock of unmeasured intangible capital. In
national accounts, these investment expenditures will be recorded, but treated as intermedi-
ate goods purchases, as opposed to purchases of final investment goods. Therefore, measured
       ^t and actual output Yt will be related through:
output Y


                                        ^t = Pt Y
                                        N       ^t = Pt Yt       Bt ,                           (6)


where recall that Pt is the price of consumption goods, and Yt is assumed to be expressed in
                                          ^t is measured total nominal output.
units of the consumption good, so that Pt Y
   The omission of intangibles, both as a stock and a flow, impacts measured TFP growth
in three ways. First, the growth rate of output might be mis-measured; namely:

                                                                              !
                           dY^t   dYt            1             dYt       ~t
                                                                        dB
                                =     +                 1                         ,             (7)
                            ^t
                            Y      Yt            bt             Yt      B~t


            Pt Y^t
where: bt           1 is the ratio of measured (or unadjusted) to actual (or adjusted) output,
            P t Yt
    ~t = Bt /Pt . Second, because the level of output is mismeasured, the labor share might
and B
be mismeasured. Specifically, the measured labor share of income is always an overestimate
                                                            W t Lt   W t Lt 1     L,t
of the elasticity of output with respect to labor: s^L,t =         =            =      > L,t .
                                                                ^
                                                            P t Yt    Pt Yt b t    bt
A3 holds, so the true labor income share Wt Lt /Pt Yt is equal to the elasticity of output to
labor. However, because of omitted intangible investment, which biases measured output
                                                     ^t ) is higher than the true labor income
downward, the measured labor income share Wt Lt /(Pt Y
share. Note that this is the opposite eect from markups. Third, the measured growth rate
                                   ^t
of capital might be incorrect:   dK
                                  ^t
                                  K
                                         ?   dKt
                                              Kt
                                                 .    The following result summarizes these dierent
sources of bias.

                                                       11
Result 2. When intangibles are omitted (bt < 1), the bias in measured TFP growth is:

                                    (1)          (2)       (3)
                   t    =           t     +      t     +   t


                                                                  !
                  (1)          1                 dYt       dB~t
                  t                   1                               (output growth bias)
                               bt                 Yt        ~t
                                                            B
                                                                  !                            (8)
                  (2)
                                                   ^t
                                                  dK         dLt
                  t      s
                         ^L,t (1          bt )                        (labor share bias)
                                                  K^t         Lt
                                                                 !
                  (3)                            dKt         ^
                                                           d Kt
                  t         (1      L,t )                             (capital growth bias).
                                                  Kt        K^t


   Three points stand out. First, the sign of the bias introduced by capital growth is
ambiguous in general: it depends on the growth rate of the measured capital stock relative
to the growth rate of the true capital stock. Nevertheless, when measured (real) capital
      ^ t is growing faster than actual (real) capital input, the simple Solow residual will
input K
tend to underestimate true output growth.
   Second, and most important, as noted above, there is mismeasurement in the elasticity of
output with respect to labor, as in the case of markups; but it has the opposite sign as with
markups. Intuitively, this is because measured output is too low, so that the measured labor
share is too high relative to the elasticity of output with respect to labor, or equivalently, the
measured capital share is too low relative to the elasticity of output with respect to capital.
When capital is growing faster than labor, this biases measured TFP upward.
   A third and equally important point is that, since the measured labor income share is
s
^L,t = L,t /bt , if the elasticity of output with respect to labor is constant, L,t = L , but
there is a growing amount of omitted intangible investment, so that bt is falling, then the
measured labor income share should rise. By contrast, the measured labor share of income
has declined since at least the late 1990s. Thus, on its own, a rising amount of omitted
intangible capital, even if produces downward bias in the Solow residual, would likely have
counterfactual implications for the measured labor share.

                                                           12
2.1.4   Bias with both markups and intangibles

The previous discussion shows that markups alone imply that the simple Solow residual
underestimates true TFP growth, by making the measured labor income share lower than
the elasticity of output with respect to labor. The magnitude of the bias in measured TFP
growth, however, appears to be relatively small. On the other hand, omitted intangibles
could also generate a downward bias in measured TFP growth, if their omission makes the
growth rate of capital inputs too high. But omitting intangibles makes the labor income
share higher than the elasticity of output with respect to labor, potentially osetting some
of the downward bias. Thus, alone, neither mechanism appears to be su cient to generate
a negative and large bias in measured TFP growth. Because they work through dierent
channels, however, combining the two is potentially more powerful than either alone.

Result 3. With omitted intangibles (bt < 1) and markups (µt > 1), the bias in measured
TFP growth can again be decomposed as:


                                                 (1)        (2)          (3)
                                       t   =     t     +    t     +      t .                                (9)


                          (1)                                              (3)
The output growth bias    t     and the capital growth bias                t     have the same expression as in
                                       (2)
Result 2, and the labor share bias     t       is given by:
                                                                                     !
                          (2)                                     dK^t         dLt
                          t      =    s
                                      ^L,t (µt bt          1)                            .                 (10)
                                                                   ^t
                                                                   K            Lt

   This result has two implications. First, the measured labor share is given by s
                                                                                 ^L,t =
L,t
       ? L,t . With both markups and intangibles, the measured labor share need not be an
µt b t
upper bound for the elasticity of output with respect to labor, so that rising intangibles
need not lead to a rising labor share. Second, all three sources of bias described in Result 3
could now potentially be negative and contribute to measured TFP growth being lower than
actual TFP growth. To determine their signs, we next turn to a more specialized model.

                                                       13
2.2     Results in a balanced growth model

We next derive expressions for the measurement biases in the context of a balanced growth
model where we allow for both markups and mismeasured capital.


2.2.1     Model elements

Description Here, we briefly summarize key model elements; Appendix A.1.1 provides
details. A representative firm chooses inputs in order to minimize total production costs.
There are three inputs: labor Lt , and two types of capital: K1,t (which represents measured
capital), and K2,t (which represents omitted intangibles). The production function is:


                                              1           1 
                                   Y t = Z t K1 ,t K2,t        Lt;                       (11)


where 1     is the elasticity of output with respect to labor, and  is the Cobb-Douglas share
of omitted intangibles in total capital, with  = 0 corresponding to no omitted intangibles.
   Capital and labor are rented by the firm on perfectly competitive markets from a repre-
sentative household that owns them. The household's budget constraint is:


                 R1,t K1,t + R2,t K2,t + Wt Lt + t = Pt Ct + Q1,t I1,t + Q2,t I2,t ,     (12)


where Rn,t is the user cost of capital of type n, Wt is the wage rate, t are profits rebated
by the firm to the household, Ct is consumption, Pt is the price of consumption goods,
In,t is investment in capital of type n, and Qn,t is price of capital of type n. The model
is set in continuous time; labor and the prices of capital goods evolve exogenously and
deterministically, according to dLt = gL Lt dt and dQn,t = gQn Qn,t dt, n = 1, 2, and the law
of motion for each capital type is given by dKn,t = (In,t            n Kn,t )dt,
                                                                     n = 1, 2, where n are
                                                                     R         C1
capital-specific depreciation rates. The household's objective is U = t 0 e dt 1t dt, with
 > 0 and        1. Finally, we allow for a constant wedge between the price of consumption


                                                 14
goods, Pt , and their marginal cost of production, M Ct : Pt = µM Ct ,               µ    1. Pure profits
are then t = (µ       1)M Ct Yt . In equilibrium, we will normalize Pt = 1, so that prices and
quantities will be expressed relative to consumption.8 Thus, this setup satisfies assumptions
A1 (constant returns) and A2 (cost minimization), and violates assumption A3 when µ > 1,
and assumption A4 when  > 0.


Balanced growth path Along the unique balanced growth path of the model, output
growth dYt /Yt is constant, and given by:

                                                  1               
                                   g = gL +              gZ             gQ ,                          (13)
                                              1               1      

where gQ is a weighted average of the growth rate of the prices of the two types of capital
goods, gQ = (1  )gQ1 +  gQ2 . Each capital stock Kn,t grows at rate gKn = g                 gQn , while the
                                             1  
growth rate of the total capital stock Kt = K1 ,t K2,t is gK = g               gQ . Additionally, the risk-
free rate along the balanced growth path is given by r =  + g. A complete characterization
of the balanced growth path is reported in Appendix A.1.1.


2.2.2    An analytical characterization of the bias

We assume that labor Lt and payments to labor Wt Lt are correctly measured, but that
intangible investment -- that is, investment in K2,t -- is treated as intermediate expenditure
                                                    ^t = Yt
in the expenditure-side measure of output, so that: Y                                         ^ t = K1,t .9
                                                                                Q2,t I2,t and K
Mirroring the discussion in Section 2.1, the balanced growth path has three key features
that aect the measurement of TFP growth.
   First, output growth is measured accurately. Recall that measured and actual output
dier because investment in capital of type 2 is treated as an intermediate expenditure, and


   8
      In particular, output Yt is expressed in consumption units. Appendix A.1.1.3 discusses how dYt /Yt
relates, in the model, to chained GDP growth as defined in national accounts.
    9
      Output in the income approach would also be underestimated, as measured gross operating surplus of
firms would be Yt Q2,t I2,t Wt Lt instead of Yt Wt Lt .
                                                      15
                                 ^t = Yt
not a purchase of final product: Y              Q2,t I2,t . However, along the balanced growth path,
expenditures on all final products -- including expenditure on intangibles, Q2,t I2,t -- grow at
rate g . Therefore, there is no bias in the measured growth rate of output by construction.10
   Second, there is bias in the level of measured output. This, in turn, aects the mea-
sured labor share. Specifically, the ratio of measured to actual output is constant along the
balanced growth path, and given by:

                                             ^t
                                             Y             g +    2       g Q2
                                bt = b =        =1                             .                     (14)
                                             Yt           µ r+    2       g Q2

As a result, the measured labor share is:

                                        W t Lt   1 
                                 sL =          =     ?1            = L .                             (15)
                                        Pt Y^t    bµ

   Third, the growth rate of capital is mis-measured, because only the stock of capital of
type 1, K1,t is measured, and it may not grow at the same rate as omitted capital K2,t :

                                       dKt     ^t
                                              dK
                                                  =  ( g Q2      gQ1 );                              (16)
                                       Kt     K^t


that is, measured capital growth is higher than actual capital growth, if an only if, prices of
omitted intangibles are growing faster than prices of measured capital.

Result 4. The bias in measured TFP growth along the balanced growth path is constant:


                                   t    =      =      (1)
                                                            +   (2)
                                                                      +     (3)                      (17)




  10
     Outside of the balanced growth path, the growth rate of measured output could dier from the true
growth rate of output. This assumption could be relaxed, for instance by studying transitional dynamics
between steady-state. It is likely that accumulation of intangibles along the transition of the model from
low- to high- steady states (steady-states with low and high levels of the omitted capital) would further
exacerbate the negative bias in measured TFP growth, as investment in omitted intangibles would be high
along that transition path.
                                                     16
where:

   (1)                       g + 2 g Q2
         =                                               (g    g) = 0                             (output growth bias)
                µ( r   g ) + (µ  ) (g +   2     g Q2 )

   (2)        (µ     1)(r + 2 gQ2 ) +  (g + 2 gQ2 )
         =                                          (gZ                 g Q1    (gQ2   gQ1 ))      (labor share bias)
                   µ(r g ) + (µ  ) (g + 2 gQ2 )

   (3)
         =     (gQ2      g Q1 )                                                                   (capital growth bias)

                                                                                                                 (1)
    In balanced growth, there is no bias due to mismeasurement of output growth:                                       = 0;
                                                                                            (2)        (3)
so the bias is the sum of the labor share and the capital biases                       =          +          .
    Two limiting cases are useful to consider. First, assume that there are no omitted in-
tangibles:  = 0, but markups are positive, µ > 1. Then, the capital growth bias is zero;
all mismeasurement comes from the downward bias that markups create in the labor share.
                                          (2)            µ 1
The value of the bias is given by               =         µ
                                                               (gZ      gQ ), reflecting the fact that it depends
on the growth rate of the capital-to-labor ratio, which is given by (gZ                           gQ )/(1        ). The
bias is positive whenever capital grows faster than labor, or gZ > gQ in the model.
    The other limiting case is  > 0 (omitted intangibles) but µ = 1 (no markups). In
Appendix A.1.1.4, Result 5, we show analytically that the measurement bias will be negative,
if and only if, the relative price of omitted capital is growing su ciently fast, i.e. gQ2 is
su ciently large. The reason for this is simple: a higher growth rate of intangible capital
prices implies a lower growth rate of the stock of omitted intangibles, K2,t , and therefore, a
                                                                                    ^ t = K1,t .11
lower growth rate of the true stock of capital Kt , relative to the measured stock, K
    These results relate to Basu et al. (2003), who study a model with unmeasured investment
in capital that is complementary with IT capital. They show that in balanced growth, the
bias in measured TFP growth must be positive. By contrast with our model, they do not
allow for markups, and assume that the price of unmeasured capital and output are constant
and equal to one another. This corresponds to gQ1 = gQ2 = 0 and µ = 1 in our model. In

  11
     Note, however, that along the balanced growth path, expenditures on intangible capital goods Q2,t I2,t ,
or the value of the intangible capital stock in consumption units, Q2,t K2,t , are growing at the same rate
as measured capital; so, this mechanism does not require a shrinking ratio of intangible capital (at cost) to
measured capital (at cost).
                                                              17
this case, using Result 4, the measurement bias in TFP growth boils down to the labor share
           (2)
bias:            =  (g + 2 )/(r     g + (1     )(g + 2 ))gZ , which is strictly positive in the balanced
growth path, consistent with their result.


2.2.3      How large can the bias be?

Beyond the cases  = 0 and µ = 1, it is not possible to characterize the sign of the bias
analytically, so we provide a numerical illustration. First, we set  = 0.04,                = 1,   2   = 0.20.12
Second, for dierent values of  and , we compute productivity growth gZ required to match
the post-1997 values of output growth, labor growth, capital growth, and the measured labor
share. Finally, we construct the implied markup and ratio of measured to actual GDP.13
    The results are reported in Figure 2; the top panel focuses on results when the Cobb-
Douglas capital share is  = 0.32, consistent with the pre-1997 value of the measured labor
share.14 The left graph on the top panel indicates that, with  = 0.5 and gQ2 = 2%, the
balanced growth model can fit the post-1997 data on output growth, input growth, and the
labor share -- and thus on measured TFP growth --, without requiring a decline in true
TFP growth relative to the pre-1997 period.
    In order to do this, the model requires two additional forces. First, omitted investment
in intangibles must represent approximately 11% of measured GDP. Second, the markup
must be substantially above 1. Why is this? We fixed the Cobb-Douglas share of labor
to 1       = 0.68, but the post-1997 data, the measured labor income share is, on average,
lower: s
       ^L = 0.64. Imagine that there were no markups: µ = 1. The model-implied measured
labor share would then be given by (1               )/b. If b < 1 (that is, with omitted intangibles),
this value would be larger than 0.68, and thus larger than the measured labor share. Thus,
markups are required in order to oset the upward bias of the measured labor income share.

  12
       See, for instance, Li and Hall (2020) for evidence on the high depreciation rates of intangibles.
  13                                                                                                        1 
       The corresponding values are given by: gZ = g   ^ (1 )^    gL  g ^K +  (gQ2 (^     g g  ^K )), µ =    s
                                                                                                             ^L   +
  g
  ^+ 2 gQ2                     +^ g + 2 gQ2
 +^ g + 2 g Q2and b = 1       µ g
                                ^+ 2 gQ2.
 14
     The middle and bottom panel report results for higher values of ; these imply somewhat smaller values
for true TFP growth, but also somewhat lower markup values.
                                                       18
3     Empirics

This section assesses, empirically, whether the combined eect of omitted intangible invest-
ment and markups creates a large negative bias in measured TFP growth.


3.1    Methodology

We use two approaches, meant to answer dierent questions. The first approach provides an
estimate of the rate of relative price growth of omitted intangibles, gQ2 , necessary to explain
a given gap between true and measured TFP. The second approach instead uses empirical
proxies for gQ2 to estimate this gap directly. Since the first approach only uses data on
expenditures on omitted intangibles, and not on prices, it can be applied more broadly.


First approach: computing required relative price growth Given measured expen-
ditures M on a particular type of intermediate commodity or service, we construct:


                              ^  Measured GDP     PY
                              b=              =        .                                   (18)
                                 Adjusted GDP   PY + M

This ratio captures mismeasurement in the level of GDP if recorded intermediate expendi-
tures on the commodity or service were in fact (misclassified) intangible investment. Using
the model, we then solve for the price growth rate gQ2 , such that for any g
                                                                           ~Z :

 (1) true TFP growth in the model, gZ , is given by gZ = g
                                                         ~Z ;

 (2) the ratio of measured to adjusted GDP in the model, b is given by b = ^
                                                                           b;

 (3) the model matches measured values of output growth g
                                                        ^, labor growth g
                                                                        ^L , capital growth
      g
      ^K , and the labor share s
                               ^L , and therefore of the Solow residual g
                                                                        ^Z .

Intuitively, this approach produces the growth rate gQ2 , such that all of the gap between
true TFP growth g
                ~Z and the Solow residual g
                                          ^Z is due to mismeasurement. Appendix A.2.2
shows that there is a unique such value for gQ2 .
                                              19
      In the application below, for true TFP growth g
                                                    ~Z , we use the pre-1997 empirical average
of the Solow residual, while we use post-1997 averages of other measured variables. Thus,
this approach will produce the value of gQ2 necessary for measurement error to entirely
account for the observed decline in TFP growth from pre- to post-1997 (assuming that the
Solow residual properly measures TFP growth before 1997). Finally, this approach requires
calibrating certain parameters; as in the previous section, we use                      = 1,  = 0.04, and

 2   = 0.20. Moreover, we set  = 0.32, the measured capital share before 1997.


Second approach: adjusting Solow residuals First, given a measure of expenditures
M on a particular intermediate commodity or service, we again define ^
                                                                     b as in Equation (18).
Next, we obtain an empirical proxy for g
                                       ^Q2 . Finally, we use the relationships implied by
the balanced growth model in order to compute the value of  , the Cobb-Douglas intangible
share, µ, the markup, and gZ , true TFP growth, that are consistent with measured values of
output growth g
              ^, labor growth g
                              ^L , capital growth g                        ^L .15 Intuitively,
                                                  ^K , and the labor share s
this approach computes an "adjusted" Solow residual that correctly measures TFP growth in
the model, while also ensuring that the model matches the empirical value of the simple Solow
residual g
         ^Z . We can then assess whether the "adjusted" Solow residual, gZ , fell less than the
simple Solow residual g
                      ^Z after 1997. The dierence is a measure of the bias introduced by
intangibles and markups in the measurement of TFP growth.16


3.2         Data sources

Our data comes from two main sources. First, we use the benchmark Input-Output accounts
(Lawson et al., 2002) to measure intermediate expenditures of dierent types of commodities
and services.17 . This data covers the 1997-2018 period. We use more specifically the Com-
     15                           1 ^b1  1 r
                                           ^+   2   ^Q2
                                                    g             1 
          These are given by  =    ^
                                   b       ^+
                                       ^L  g
                                       s        2   g
                                                    ^Q2   , µ =   ^
                                                                  bs^L
                                                                       ,   and gZ = g
                                                                                    ^    (1    gL
                                                                                              )^    ^K +
                                                                                                    g
 g ^Q2     g
           ^ g ^K ^  .
  16
     As for the first methodology, this approach requires calibrating the values of ( , , 2 , ); we use the
same values as reported above.
  17
     The data are available at apps.bea.gov/industry/iTables%20Static%20Files/AllTablesSUP.zip
These data were produced following the 2018 comprehensive update of the Industry Economic accounts
                                                          20
modity Use tables, aggregated at the Summary level, which provides detail for 61 dierent
commodities and services, after excluding non-comparable imports, used and second-hand
goods, and government-provided services and commodities. In each year and for each com-
modity or service, we collapse the amount used as intermediate input (as opposed to final
product) across all industries. This provides a measure of M ; we then compute the associated
ratio of measured to adjusted GDP, ^
                                   b, as in Equation (18).18
    Second, we obtain information on prices from the GDP-by-industry tables.19 These data
provide annual measures of gross output, intermediate input use, and value added, at the
industry level, for the period 1997-2018, along with associated price deflators. Industries
in this data follow an identical classification as the 61 groups of commodities and services
described in the Input-Output tables, so that industry price deflators can be merged to
the Input-Output account data on commodities and services.20 For each commodity and
service, we then compute g
                         ^Q2 = g
                               ^Qnom
                                 2
                                                   g
                                                   ^P CE , where g
                                                                 ^P CE is the annual change in the
implicit deflator for personal consumption expenditure.21
    The data sources on expenditures and prices overlap on both their time and commod-
ity/service coverage, but they are limited to the 1997-2018 period. In Section 3.3.3 below, we
extend our analysis to the pre-1997 period, using the historical Input-Output accounts for
the 1947-1962 and 1962-1996 periods. Other data sources are described in Appendix A.2.3.


3.3     Results

This section discusses the results from our two empirical approaches.


(Howells et al., 2018).
   18
      We adjust our basic output measure, total final product use across all commodities, by subtracting
imports from the Commodity Supply tables at the same level of disaggregation; the resulting measure
matches, by construction, total value added.
   19
      The data are available at apps.bea.gov//industry/iTables%20Static%20Files/AllTables.zip.
   20
      The tables provide price indices for more a disaggregated industry classification, but we only use the
data at the same level of aggregation as the Input-Output accounts.
   21
      The GDP-by-industry tables also provide price deflators for gross output, which have similar signs, on
average, than value added deflators, but are somewhat smaller in magnitude. From the standpoint of the
model, value added deflators should be used, and so we focus on this measure for the remainder of the results.
                                                     21
3.3.1    First approach: computing required relative price growth

The magnitude of GDP adjustments Table 2 reports the time-series averages of the
ratios of unadjusted to adjusted GDP, ^
                                      b, defined as in Equation (18). The averages reported
are computed when intermediate use of a single commodity or service group (among the 61
reported in the Use table) is reclassified as intangible investment in isolation. Among the
groups with the 10 largest adjustments, 3 service groups are of particular interest.
    The largest adjustment is associated with the Professional, Scientific and Technical Ser-
vices (PSTS) group. Reclassifying intermediate expenditures on these services as intangible
investment implies that actual GDP is approximately 6% larger than measured GDP. This
group comprises service activities that can be purchased externally by firms, such as account-
ing, consulting, design, or computer services. The two other service groups of interest are
Administrative and Support Services, and Management of Companies and Enterprises. The
former group measures the use of outsourced business support services (such as personnel
administration and training). The latter group measures the service output of establishments
that administer other establishments in a company.22
    Our core argument is that intermediate expenditures on these types of services could in
fact represent purchases of investment goods by firms, which would then be misclassified in
national accounts. The type of capital created by these purchases is intangible, in that it
does not have a physical presence. Indeed, these purchases could lead to the accumulation
of various forms of organization capital (through consulting, advertising, design, manage-
ment and personnel-related services), none of which are embodied in physical assets. These
expenditures lead to capital accumulation to the extent that the corresponding inputs are
not used up in production entirely within the year of their purchase.
    Taken together, omitting these forms of investment could have large eects on GDP. The
first column of Table 3 shows that reclassifying the three service groups mentioned above

  22
     These establishments are likely to be headquarters or core firm locations where organization and strate-
gic planning services are produced. The output of these establishments is reported in isolation in the
benchmark IO accounts.
                                                     22
leads to a cumulative adjustment in the level of GDP in the order of 11%. Accordingly,
investment rates adjusted for these omissions are higher than, and diverging from, measured
investment rates. Figure 3 reports the time series for both the ratio of unadjusted to adjusted
GDP, and for the implied ratio of nominal investment to GDP after adjusting for omitted
intangibles. For instance, adjusting for Professional Services leads to an upward revision of
approximately 5% in the ratio of nominal investment to nominal GDP.23
    For reference, Table 2 also reports the adjustment factor ^
                                                              b implied by reclassifying seven
other commodities and service groups (those remaining among the 10 groups with the largest
GDP adjustments). However, it is di cult to argue that these inputs represent misclassified
investment; Chemical Products, for instance, tend to be used up in production within the
year of their purchase. Hence, not all intermediates are candidates to be capitalized, in
particular if they are clearly used as materials inputs.
    Finally, own-account investment in organization capital, for instance through worker
training, or branding and marketing expenses, could also contribute to the stock of orga-
nization capital. The distinction between externally purchased and own-account intangible
investment is moot in our model because we assume away internal capital adjustment costs.
However, in the Use tables, only externally purchased intangibles will be captured. (This
is with the exception of one important component of own-account spending on organization
capital, managerial compensation, which is isolated in the Use table as intermediate inputs
purchased from the Management of Companies and Enterprises sector, and will therefore
be captured by our baseline approach.) In Section 3.4 and Appendix A.2.4, we use firm-
level data on organization capital spending that includes own-account investment, and show
that the magnitudes we obtain for the adjustments to GDP are in the upper range of those
implied by the Use tables.
   23
     In anticipation of the analysis of Section 3.3.3, this figure reports the times series for these ratios for the
entire postwar era, 1947-2018. The ratios of unadjusted to adjusted GDP reported in the top panel of Figure
3 dier somewhat from those used in this section because the industry classification of the Input-Output
accounts changed in 1963 and 1997, as explained in Section 3.3.3. Appendix Figure A2 reports the time
series for the same moments from 1997-2018 only, using definitions of the omitted intangibles based on the
more granular classifications of the post-1997 IO tables.
                                                        23
Results Using these GDP adjustments, Table 3 then reports the values of relative price
growth of omitted capital, gQ2 , that would be required to explain the entirety of the decline
in measured TFP growth from bias generated by intangibles and markups. The implied
relative price growth ranges from 0.6 to 2.1% p.a., with lower estimates corresponding to
more intermediate expenditures being reclassified as investment.
   Two points are worth noting. First, the required relative price growth is positive; that
is, the price of omitted capital must be rising, relative to the price of final goods, in order
for the bias to be positive, as discussed in Section 2. In Section 3.3.1, we argue that, for
the three service groups we focus on, this is empirically plausible. Second, these adjustment
lead to high markups. For instance, when adjusting for the PSTS group, the implied value-
added markup corresponds to a pure profit share of value added in the order of 11.5%. As
highlighted in the previous section, in order to simultaneously accommodate a low labor
share s
      ^L and a substantial underestimation of GDP, markups must be elevated.


3.3.2   Second approach: adjusting Solow residuals

Relative price growth in the data Are relative price growth rates for omitted intangi-
bles in the order of 0.6% to 2.1% realistic? The second column of Table 2 reports average
price growth rates for the 10 commodities or service groups with the 10 largest GDP ad-
justments. For the three key service groups discussed above and highlighted in Table 2, our
empirical proxies for g
                      ^Q2 are all positive. However, their magnitudes are not as large as the
values discussed in the previous section: the highest rate of relative price increase is 1.5%
per year, for Management Services. Thus the bias generated will not be su cient to fully
explain the decline in measured TFP growth. So we next discuss how much of this decline
our mechanism can account for, given these proxies for g
                                                       ^Q2 .


Results Figure 4 reports the implied rate of growth of TFP (as well as a red line indicat-
ing the average simple Solow residual g
                                      ^Z the post-1997 sample) when adjusting for the 61


                                              24
commodity and service groups individually. Adjustments of individual service or commodi-
ties groups have a positive, though relatively small overall eect on measured TFP growth.
Among the largest adjustments is obtained for the PSTS group; alone, it adds approximately
0.1% to overall TFP growth, or 1/5th of the gap between pre- and post- 1997 TFP growth.24
    Table 4 reports the implied growth rates, Cobb-Douglas intangible shares, and markups,
when adjusting for the three key groups of services highlighted earlier in the discussion. The
first two lines report the unadjusted Solow residual for the pre- and post-1997 periods; as
highlighted in the introduction, it declines by 49bps, from 1.11% to 0.62% per year.
    The third line reports the average growth rate of TFP obtained when adjusting only for
markups, but not for omitted intangibles. The adjustment for markups alone raises measured
TFP growth by approximately 9bps, or one-fifth of the decline. The remaining lines report
TFP growth in the post-1997 sample when adjusted for both markups and omitted intan-
gibles. Altogether, the decline is 33bps (or 67%) smaller after adjusting for both markups
and intangibles produced by all three key sectors highlighted above. Thus markups and
intangibles together can account for 2/3 of the observed decline in TFP growth.25 Adjusting
only for professional services, or for professional services plus management, yields somewhat
lower eects ­ from one-third to one-half of the total decline in measured TFP growth.


3.3.3    Comparing pre- and post-1997 data

The previous section shows that measurement bias from markups and intangible capital can
explain up to two thirds of the decline in the Solow residual. It is however possible that the
Solow residual before 1997 also requires upward adjustments because of markups and intan-
  24
      In Figure 4, it is also worth briefly highlighting the Petroleum and Coal Products commodity group.
As a widely used intermediate input, it has a low value of ^   b. Additionally, as indicated by Table 2, this
group experienced a high rate of relative price increase over the period. As result, reclassifying intermediate
expenditures on this group as purchases of capital goods would lead to a large upward adjustment to TFP
growth. However, as argued before, these are typically used up in production within the year, which rules
out reclassifying them as omitted capital goods.
   25
      Appendix Figure A3 reports the annual time-series underlying the averages of Table 4. These time-
series show that the adjustment for omitted intangibles produces a sizable upward revision of TFP growth
in two periods: the early 2000's, and the Great Recession. In particular, during the Great Recession, the
dierence between measured and adjusted TFP growth is almost a full percentage point.
                                                      25
gibles. More generally, since the rise in intangible capital and markups are thought to have
accelerated after the 1990s, comparing the pre- to post-1997 data provides a "placebo" test
for our hypothesis that both trends have contributed to an increase in the mismeasurement
of TFP growth.
    The first empirical challenge in doing so is that the service and commodity groups used in
the Input-Output tables change twice before 1997. More specifically, the 1947-1962 Input-
Output tables have a substantially coarser definition of service and commodity groups.26
Given this limitation, we aggregate up service and commodity groups in the 1963-1996 and
1997-2018 data so that they match the 43 groups of the 1947-1962 data. Table 5 then reports
the magnitude of these GDP adjustments, both before and after 1997.
    The top panel of Table 5 shows that omitted intangibles would have led to adjustments
to the level of GDP even before 1997.27 However, the adjustment is substantially larger in
the post-1997 period. The last two columns of the top panel of Table 5 report the change in
^
b for each group; it is generally negative, with t-tests confirming that the drop is statistically
significant. The bottom panel of Table 5 repeats these computations, using aggregates of the
three service groups most likely to represent misclassified intangible investment and discussed
in the previous section. Taken together, the ratio of unadjusted to adjusted GDP for these
three service groups is 0.92 pre-1997, but falls to 0.87, after 1997.
    Nevertheless, the fact that ^
                                b < 1 even before 1997 means that one should, in principle,
adjust the Solow residual also before 1997. In order to do so, as discussed in the previous
section, data on the growth rate of relative prices of omitted intangibles is required. However,
the second empirical challenge is that there are, to our knowledge, no price deflators available,
  26
      There are 43 groups in the 1947-1962 tables, instead of 60 in the 1963-1996 tables
and 61 in the 1997-2018 tables.            The historical Input-Output tables we use in the analy-
sis are available at https://apps.bea.gov/industry/xls/io-annual/IOUse_Before_Redefinitions_
PRO_1947-1962_Summary.xlsx and http://https://apps.bea.gov/industry/xls/io-annual/IOUse_
Before_Redefinitions_PRO_1963-1996_Summary.xlsx, respectively. In particular, the service groups most
likely to include omitted intangible investment after 1997 are not consistently defined across periods. For
instance, prior to 1997, the Administrative and Support Services group is included in a larger group, which
also contains Waste Management services.
   27
      The GDP adjustments in this exercise after 1997 are mechanically large than in our previous exercise,
because of the coarser definitions of commodity and service groups which we are constrained to use.
                                                    26
at the required level of aggregation, for the 1947-1996 period.28 We therefore assume that
relative price growth is the same as in the post-1997 period.
     The adjusted Solow residuals which we obtain are reported in Table 6. With all three
key service sectors accounted for, the pre-1997 Solow residual is 1.21% p.a., versus 1.11%
in the baseline. Crucially, this upward adjustment is smaller than the upward adjustment
for the post-1997 sample.29 Thus after adjusting for markups and intangibles in both the
pre- and post-1997 periods, the Solow residual only fell by approximately 21bps after 1997,
instead of an unadjusted decline of 49bps, confirming our baseline findings.


3.4      Robustness

Appendix A.2.4 reports results from four robustness checks. First, our results also hold
using BLS price data. Second, the magnitude of the adjustments for omitted intangibles
obtained from firm data (potentially including own-account intangible investment) is similar
to that obtained from the Input-Output tables. Third, later breakpoints weaken our results
somewhat, because the price of omitted intangibles grew more slowly (relative to the PCE
deflator) in the 2004-2007 period. However, even with a 2004 breakpoint, our mechanism
still explains one-third of the decline in the Solow residual. Finally, our results are robust to
using alternative values for the depreciation rate of omitted intangibles,            2.




4        Conclusion

A recent literature has argued that the recent decline in the rate of economic growth in the
US is attributable to a decline in TFP growth (Cette et al., 2016; Gordon, 2017; Fernald

    28
      The historical GDP by industry tables, available at https://apps.bea.gov/industry/xls/GDPbyInd_
VA_SIC.xls, do not include price deflators. The Gross Output by industry tables, available at https:
//apps.bea.gov/industry/xls/GDPbyInd_GO_SIC.xls, report price deflators, but only for the 1977-1997
period, and with a dierent industry classification (that does not adequately cover service groups) relative
to the input-output accounts.
   29
      Adjusted TFP growth for the post-1997 sample is, itself, higher than in Table 3, because the estimates
   ^
of b obtained using the coarser industry classification are higher than in our baseline analysis.
                                                    27
et al., 2017). In this paper, we have studied whether this decline in measured TFP growth
could reflect measurement bias caused by a simultaneous rise in rents (Barkai, 2020) and a
rise in the importance of firms' use of intangible capital, which may not be properly measured
(Corrado et al., 2009; Crouzet and Eberly, 2020).
   If the price of omitted intangible capital is rising su ciently fast, an upward bias in
measured capital growth (and therefore, a downward bias in measured TFP growth) can
occur. However, such mismeasurement would also imply that the level of measured GDP
is biased downward, by an amount equal to the flow of intangible investment. This, in
turn, would tend to generate a rising measured labor share, at odds with the data. Rising
markups, in tandem with rising intangibles, can oset this force and allow simultaneously for
a downward bias in measured TFP growth and a declining labor share. We articulated this
argument more precisely in balanced growth model featuring both intangibles and markups,
and showed, using the input-output tables, that this mechanism could plausibly account for
one to two-thirds of the decline in measured TFP growth.
   Our results do not imply that the rate of growth of output is mismeasured. Rather, they
attribute some of this decline to rising relative prices of certain forms of intangible capital.
A di cult but worthwhile question is why these forms of intangible capital have become
relatively more expensive. Additionally, outside of the balanced growth path, omitted intan-
gibles may bias the measured growth rate of GDP, further exacerbating TFP growth biases.
Finally, our balanced growth analysis assumes Cobb-Douglas substitutability between labor
and capital, but deviations from this assumption may accentuate the wedge between the
measured labor share and the output elasticity of labor, and amplifying measurement bias.
We leave these questions to future research.



References
Alexander, L. and J. Eberly (2018). Investment hollowing out. IMF Economic Review 66 (1), 5­30.

Atkeson, A. and P. J. Kehoe (2005). Modeling and measuring organization capital. Journal of political
                                                 28
  Economy 113 (5), 1026­1053.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2020). Productivity and misallocation in general equilibrium. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 135 (1), 105­163.

Barkai, S. (2020). Declining labor and capital shares. The Journal of Finance .

Basu, S. and J. Fernald (2001). Why is productivity procyclical? Why do we care? In New developments in
  productivity analysis, pp. 225­302. University of Chicago Press.

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, N. Oulton, and S. Srinivasan (2003). The case of the missing productivity growth.
  NBER macroeconomics annual 18, 9­63.

Bils, M., P. Klenow, and C. Ruane (2020). Misallocation or mismeasurement? NBER working paper .

Byrne, D. M., J. G. Fernald, and M. B. Reinsdorf (2016). Does the United States have a productivity
  slowdown or a measurement problem? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2016 (1), 109­182.

Cette, G., J. Fernald, and B. Mojon (2016). The pre-great recession slowdown in productivity. European
  Economic Review 88, 3­20.

Corrado, C., J. Haskel, C. Jona-Lasinio, and M. Iommi (2016). Intangible investment in the EU and US
  before and since the Great Recession and its contribution to productivity growth. Technical report, EIB
  Working Papers.

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2009). Intangible capital and US economic growth. Review of income
  and wealth 55 (3), 661­685.

Crouzet, N. and J. Eberly (2020). Rents and Intangibles: a Q+ Framework. Working paper, Northwestern
  University.

Crouzet, N. and J. C. Eberly (2019). Understanding weak capital investment: The role of market concen-
  tration and intangibles. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020). The rise of market power and the macroeconomic
  implications. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2), 561­644.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and D. Papanikolaou (2013). Organization capital and the cross-section of expected returns.
  The Journal of Finance 68 (4), 1365­1406.

                                                    29
Fernald, J. (2014). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity. Federal Reserve Bank
  of San Francisco.

Fernald, J. G., R. E. Hall, J. H. Stock, and M. W. Watson (2017). The disappointing recovery of output
  after 2009. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gordon, R. J. (2017). The rise and fall of American growth: The US standard of living since the civil war,
  Volume 70. Princeton University Press.

Gourio, F. and M. Rognlie (2020). Capital heterogeneity and investment prices: how much are investment
  prices declining?

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997). Long-run implications of investment-specific technolog-
  ical change. The American economic review , 342­362.

Guti´
    errez, G. and T. Philippon (2017). Declining Competition and Investment in the US. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hall, R. E. (1968). Technical change and capital from the point of view of the dual. The Review of Economic
  Studies 35 (1), 35­46.

Howells, T., E. Morgan, and C. Ross (2018). Improved estimates of the industry economic accounts. In
  Survey of Current Business, Volume 98. Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Jorgenson, D. W. and Z. Griliches (1967). The explanation of productivity change. The review of economic
  studies 34 (3), 249­283.

Lawson, A. M., K. S. Bersani, M. Fahim-Nader, and J. Guo (2002). Benchmark input-output accounts of
  the United States. Survey of Current Business 82, 19­108.

Li, W. C. and B. H. Hall (2020). Depreciation of business R&D capital. Review of Income and Wealth 66 (1),
  161­180.

Oulton, N. (2007). Investment-specific technological change and growth accounting. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 54 (4), 1290­1299.

Solow, R. M. (1957). Technical change and the aggregate production function. The review of Economics
  and Statistics , 312­320.


                                                      30
                                                       1947-1996    1997-2018    Change

            GDP growth (p.p.)                             3.36         2.44       -0.92
            Labor growth (p.p.)                           1.52         0.98       -0.54
            Capital growth (p.p.)                         3.80         3.32       -0.48
            Labor share of income                         0.68         0.64       -0.04

            TFP growth (p.p.)                             1.11         0.62       -0.49
            TFP growth (utilization-adjusted; p.p.)       1.13         0.66       -0.47


Table 1: Solow residuals before and after 1997. The Solow residual is constructed as g          ^Z =
g
^ s  ^L g
        ^L (1 s  ^L )^
                     gK , where g
                                ^ is the average growth rate of output in consumption units (defined
as nominal business value added divided by the deflator for personal consumption expenditures),
s
^L is the average measured labor income share, g    ^L is the average growth rate of labor input, and
g
^K is the average growth rate of capital input. Utilization-adjusted TFP growth is constructed as
^Z = g
g      ^ s    ^L (1 s
           ^L g           ^L )^
                              gK g^u , where g
                                             ^u is the average growth rate of utilization. Input and
utilization data are from the Fernald (2014) quarterly dataset; more detail on the measurement of
the growth rate of output in consumption units is reported in Appendix A.2.1.




                                                 31
                                                                 ^
                                                                 b        g
                                                                          ^Q2   (%)
                                                                                        GDP
                                                                                      share (%)
   Services
   Professional, scientific, and technical services            0.940       0.59         3.63
   Other real estate                                           0.952      -1.75         0.77
   Administrative and support services                         0.964       0.20         0.31
   Insurance carriers and related activities                   0.972      -0.21         1.84
   Credit intermediation and related activities                0.973       1.06         1.42
   Management of companies and enterprises                     0.974       1.54         0.02

   Commodities
   Chemical products                                           0.962       1.31         2.67
   Oil and gas extraction                                      0.972       2.09        -1.25
   Petroleum and coal products                                 0.973       3.78         1.89
   Food and beverage and tobacco products                      0.976       1.12         5.55

Table 2: Intermediate commodities or services producing the largest GDP adjustments. The
table reports the 10 commodity or service groups with the smallest value of unadjusted GDP to
adjusted GDP, where the latter is computed using data from the Use tables of the benchmark
Input-Output accounts. For each commodity or service, the first column is the average value of
^
bt = Pt Yt /(Pt Yt + Mt ), where Pt Yt is total GDP at producer prices, and Mt is the nominal value
of intermediate input use of the commodity or service. The average is computed over the 1997-
2018 period, for each commodity or service group. The second column reports average values
for the relative price growth of omitted capital, computed using price deflators from the GDP-
by-industry tables, as described in Section 3.2. The third column is the share of the commodity
or service in total GDP. We compute the contribution of each commodity to GDP by using the
final expenditure data by commodity provided in the Use tables, and subtracting imports of the
commodity or service, the latter obtained from the Supply tables. Total GDP is the sum of GDP
across all goods and services. The contribution of oil and gas extraction is negative because in
many sample years, imports are larger than total domestic use for that commodity. The top panel
reports services, while the bottom panel reports commodities. Intermediate services the purchases
of which plausibly represents omitted intangible investment are highlighted in bold.




                                                32
                                                                      Average, 1997-2018
  Service groups included                                             ^
                                                                      b  gQ (%)        µ
                                                                              2


  Professional serv.                                                0.94     2.08    0.25   1.13
  Professional serv. + Management                                   0.92     1.21    0.36   1.15
  Professional serv. + Management + Administrative serv.            0.89     0.60    0.50   1.19

  Organization Capital (Compustat)                                  0.91     1.05    0.39   1.16

Table 3: Required rate of growth of relative prices, gQ2 , in order to fully account for the post-1997
decline in measured TFP growth. These results are constructed using the first approach described
in Section 3.1, which only uses data on intermediate expenditures on commodities or services. The
first column reports the average ratio of unadjusted GDP to GDP adjusted for omitted intangible
investment, ^b, defined as in Equation (18). The second column reports the rate of relative price
growth gQ2 which would be necessary for measurement bias to account for the entirety of the
decline in measured TFP growth after 1997, while the third and fourth columns report the Cobb-
Douglas share of omitted intangible capital  and the implied level of markups µ. Each line reports
the results when a dierent set of intermediate service expenditures are reclassified as intangible
investment. See Section 3.1 for more details on the methodology used to construct gQ2 ,  and µ.




                                                 33
                                                              ^
                                                              b     g
                                                                    ^Q2    (%)   gZ   (%)    µ      

 1947-1996                                                    0        0         1.11       1.00    0

 1997-2018
    No adjustment, no markups                                 0        0         0.62       1.00    0
    No adjustment, markups                                    0        0         0.71       1.06    0

    Adjusted for Prof. services                              0.94    0.59        0.83       1.13   0.25
    Adjusted for Prof. services + Manag.                     0.92    0.78        0.90       1.15   0.35
    Adjusted for Prof. services + Manag. + Admin.            0.89    0.65        0.95       1.19   0.50
    Adjusted for Organization capital (Compustat)            0.91    0.78        0.91       1.16   0.38

Table 4: TFP growth, after adjusting for omitted intangibles and for markups. The first line
reports TFP growth estimated using a model without markups and without omitted capital on the
1947-1996 data; the simple Solow residual is, in that case, a correct measure of GDP. The second
line reports the simple Solow residual in the post-1997 sample. The third line reports TFP growth
adjusted for markups, and the third to sixth lines report measured TFP growth after adjusting
for both markups and omitted intangibles. The adjustments are made following the second of the
two approaches described in Section 3.1, which uses data on both expenditures and prices. GDP
adjustments, ^b, are reported in the first column, and relative price growth rates, gQ2 , are reported
in the third column.




                                                 34
                                                     ^
                                                     b (average)
                                               1947-1996 1997-2018             ^
                                                                               b        t-stat
   Services
   Prof., scient. & techn. services              0.955          0.921       0.033        15.40
   Finance and Insurance                         0.957          0.929       0.028        13.72
   Real estate                                   0.973          0.952       0.021        13.15
   Admin. and waste services                     0.984          0.959       0.025        13.84
   Information                                   0.979          0.967       0.013         9.89
   Management of companies                       0.981          0.974       0.007        17.60
   Commodities
   Chemical products                             0.966          0.962       0.004         9.89
   Oil and gas extraction                        0.978          0.972       0.007         2.78
   Petroleum and coal products                   0.980          0.973       0.007         3.48
   Food, beverage, tobacco                       0.956          0.976      0.020          6.07
   All commodities and services                  0.982          0.983       0.001         1.25
    : p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01,    : p < 0.001.
                             (a) Individual commodity and service groups

                                                      ^
                                                      b (average)
                                               1947-1996    1997-2018          ^
                                                                               b        t-stat

   Prof. services                                0.955         0.921        0.033       15.40
   Prof. services + Manag.                       0.937         0.899        0.038       18.11
                                                                                    
   Prof. services + Manag. + Admin.              0.924         0.866        0.057       16.23

    : p < 0.05,  : p < 0.01,    : p < 0.001.
                                    (b) Aggregated service groups

Table 5: Change in GDP adjustment between 1947-1996 and 1997-2018, for the 10 commodity
and service groups with the largest GDP adjustments after 1997. The top panel of the table
reports the 10 commodity of service groups with the smallest value of unadjusted GDP to adjusted
GDP for the 1997-2018 period. The data are from the Use tables of the benchmark Input-Output
accounts. For each period and each commodity or service, the first column is the average value of
^
bt = Pt Yt /(Pt Yt + Mt ), where Pt Yt is nominal GDP, and Mt is the nominal value of intermediate
input use of the commodity or service. Averages are computed over the 1947-1996 and 1997-
2018 periods, respectively. The definition of the groups diers from Table 2 because the industry
classification of the Input-Output accounts changed in 1963 and in 1997; see main text for details.
The last column of the table reports the change in the adjustment ratio ^ b across periods, and the
t-statistic for the one-sided t-test on the dierence of means across the two samples. The bottom
panel of the table reports similar moments, computed for the aggregated service sectors highlighted
in the top panel of the table, and where purchases of intangible capital goods is most likely to be
misclassified as expenditure on intermediate inputs.

                                                 35
                                          1997-2018                            1947-1996
                              g
                              ^Q2   (%)   gZ   (%)    µ            g
                                                                   ^Q2   (%)   gZ   (%)    µ            gZ   (%)


 No adj., no markups            0         0.620      1.00    0       0         1.107      1.00   0.00   -0.487
 No adj., markups               0         0.708      1.06    0       0         1.106      1.00   0.00   -0.398
 Prof. serv.                   0.59       0.866      1.15   0.33    0.59       1.164      1.05   0.17   -0.298
 Prof. serv.+Manag.            0.78       0.942      1.18   0.44    0.78       1.202      1.07   0.25   -0.261
 Prof. serv.+Manag.+Admin.     0.65       1.004      1.22   0.60    0.65       1.212      1.08   0.30   -0.208


Table 6: Change in implied moments, between 1947-1996 and 1997-2018, after adjusting for the
bias induced by markups and omitted intangible investment. The columns marked "1947-1996"
report adjusted moments for the 1947-1996 period, while the columns marked "1997-2018" report
adjusted moments for the 1997-2018 period. The last column reports the implied change in the rate
of growth of TFP. The line marked "No adjustment, no markup" uses a model with no markups
and no intangibles; the line marked "No adjustment, markup" uses a model with no intangibles
but positive markups; and the remaining lines adjust for both omitted intangibles and markups,
using dierent service groups to measure omitted intangible investment.




                                                     36
                                    5

                                    4

                                    3
   Percentage change, annual rate




                                    2

                                    1

                                    0

                                    -1

                                    -2

                                    -3                                                 Measured TFP growth
                                                                                       Actual TFP growth (if L = 1)
                                    -4                                                 Actual TFP growth (if L = 0.68)

                                     1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020


Figure 1: Measured TFP growth, unadjusted and adjusted for markups. The solid black line
is annual TFP growth, constructed as dZ                 ^t = dY
                                                    ^t /Z        ^t /Y
                                                                     ^t s ^L,t dL    ^ t (1 s
                                                                                ^ t /L                          ^ t , where
                                                                                                           ^ t /K
                                                                                                    ^L,t )dK
dY ^t /Y
       ^t is output growth, s     ^L,t is the measured labor share of income, dL        ^ t /L
                                                                                             ^ t is labor input growth,
         ^       ^
and dKt /Kt is capital input growth, all obtained as annual average from the quarterly data of
Fernald (2014). The solid red lineis TFP growth adjusted                   for markups, assuming that L,t = 1:
( dZ^t /Z^t ) ( adj ) = dZ   ^t + (1 s
                         ^t /Z                 ^ t /K
                                       ^L,t ) dK    ^ t dL      ^ t i.e. the upper bound (in absolute value) for
                                                           ^ t /L
the bias in measured TFP growth. The dashed blue line TFP growth adjusted for markups, when
the output elasticity of labor is assumed to be given by the         sample averageof the labor income
                        ^  ^
share prior to 1995: (dZt /Zt ) ( adj )     ^    ^       ¯
                                                         ^L,t s
                                                              ^L,t ) dK
                                        = d Z t /Z t + ( s                 ^ t dL
                                                                      ^ t /K                    ¯
                                                                                     ^ t , with s
                                                                                ^ t /L          ^L,t = 0.68.




                                                                       37
Figure 2: Numerical examples from the balanced growth model. The top panel corresponds to
a calibration with  = 0.32, while the middle and bottom panels correspond to  = 0.34 and
 = 0.36, respectively. In each panel, the left graph reports the true value of productivity growth
gZ required for the balanced growth model to match measured average values of output growth g         ^,
labor growth g ^L , measured capital growth g
                                            ^K^ , and the labor share ^
                                                                      s L , in the post-97 sample, as  a
function of  , the Cobb-Douglas share of omitted intangibles. Implied TFP growth gZ is reported
for dierent values of the growth rate of omitted capital prices, gQ2 (the dierent green lines). The
dashed red line is the average simple Solow residual post-97, while the dashed orange line is the
average simple Solow residual pre-97. The middle and right graphs of each panel report the implied
markups µ and share of measured to actual capital b. In these latter two graphs, the three distinct
lines, corresponding to the dierent levels of gQ2 , are not visible because they overlap.

                                                  38
                                         Ratio of unadjusted to adjusted GDP
      1

     .98

     .96

     .94

     .92

      .9

     .88

     .86

     .84
       45


              50


                      55


                             60


                                    65


                                            70


                                                      75


                                                             80


                                                                    85


                                                                            90


                                                                                    95


                                                                                            00


                                                                                                    05


                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                                      15
     19


            19


                    19


                           19


                                  19


                                          19


                                                    19


                                                           19


                                                                  19


                                                                          19


                                                                                  19


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                    20
                             Prof. services                                    Prof. services + Management
                             Prof. services + Management + Admin.




                   Nominal investment to GDP, after adjusting for omitted intangible investment
     .35




      .3




     .25




      .2




     .15
       45


              50


                      55


                             60


                                    65


                                            70


                                                      75


                                                             80


                                                                    85


                                                                            90


                                                                                    95


                                                                                            00


                                                                                                    05


                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                                      15
     19


            19


                    19


                           19


                                  19


                                          19


                                                    19


                                                           19


                                                                  19


                                                                          19


                                                                                  19


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                    20


                                   Unadjusted              Prof. services + Management
                                   Prof. services          Prof. services + Management + Admin.



Figure 3: Time series for the ratio of unadjusted GDP to GDP adjusted for omitted intangibles
(top panel), and for the ratio of investment to GDP without and with adjustments for omitted
intangibles (bottom panel), for the 1947-2018 period. The 1997-2018 period is highlighted in grey.
The top panel reports the time series for ^ bt = Pt Yt /(Pt Yt + Mt ), where Pt Yt is nominal GDP,
and Mt is the nominal value of intermediate input use of a group of services, where the latter is
obtained from the Use tables of the benchmark Input-Output accounts. Each line corresponds to
the ratio obtained when treating a dierent group of services as misclassified intangible investment.
The bottom panel reports the time series t = (Qt It + Mt )/(Pt Yt + Mt ), where Qt It is measured
aggregate spending on investment goods, also obtained from the Input-Output accounts. Appendix
Figure A2 reports the time series for the same moments from 1997-2018 only, using definitions of
the omitted intangibles based on the more granular classifications of the post-1997 input/output
tables.

                                                             39
                                                            Adjusted Solow residual gZ,j (%)

   .9
                                                                                      Petroleum and coal products

             Prof. and technical services                      Chemical products   Oil and gas extraction
   .8
                                                                                         Management
                                                                  Admin. and support                                  Other services
   .7


   .6        Measured TFP growth (post-97)


   .5
                                                                                                             Computer and electronic products
        .94                                           .96                                              .98                                      1
                                                             Unadjusted GDP/Adjusted GDP (bj)



                                                                     Implied markup µ
   1.14


                  Prof. and technical services
   1.12



    1.1
                                                                    Admin. and support

                                                                                          Management
   1.08
                                                                                                                      Other services

   1.06
             .94                                       .96                                             .98                                      1
                                                              Unadjusted GDP/Adjusted GDP (b)



                                                 Implied Cobb-Douglas share of omitted capital 
   .25        Prof. and technical services

    .2


   .15                                                             Admin. and support

    .1                                                                                    Management

                                                                                                                      Other services
   .05


        0
            .94                                       .96                                              .98                                      1
                                                             Unadjusted GDP/Adjusted GDP (b)


Figure 4: Implied moments when adjusting for individual commodity or sector groups. The
moments in each panel are computed using second of the two approaches described in Section 3.1,
applied to individual commodity or service groups among the 61 reported in the Input-Output
tables. The top panel reports TFP growth adjusted for both intangibles and markups, the middle
panel reports the implied markup, and the bottom panel reports the implied Cobb-Douglas share
of omitted intangible capital in the production function. Key service sectors are highlighted in
orange.
                                                                            40
Supplementary Materials
A.1       Theory
This appendix provides details for the theoretical results reported in Section 2.


A.1.1      Main model
We start by a describing and analyzing in more detail the balanced growth model described
in Section 2 and used in Section 3 for empirical analysis. This model uses a value added
production function.

A.1.1.1    Description

Firm The representative firm solves:

                        2
                        X                                          1             
       T Ct = min             Rn,t Kn,t + Wt Lt       s.t.    Z t K1 ,t K2,t        L1
                                                                                     t
                                                                                         
                                                                                            Yt   [M Ct ]
               Kt ,Lt
                        n=1


where T Ct denotes total costs of production, Kt = {Kn,t }2    n=1 is a vector of capital inputs,
with K1,t the measured capital input, and K2,t the omitted intangible input, Lt is labor
input, {Rn,t }2
              n=1 is a vector of user costs, Wt is the wage rate, Zt is total factor productivity,
1  is the elasticity of output with respect to labor, and  is the elasticity of the total
                       1  
capital input Kt = K1   ,t K2,t . Total factor productivity evolves exogenously, following:


                                             dZt = gZ Zt dt.

The solution to this problem is:

                                    T C t = M C t Yt                                                       (19)
                                                             1                
                                          1           Wt                 Rt
                                   M Ct =
                                          Zt         1                   

                                                     (1     ) Yt
                                      Lt = M C t
                                                          Wt

                                                      Yt
                                     Kt = M C t
                                                     Rt

                                                       41
                                                       1  
                                                 Kt = K1 ,t K2,t

                                                                          1                
                                                                 R1,t               R2,t
                                                 Rt =
                                                                1                    

                                                                          Rt
                                            K1,t = (1                 )        Kt
                                                                          R1,t

                                                             Rt
                                            K2,t =                Kt                                                          (20)
                                                             R2,t

The firm's revenue is St = Pt Yt and its profits are t = Pt Yt                                     T C t = ( Pt    M Ct )Yt , where
Pt is the price of consumption goods. The labor share is:

                                                             W t Lt                     M Ct
                                            sL,t                    = (1            )        .
                                                             Pt Yt                       Pt

Household The representative household solves:
                                                     Z       +1
                                                                      h   Ct1+h
      U ( K t ; Xt ) =           max                              e             dh
                         { C t + h ,It + h } h   0       0                1
                                  s.t.               dKn,t = (In,t                  n Kn,t ) dt,   n = 1, 2
                                                     2
                                                     X                                             2
                                                                                                   X
                                                             Rn,t Kn,t + Wt Lt + t =                     Qn,t In,t + Ct
                                                     n=1                                           n=1


Here,  is the household's discount factor,         1 is the intertemporal elasticity of substi-
                              2
tution in consumption, { n }n=1 is the rate of depreciation of capital, and the vector Xt
collects all variables that are either exogenous or taken as given by the household when
making consumption plans: Xt = {Wt , Lt , t , R1,t , R2,t , Q1,t , Q2,t }. In particular, the prices
of investment goods, {Qn,t }2n=1 , and labor supply, Lt , all evolve exogenously, following:


                                          dQn,t = gQn Qn,t dt,                        n = 1, 2
                                                 dLt = gL Lt dt.

Equilibrium An equilibrium is a set of deterministic sequences for all endogenous vari-
ables such that (1) given the exogenous processes for labor, productivity, and the prices of
capital goods, the endogenous variables satisfy the solution to the firm's problem and solve
the representative consumer's problem; and (2) the price of consumption goods and their



                                                                      42
marginal cost of production are related through:

                                            Pt = µM Ct ,

where µ > 1 is the exogenous price-cost markup. Finally, in equilibrium, we normalize the
price level to Pt = 1, so that all other prices are expressed relative to consumption goods.

A.1.1.2   Balanced growth path

We next derive the unique stationary, or balanced growth, equilibrium of the model. Define
an aggregate price index for capital goods Qt as:

                                         Qt = Q1   
                                               1,t Q2,t .


Next, define the trend growth factor Xt as:
                                                      1            
                                      TX,t = Lt Zt1       
                                                             Qt   1 
                                                                       ,

and define the detrended variables:

                                             Ct
                                      ct 
                                            TX,t
                                            W t Lt
                                  wt 
                                            TX,t
                                             t
                                   t 
                                            TX,t
                                            Qn,t In,t
                                  in,t                ,       n = 1, 2
                                             TX,t
                                            Qn,t Kn,t
                                 kn,t                 ,           n = 1, 2
                                             TX,t
                                            Rn,t
                               Rd,n,t            ,    n = 1, 2
                                            Qn,t
                                            Rt
                                 Rd,t 
                                            Qt
                                             Yt
                                      yt 
                                            TX,t
                                            Q t Kt
                                      kt 
                                             Tt
                                                 43
Moreover, define the trend growth rate (the growth rate of TX,t ), the capital price growth
rate (the growth rate of Qt ), and the discount rate r as:

                                                             1                      
                                          g  gL +                      gZ               gQ ,
                                                        1             1 
                                          gQ  (1         ) g Q1 +  g Q2 ,
                                          r   + g.

Using these detrended variables, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation corresponding to
the household's problem can be written as:

                                                                     2
                                                                     X
                                              c1
                                               t
    (r    g ) u(kt , xt ) = max                         +                   (in,t      (g +     n   gQn ) kn,t ) ukn ,t (kt , xt )
                               c t ,i t      1
                                                             Xn=1
                                                        +              x
                                                                        j,t uxj ,t (kt , xt )
                                                                 j
                                           2
                                           X                                        2
                                                                                    X
                              s.t.               Rd,n,t kn,t + wt + t =                   in,t + ct
                                           n=1                                      n=1


where it = {in,t }2                   2                                                                   1
                    n=1 , kt = {kn,t }n=1 , xt = {wt , t , Rd,1,t , Rd,2,t }, u(kt , xt ) = U (Kt , Xt )/TX,t ,
           dxj,t
     j,t  dt
and x            . After simplifications, the two Euler equations associated with this problem
can be written as:
                  2                                2
                                                                               !
               X                                  X                              ckn ,t
                     Rd,n,t kn,t + wt + t ct           ( n + g gQn )kn,t                  =
                n=1                               n=1
                                                                                    c t

                                                   P
                        Rd,n,t (r + n gQn ) + j x          j,t uxj kn ,t
                                                                         ,    n = 1, 2 .

A balanced growth path is defined as an equilibrium where detrended variables are constant:
x                      n,t = 0, n = 1, 2, and so on. Detrended variables without a time index
  j,t = 0 for all j , k
indicate these constant values.
            n,t = in,t (g + n gQn )kn,t , n = 1, 2, on the balanced growth path,
     Since k

                                in,t = in = (g +         n           g Q n ) kn ,   n = 1, 2 .

Plugging this into the first-order condition, and using the budget constraint of the household
and the fact that x
                   j,t = 0 for all j , we obtain that along the balanced growth path, detrended
user costs must satisfy:

                               Rd,n,t = Rd,n = r +               n        g Qn ,    n = 1, 2 ,
                                                             44
the standard Hall-Jorgenson formula. rest of the balanced growth path is then given by:

                           1
                  MC =
                           µ
                                           1                 
                                Rd,1                  Rd,2
                    Rd =
                               1                       

                     y = k
                                        1 1
                                
                     k=
                               µRd
                           1       
                     w=                k
                               µ
                           µ       1
                     =                 k
                               µ
                                           Rd
                    k1 = (1        )            k
                                           Rd,1
                               Rd
                    k2 =            k
                               Rd,2

                    in = (g +          n     gQn )kn = (Rd,n             (r    g ))kn ,   n = 1, 2 .

A.1.1.3    Chained GDP growth vs. growth of output in consumption units

Finally, we discuss the relationship between growth of output in consumption units, dY
                                                                                     Yt
                                                                                       t
                                                                                         , and
chained GDP growth, the usual empirical measures of real output. This discussion follows
Oulton (2007).
   First, note that we assume that measured nominal output is the sum of consumption
expenditures, plus measured investment expenditures:

                                                  ^t = Pt Ct + Q1,t I1,t ,
                                               Pt Y

         ^t is measured nominal output (with Pt referring to the price of consumption goods,
where Pt Y
and Y^t measured output in consumption units); Ct is consumption; and Q1,t I1,t are measured
                                                                            dY^ ch
investment expenditures. In our model, measured chained GDP growth, Y        ^ ch , is defined as
                                                                               t
                                                                              t
the share-weighted growth rate of real consumption and measured real investment:

                                   dY^ ch                          dCt          dI1,t
                                      t
                                           (1           sI1 ,t )       + sI1 ,t       ,
                                    ^
                                   Yt ch                            Ct          I1,t


                                                             45
where the share of investment in measured nominal GDP is:

                                                     Q1,t I1,t
                                            sI,t               ,
                                                      Pt Y^t

where variables are defined as above. By contrast, since we have:

                                       ^t = Ct + (Q1,t /Pt )I1,t ,
                                       Y

growth of measured output in consumption units is given by:

                        ^t                                                                    
                      dY                    dCt               dI1,t dQ1,t               dPt
                           = (1    sI1 ,t )     + sI1 ,t            +                            .
                       ^t
                       Y                     Ct                I1,t   Q1,t              Pt

Therefore, chained GDP growth is not equal to the growth rate of measured output in
consumption units. Instead:

                                ^tch      ^t                                 
                              dY        dY                     dQ1,t   dPt
                                             =     sI1 ,t                           .
                               ^tch
                               Y         ^t
                                         Y                      Q1,t   Pt

It is straightforward to see that this bias remains nonzero even in the balanced growth path.
(Note that in the balanced growth path, since we normalize Pt = 1, the expression boils
down to sI1 ,t dQ  1,t
                 Q1,t
                       ; however, dQ  1,t
                                    Q1,t
                                          should then be interpreted as the change of the price of
measured investment goods relative the price of consumption goods.)
    Next, assume that, instead of measuring output growth using output in consumption
units (as we do in our baseline approach), we were to measure it using chained GDP growth.
                        dZ^tch
Then, denoting by ch           the Solow residual obtained using chained GDP growth, since our
                         ^t
                         Z
other measures of input growth and input shares are unchanged, we have:

                                 ^tch     ^t                                 
                               dZ       dZ                    dQ1,t    dPt
                                      =           sI1 ,t                        .
                               Z^tch     ^t
                                         Z                     Q1,t    Pt

Note that, consistent with dQ   1,t
                              Q1,t
                                    < dPPt
                                          t
                                            , Table A2 shows that the Solow residual obtained using
chained GDP growth is higher than the one obtained using growth of output in consumption
units.
   The rest of the derivations regarding the bias between the true rate of growth of neutral
                                               dZ^t
technology, dZ t
                 , and the Solow   residual         , is unchanged. Therefore, we can express the bias
             Zt
                                               Z^t
between the chained GDP Solow residual, and the true growth rate of neutral technology,


                                                    46
as:
                                      dZ^tch    dZt            (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)
                                                    =          t     +     t     +       t     +   t ,
                                      Z^tch     Zt
                          (1)     (2)            (3)
where the terms           t ,     t ,   and      t     are defined as in the baseline model, and:
                                                                                           
                                               (4)                      dQ1,t        dPt
                                               t            sI1 ,t                             .
                                                                         Q1,t        Pt

In other words, with the chained GDP Solow residual, the analysis of the baseline text is
unchanged, except that there is a fourth bias term. This term reflects the fact that with
investment-specific technical change of the form assumed in our baseline model, the chained
GDP Solow residual does not appropriately measure the growth rate of neutral technology.
                                                                     (4)
In our baseline approach, rather than adding the fourth bias terms t , we instead measure
the Solow residual using the growth rate of output in consumption units; as the previous
                                                                                       (4)
discussion shows, the two approaches are equivalent, up to the additional bias term, t .

A.1.1.4       Additional results and proofs

We next state the following result about the case of no markups (µ = 1), and provide a proof
below.

Result 5. Assume that µ = 1, = 1, and that the stock of intangibles is growing (dK2,t /K2,t >
0, or g > gQ2 ). Then, along the balanced growth path, TFP growth is biased downward
( < 0), if and only if: gQ2 g
                            ¯2 ( ), where:

                                               gL +     2                
                                 g
                                 ¯2 ( ) =                   gZ +                         g Q1 + O (  ) .                      (21)
                                                +       2             + gL +         2


In particular, if     2       , measured TFP growth is biased downward, if and only if: gQ2 > gZ .30

Proof. [Result 5] Along the balanced growth path, using the fact that                                       = 1, we have:

                 (r       g ) (g Q2     g Q1 ) + ( g + 2             g Q2 ) (g Z       gQ1 (1 +  ) (gQ2             gQ1 ))
       = 
                                              r g + (1                ) (g +         2    g Q2 )

                  ( g Q2        gQ1 ) + (g + 2 gQ2 ) (gZ gQ1 (1 +  ) (gQ2                                  gQ1 ))
       =                                                                                                                     when    =1
                                           + (1  ) (g + 2 gQ2 )




  30
       The proof is reported in Appendix A.1.1.4, and illustrated in Appendix Figure A1 illustrates the result.
                                                                     47
The stock of intangibles is growing if and only:

         dK2,t
               >0     () g         g Q2 > 0
          K2,t
                                        1                           1     + 
                      () gL +                  (gZ   g Q1 )                  ( g Q2              g Q1 ) > 0
                                    1                                   1 

Define   x  g Q2    gQ1 . Then:

                                             1         +                1
           g   g Q2 > 0       () gL +            (gZ       g Q1 )
                                                          x>0
                                     1               1 
                                                 
                                             1          1
                                    ¯ ( ) 
                              () x  x             gL +    ( g Z g Q1 )
                                           1  +        1 

Thus intangible capital is growing so long as x  x ¯( ). In that case, note that the sign of
the total bias only depends on the sign of its numerator. The sign of the numerator in is
the same as the sign of:

                    (x,  ) = (x         B ( )) (x         C ( ))        A(  ) x
                                   (1
                                 )(1 +  )
                     A(  )                
                               1  + 
                            g Z g Q1
                     B ( ) 
                             1 +                                                                 
                               1             1
                     C ( )             gL +    (gZ                                g Q1 ) +   2
                            1  +            1 

The minimum of (.,  ) is attained at x  ^ ( )  1
                                               2
                                                 (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( )). Moreover, a su cient
condition for x       ¯( ) for all  is:
              ^ ( ) > x

                                         
                          2   +>                 (gZ                gQ1 ) + gL . (1)
                                   (1   )(1 +  )

The discriminant of the polynomial          (.,  ) can be rewritten as:

D( ) = (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( ))2          4BC ( ) = (C ( )                B ( ))2 + A( )(A( ) + 2(B ( ) + C ( )))

A su cient condition for D( ) > 0 for all  is:

                                        gZ       gQ1 > 0. (2)




                                                     48
Assume conditions that (1) and (2) hold. Then, given that D(.,  ) is a convex function with
global minimum x^( ),

                 D(x,  ) < 0     and     g > g Q2     ()                    ¯ ( ),
                                                                x1 (  )  x  x

where x1 is the smallest root of the polynominal        (x):
                                                      s                                  !
                   1                                                 4B (  ) C (  )
           x1 ( ) = (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( )) 1             1
                   2                                           (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( ))2

The threshold reported in the Result is therefore given by:

                                       ¯2 ( )  gQ1 + x1 ( ).
                                       g

For the expansion, assume that C ( ), A( )          B ( ). Then:
                                                       s                              !
                      1                                             4B (  ) C (  )
          x1 (  ) =     (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( )) 1         1
                      2                                       (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( ))2
                      1                                  B ( )C ( )
                 =      (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( )) 2                            + O ( )
                      2                          (A( ) + B ( ) + C ( ))2
                           B ( )C ( )
                 =                         + O ( )
                      A( ) + B ( ) + C ( )
                        gL + 2
                 =               ( g Z g Q1 ) + O (  ) .
                       + gL + 2



    Appendix Figure A1 illustrates this result. In a first parameter region (highlighted in
blue), the price of omitted capital is growing too slowly to generate negative measurement
error in TFP growth, while in the second one (highlighted in green), the price of omitted
capital is growing su ciently fast so as to generate negative measurement bias. The frontier
between the two regions -- corresponding to the threshold g  ¯2 ( ) in Result 5 -- depends on
 , the Cobb-Douglas intangible share, but, as indicated by Result 5, its slope is small.


A.1.2     Gross output model
This appendix provides more details on the results relating to gross-output production func-
tions. The main dierence is that gross output is not mismeasured, but its components are,
which will contribute to mismeasured productivity growth as in the value-added approach.

                                                49
A.1.2.1      General results

Assume that gross output is given by Xt = ZX,t G(Mt , Lt , Kt ), where G is homogeneous of
degree 1, Mt are intermediate inputs, and ZX,t is "gross output" total factor productivity.31
Define the "gross output" Solow residual as:

               dZbX,t   dX^t                 ct
                                            dM                bt
                                                             dL                                         bt
                                                                                                       dK
                      =            bX,M,t
                                   s                bX,L,t
                                                    s                  (1      bX,M,t
                                                                               s            bX,L,t )
                                                                                            s              .   (22)
                bX,t
                Z        ^t
                         X                  Mct              Lbt                                       Kbt

      bX,M,t and s
Here, s          bX,L,t are the shares of intermediate input and labor in gross output:

                                              bM,t M
                                              P    ct                       W t Lt
                                  bX,M,t 
                                  s                   ,      bX,L,t 
                                                             s                     ,                           (23)
                                               Pt X t                       Pt X t

and P bM,t M
           ct is nominal expenditure on intermediate inputs.
     Analogous to the value added case, we are interested in whether the gross-output Solow
residual is a biased measure of gross-output TFP growth when there are markups and omit-
ted intangibles. Markups are defined as the wedge between the price of consumption goods,
                                                       Pt
Pt , and the marginal cost of gross output, µX,t  M C   X,t
                                                            .32 With omitted intangibles, gross
output is always correctly measured. Omitting intangibles only aects its distribution be-
tween purchases of intermediates and purchases of investment goods.
     As before, denoting by Bt misclassified purchases of intangibles, we have: P   bM,t M
                                                                                         ct =
PM,t Mt Bt , where PM,t Mt are actual purchases of intermediate inputs. Similar to the ratio
                                           PM,t Mt
bt in the value added case, the ratio ct =          1 captures the amount of mismeasurement
                                           bM,t M
                                           P    ct
due to omitted intangibles; in particular, when ct = 1, there is no mismeasurement.

Result 6. Assume that labor and intermediate inputs are chosen to minimize total variable
cost PM,t Mt +Wt Lt . Then, the bias in the gross-output Solow residual, relative to gross-output
TFP growth, can be written as:

                   dZ^X,t    dZX,t                           (1)       (2,L)           (2,M )       (3)
                                              X,t   =        X,t   +   X,t     +       X,t      +   X,t .      (24)
                   Z^X,t     ZX,t

The components of the bias in the gross-output Solow residual, relative to gross-output TFP

  31
      The terminology "multi-factor productivity" is sometimes used to refer to ZX,t , but we use "gross
output" TFP in order to distinguish it from the notion of productivity in our value-added approach.
   32
      Note that µX,t is a gross-output, or a sales, markup. Under cost minimization and constant returns, we
have µt = (µX,t X,M,t )/(1 X,M,t ) µX,t , where X,M,t is the elasticity of gross output with respect to
intermediate inputs. This can also be written as µt = µX,t (1 ct s  ^X,M,t )/(1 ct µX,t s
                                                                                        ^X,M,t ). Additionally,
as in the case of the value-added approach, we assume that Xt is expressed in units of consumption goods.
                                                        50
growth, are given by:
                                                 !
     (1)                      dMt      dM^t
     X,t       = s
                 ^X,M,t                                                          (intermediate growth bias)
                              Mt        ^t
                                        M
                                                               !
     (2,L)
                                                  ^t
                                                 dK      dLt
     X,t       =     s
                     ^X,L,t (µX,t      1)                                                  (labor share bias)
                                                 K^t     Lt
                                                                    !                                                (25)
     (2,M )                                       dK^t       dMt
     X,t       =     s
                     ^X,M,t (µX,t ct        1)                                      (intermediate share bias)
                                                   ^t
                                                   K         Mt
                                                                      !
     (3)                                               dKt     dK^t
     X,t       = (1       (X,L,t + X,M,t ))                                             (capital growth bias)
                                                       Kt       ^t
                                                                K

and X,L,t and X,M,t are the elasticities of gross output with respect to labor and intermediate
input, respectively.
    The similarities and dierences with respect to the value added case are the following.
    First, there is no mis-measurement in gross output growth (whereas, in the value-added
                                                                       (1)
approach, output growth is potentially mismeasured). The term X,t instead reflects mis-
measurement in the growth rate of intermediate inputs.
    Second, the labor share of gross output s
                                            ^X,L,t is not aected by the omission of intangibles,
because gross output and the wage bill are correctly measured (whereas, in the value-added
approach, the omission of intangibles can aect the measurement of the labor share). Thus,
                        (2,L)
the labor share bias X,t only reflects markups.
    Third, the intermediate share of gross output s  ^X,M,t is aected by the omission of intan-
                                                        (2,M )
gibles. This creates an "intermediate share" bias, X,t , the expression of which is closely
analogous to the "labor share bias" in Result 3.
                                                                                  (3)
    Finally, the mismeasurement of capital growth rates also creates a bias, X,t , with the
same intuition as in the value added case.

A.1.2.2       Model

Next, we describe a version of our model in which firms use a gross output production
function. We then derive results on measurement bias in this model along the balanced
growth path.

Firm The representative firm solves:

                    2
                    X                                                                            
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                     1  
T CX,t = min              Rn,t Kn,t + Wt Lt + PM,t Mt             s.t.    ZX,t      K1 ,t K2,t      L1
                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                Mt    Xt
           Kt ,Lt
                    n=1
                                                             51
where T CX,t denotes total costs of production, Kt = {Kn,t }2   n=1 is a vector of capital inputs,
with K1,t the measured capital input, and K2,t the omitted intangible input, Lt is labor
input, {Rn,t }2
              n=1 is a vector of user costs, Wt is the wage rate, Mt are intermediate inputs,
ZX,t is total factor productivity (over all factors), is the elasticity of output with respect
to intermediate inputs, (1 )(1          ) is the elasticity of output with respect to labor,  is
                                                     1  
the elasticity of the total capital input Kt = K1     ,t K2,t with respect to intangibles. Total
factor productivity (over all factors, including gross output) evolves exogenously, following:

                                              dZX,t = gZX ZX,t dt.

The price of intermediate goods also evolves exogenously, following:

                                             dPM,t = gM PM,t dt.

Define M CX,t , the marginal cost of capital, labor, and intermediates , to be the Lagrange
multiplier on the constraint. The solution to this problem is:

              T Ct = M CX,t Yt                                                                          (26)
                                                                 (1   )(1 )                    (1   )
                       1        PM,t                   Wt                             Rt
           M CX,t   =
                      ZX,t                     (1      )(1   )                   (1        )

                                  Xt
               Mt = M CX,t
                                PM,t

                                (1        )(1 )Xt
                Lt = M CX,t
                                           Wt

                                (1        ) Xt
               Kt = M CX,t
                                       Rt
                      1  
               K t = K1 ,t K2,t

                                 1                  
                          R1,t               R2,t
               Rt =
                         1                    

                                 Rt
              K1,t = (1      )        Kt
                                 R1,t

                        Rt
              K2,t =         Kt                                                                         (27)
                        R2,t

                                                        52
The firm's revenue is St = Pt Xt and its profits are t = Pt Xt     T CX,t = (Pt   M CX,t )Xt ,
where Pt is the price of consumption goods.

Household The representative household solves the same problem as in the model with a
value added production function, so we do not re-state it here.

Equilibrium An equilibrium is a set of deterministic sequences for all endogenous variables
such that (1) given the exogenous processes for labor, productivity, the price of intermediate
goods, and the prices of capital goods, the endogenous variables satisfy the solution to
the firm's problem and solve the representative consumer's problem; and (2) the price of
consumption goods and their marginal cost of production are related through:

                                       Pt = µX M CX,t ,

where µX > 1 is the exogenous price-cost markup of price over the marginal cost of labor,
capital, and intermediate inputs -- the gross output markup, for short. Finally, in equilib-
rium, we normalize the price level to Pt = 1, so that all other prices are expressed relative
to consumption goods.

A.1.2.3    Equivalence with the value added model

Aggregate accounting Intermediate output was introduced above assuming a "round-
about" production function, where the representative firm both produces consumption goods,
and uses consumption goods as intermediate input (converting them to intermediate output
at rate Pt /PM,t ) within the same period, while still behaving as though it were purchasing
consumption goods from a perfectly competitive market.
    Using the normalization Pt = 1, gross output is given by:
                                                         1
                                      1   
                     Xt = ZX,t       K1 ,t K2,t    L1
                                                    t
                                                      
                                                             Mt

                          = Wt Lt + R1,t K1,t + R2,t K2,t + PM,t Mt + t

                          = Ct + Q1,t I1,t + Q2,t I2,t + PM,t Mt

The first relationship uses the definition of the production function (the output approach),
the second uses the definition firm profits (the income approach), and the third relationship
uses the budget constraint of the household (the expenditure approach). Value added is



                                              53
defined as:
                                Yt  X t            PM,t Mt

                                     = Wt Lt + R1,t K1,t + R2,t K2,t

                                     = Ct + Q1,t I1,t + Q2,t I2,t .
The second line is the income approach definition of GDP, and the third line is the expen-
diture approach to GDP.

Value added representation The following result describes the equivalence between the
value added and gross output models.

Result 7. Define:
                                                                               !11
                                   µX                  ZX,t      PM,t
                              Zt =
                                    1                  µX                                          (28)
                                   µX
                               µ =
                                    1
Then, all quantities and prices in the gross output model are the same as in a value added
model where total factor productivity Zt and markups µ are given by Equation (28).33

    This equivalence result says that one can think of the value-added model as being derived
from an underlying gross output model. The expressions in (28) then highlights two points.
First, the link between the (value-added) markup µ in the value added model and the (gross
output) markup µX in the gross output model depends on the intermediate share . Second,
value-added TFP growth gZ in the value-added model is related to gross-output TFP growth
                       1
gZX through: gZ =          (gZ~    gPM ). Value-added TFP in the value-added model should
                     1
therefore be thought of as reflecting a combination of technical change and change in the
price of intermediate products. This equivalence result implies that all the result results
regarding how the simple value-added Solow residual dZ/  ^ Z^t potentially mis-measures value-
added TFP, gZ , follow through in the gross output model.

Proof. [Result 7] Since the household's problem is the same in both models, we only need to
show (1) that the first-order conditions of the firm's problem are the same as in the value-
added model, under the definitions of value-added TFP Zt and markups µ given above; and
(2) that Yt and M Ct defined as:

                                                         1              
                                    Yt = Z t L 1
                                               t
                                                    
                                                        K1 ,t K2,t         ,                       (29)
  33
    This is with the exception of intermediate inputs Mt , gross output marginal cost M CX,t , and gross
output Xt , which are undefined in the value-added model.
                                                       54
                                                                  1                   
                                            1            Wt                      Rt
                                     M Ct =                                               .             (30)
                                            Zt          1                        

indeed measure value added and its marginal cost in the gross output model.
   Combining the first-order conditions for capital and labor from the firm's problem in the
gross output model, (26), we obtain (for any Zt ):

                                                           M CX,t
                                     Zt Kt L1
                                            t
                                                  
                                                      =           (1              )Xt ,                 (31)
                                                           M Ct

where we defined M Ct as in Equation (30). Plugging this back into the first-order conditions
for capital and labor, this implies that they are the same as in the value added model:

                                                      (1       ) M C t Yt
                                             Wt =
                                                              Lt

                                                      M Ct Yt
                                             Rt =
                                                       Lt

where Yt is defined as in equation (29). Note, additionally, that equation (31) implies:

                                         M Ct Yt = (1                )M CX,t Xt .                       (32)

In the equilibrium of the gross output model, M CX,t = µX1 . Therefore:

                                     1                                                        !11
                                          
                             Lt                 Kt                ZX,t        PM,t
                                                          =                                         .
                         1                                        µX

Therefore, using the definitions of Zt and µ
                                                                     1                
                                            1                Lt                  Kt
                                     M Ct =
                                            Zt           1                       

                                                  1                  1
                                             =                =        .
                                                 µX                  µ

This proves that 1 = Pt = µM Ct , as in the value-added model. Additionally, it implies that:

                                             M CX,t   µX                    1
                                                    =                         .
                                             M Ct      1                   µX




                                                             55
Therefore:
                                                            
                        Xt     PM,t Mt =       1               Xt
                                                       µX

                                            µX          M Ct
                                        =                      (1            ) Yt
                                              µX        M CX,t

                                            µX          µX (1       )
                                        =                               (1          ) Yt
                                              µX         µX

                                        = Yt ,

where to go from the first to the second line, we used equation (32). So Yt indeed measures
value added. Moreover:

                 M Ct Yt = M CX,t Xt        M CX,t Xt = T CX,t               PM,t Mt = T Ct

where T Ct is the total cost of production of output minus intermediate costs. So M Ct
measures the marginal cost of value added.

A.1.2.4      Balanced growth

For completeness, we next report the balanced growth expressions for the solution of the
gross output model. The steps are the same as for the value added model, so we do not
detail them. Define the aggregate price index for capital goods Qt as:

                                         Qt = Q1   
                                               1,t Q2,t .


Next, define the trend growth factor TX,t as:
                                               1             
                                        (1     )(1 )        1      (1   )(1 )
                             TX,t = Lt ZX,t            Qt        PM,t               ,

and define the detrended variables:

                                               Ct
                                      ct                                                      (33)
                                              TX,t
                                              W t Lt
                                     wt                                                       (34)
                                              TX,t
                                              PM,t Mt
                                    mt                                                        (35)
                                               TX,t
                                                   56
                                                      t
                                             t                                                        (36)
                                                     TX,t
                                                     Qn,t In,t
                                          in,t                 ,      n = 1, 2                        (37)
                                                      TX,t
                                                     Qn,t Kn,t
                                         kn,t                  ,        n = 1, 2                      (38)
                                                      TX,t
                                                     Rn,t
                                    Rd,n,t                ,       n = 1, 2                            (39)
                                                     Qn,t
                                                     Rt
                                         Rd,t                                                         (40)
                                                     Qt
                                                     Xt
                                             xt                                                       (41)
                                                     TX,t
                                                     Q t Kt
                                             kt                                                       (42)
                                                     TX,t

Moreover, define the trend growth rate (the growth rate of TX,t ), the capital price growth
rate (the growth rate of Qt ), and the discount rate r as:
                                                                                  
                                             1                                           
                     g  gL +                            gZX                g PM                gQ ,
                                         1                        1                  1      
                     gQ  (1               ) g Q1 +  g Q2 ,

                     r   + g.

Note that gZ = gZX     1
                              gPM , where Zt is defined in Equation (28). Detrended user costs
must satisfy:
                           Rd,n,t = Rd,n = r +                n       g Qn ,   n = 1, 2 ,

the standard Hall-Jorgenson formula. The balanced growth path is then given by:

                            1
                 MC =
                           µX
                                      1                    
                               Rd,1                 Rd,2
                  Rd =
                              1                      
                                    (1                                  1 
                                             )(1 )      (1     )
                     x=
                              µX                          µX R d



                                                            57
                          (1     )
                     k=            x
                            µX R d

                    m=         x
                          µX

                          (1       )(1          )
                     w=                             x
                                   µX

                          µX 1
                     =         x
                           µX

                                       Rd
                    k1 = (1        )        k
                                       Rd,1

                            Rd
                    k2 =         k
                            Rd,2

                    in = (g +      n     gQn )kn = (Rd,n              (r      g ))kn ,   n = 1, 2 .

A.1.2.5    TFP measurement on the balanced growth path

Assumptions We make the same assumptions about (mis)measurement in aggregate ac-
counts as we do in the analysis of Section 2. First, gross output Xt is correctly measured.
Second, measured value added excludes Q2,t I2,t . We have:

                                           bt = Yt
                                           Y                      Q2,t I2,t

                                                    = Xt          P\M,t Mt


                                   P\M,t Mt = PM,t Mt + Q2,t I2,t



Here, P  \M,t Mt is measured nominal purchases of intermediates (which are too large, because

Q2,t I2,t is misclassified). In what follows, we use the following two ratios (the first of which
is also the one we use in the analysis of the value-added model):

                                                        bt
                                                        Y
                                        bt =
                                                        Yt
                                                             PM,t Mt
                                        ct =
                                                        PM,t Mt + Q2,t I2,t




                                                             58
The case of no omitted intangibles corresponds to  = 0. Using the expressions from Section
A.1.2.4, we obtain that along the balanced growth path:

                                                 1          g + 2 g Q2
                            bt = b = 1                                  
                                                µX         + g + 2 g Q2
                                                1         g + 2 g Q2
                            ct = c = 1                                 
                                                          + g + 2 g Q2

The expression for bt is the same as Equation (14), for the value-added model, when µ =
µX
  1
      . These expressions indicate that there are no omitted intangibles ( = 0), if and only
if, b = 1 and c = 0.

Mis-measurement of value-added TFP growth (gZ ) Recall that in the gross output
model, value-added TFP (in levels) is defined as:

                                                                             !11
                                     µX             ZX,t         PM,t
                              Zt =                                                     ,
                                      1             µX

so that, in growth rates.
                                                1
                                     gZ =              ( g ZX          g PM ) .
                                            1
Given the equivalence between the gross output and value added approaches developed in
Result (7), all the results of Section 2 on the mis-measurement of value-added TFP growth
go through. Define the (value-added) Solow residual as:

                              dZ^t   dY^t              dL^t                        dK^t
                                   =            s
                                                ^L,t              (1      s
                                                                          ^L,t )        ,
                              Z^t     ^t
                                      Y                 ^t
                                                        L                           ^t
                                                                                    K

where s
      ^L,t is the labor share of value added, which, on the balanced growth path, is given
by:

                                   W t Lt   (1   )(1/µX )                                   1        
                    s
                    ^L,t = s
                           ^L =           =               (1                       ) =                  .
                                    ^t
                                    Y        b(1   /µX )                                        bµ

Then dZ ^t /Z
            ^t is a biased measure of gZ , and the bias can be decomposed into a capital growth
bias (which is zero whenever there are no omitted intangibles), and a labor share bias (which
is driven by markups, but can amplify the omitted capital bias), and their expressions are
given as in (4).



                                                       59
Mis-measurement of gross output TFP growth (gZX ) This model also has predictions
for the bias between the gross-output Solow residual dZ^X,t /Z
                                                             ^X,t , and gross-output TFP
growth gZX , in the presence of markups and omitted intangibles, analogous to Result 6.
These predictions are summarized in the follow result.

Result 8. Assume that the growth rate of intermediate goods prices is correctly measured.
Then, along the balanced growth path:

                                                        (1)           (2,M )            (2,L)       (3)
                             X,t   =       X   =        X     +       X        +        X       +   X                 (43)

         (1)
where    X     = 0, and:

               (2,L)                   µX 1
               X        =   (1     )        (gZ     g Q1       (gQ2            gQ1 ))           (labor share bias)
                                        µX

               (2,M )        µX c 1
               X        =           ( g PM     g Q1 )                                     (intermediate share bias)
                              µX c

               (3)
               X        =   (1     ) (gQ2      g Q1 )                                       (capital growth bias),

                                                                  1       g+        2       g Q2
where along the balanced growth path, c = 1                                                       .
                                                                          r+        2       g Q2
    Result (8) reports expressions for the components of the bias between the gross output
Solow residual and gross output TFP growth, derived from applying to balanced growth
solution to Result (6). In this result, we have assumed that the real growth rate of actual
intermediate inputs, which is equal to g gPM in the balanced growth path, is the same as the
real growth rate of measured intermediate inputs. The latter growth rates depends on the
measured growth rate for intermediate inputs, gP  ^M . If this growth rate is correctly measured,

the contribution of mismeasurement of intermediate input growth along the balanced growth
path (the term X,1,t ) is zero; otherwise, the contribution of this term is equal to µX (gPM
gP^M ).

    An important dierence with the value-added case is that, so long as dK        ^ t /K
                                                                                       ^ t > dLt /Lt
(the empirically relevant case), the labor share bias will be (weakly) negative. Thus, a
su cient condition for the overall bias to be negative is gQ2 > gPM > gQ1 . As discussed in
Section 3, this condition is empirically plausible, as the types of intangible investments most
likely to be misclassified as omitted intangibles are also among the intermediate goods with
highest relative price growth.
    In the empirical applications, we focus on quantifying mis-measurement of value-added
TFP growth gZ by the value-added Solow residual dZ        ^t /Z
                                                              ^t , and not on mismeasurement of
gZX using the gross-output Solow residual dZ   ^X,t /Z
                                                     ^X,t . We make this choice because we are
                                                           60
interested in understanding trends in value-added TFP growth which can be compared with
the relevant literature, but, in principle, the analysis could be extended to gross-output TFP
growth.


A.2       Empirics
This section of the appendix provides more details on the empirical analysis.


A.2.1     The decline in measured TFP growth
In order to document the decline in measured TFP growth, we use the time series constructed
by Fernald (2014). This data covers the period 1947q1-2020q1, and provides measures of
the growth rate of real output, labor input, capital input, and the labor share, for the
business sector. This comprises all corporate and non-corporate for-profit businesses, as well
as other business entities, such as non-profits and certain government agencies; see Bureau
of Economic Analysis (2017).
    We make one main modification to the data of Fernald (2014): in Solow residual com-
putations, we use the growth rate of GDP in consumption units. In computing the Solow
residual, Fernald (2014) use the quarterly growth rate of real value added by businesses in
chained dollars (NIPA table 1.3.6; FRED series A195RX1Q020SBEA). Instead, we use the
quarterly growth rate in the ratio of nominal value added by businesses (NIPA Table 1.3.5;
FRED series A195RC1Q027SBEA) to the implicit price deflator for personal consumption
expenditures (NIPA Table 1.1.9; FRED series DPCERD3Q086SBEA).
    We choose to do this because, in our balanced growth model, the notion of output we
consider, Yt , is directly defined in consumption units, and is not necessarily equal to chained
GDP growth. We explain this point, which is explained more generally in Oulton 2007, in
Appendix A.1.1.3. We compare below the results of the simple growth accounting decom-
position when chained GDP growth is used instead of the growth of output in consumption
units.
    Other than this dierence, three points about these data are worth noting. First, the data
on capital input growth are constructed from estimated stocks for nine types of capital, in-
cluding specific estimated stocks for R&D capital and software. These stocks are themselves
derived from NIPA series on investment capitalized using perpetual inventory methods. The
nine types of capital are: land; business inventory; business residential real estate; informa-
tion processing equipment; other equipment; structures; software; R&D; artistic originals.
Investment in dierent capital goods is deflated using capital-specific price indices, so that

                                              61
the resulting growth rates in stocks are real. Aggregate capital growth is obtained by weight-
ing these series by their estimated user cost shares. Second, the labor share is measured as
the ratio of total labor payments to total value added; the capital share is obtained as the
residual (one minus the labor share), as opposed to being directly imputed from estimates of
the user cost of capital. Proprietor's income, in particular, is allocated so as to ensure that
the aggregate labor share is equal to the labor share of non-financial corporations. Third,
the data also contain an adjustment for variable capacity utilization; we compare trends
with and without this adjustment below.
    Figure 1 reports the time-series for TFP growth without adjustments for capacity uti-
lization, defined as the simple Solow residual:

                             dZ^t   dY^t           dL^t                 dK^t
                                  =         s
                                            ^L,t          (1   s
                                                               ^L,t )                        (44)
                              ^t
                              Z     Y^t             ^t
                                                    L                    ^t
                                                                         K

       ^t /Y
where dY   ^t denotes the growth rate of output in consumption units,

                                                     W t Lt
                                           s
                                           ^L,t =                                            (45)
                                                      Nt

denotes the labor share in nominal business value added, Nt , dL  ^ t /L
                                                                       ^ t denotes the growth rate
of labor, and dK  ^ t /K
                       ^ t denotes the measured growth rate of capital. The series show that,
after a period of rapid increase in the early to mid-1990's, TFP growth reach a plateau,
and then declined. This decline lasted until late 2007, but was not followed by a persistent
rebound; instead, productivity growth has remained subdued since 2010.
    Table 1 reports simple averages on the decline in TFP growth, comparing the 1947-1996
period, to the 1997-2018 period. Before 1997, TFP growth in the US had been, on average,
1.11% per year; after 1995, it fell to 0.62% per year, a 0.49% decline. By contrast, between
the two periods, growth of output in consumption units fell by 0.92%; 0.43% of that decline
is therefore attributable to a decline in input growth, and the rest to the TFP growth decline.
Additionally, the labor share of income fell by 4 p.p. over the period. Finally, the last line in
the table highlights the fact that the utilization adjustment constructed by Fernald (2014)
using the methodology of Basu et al. (2013) only leads to a very small dierence in the
decline of measured TFP growth.
    Table A2 compares output growth and the Solow residuals obtained using output in con-
sumption units (our baseline approach), to the values obtained using chained GDP (the data
provided in Fernald (2014)). The table shows that the growth rate of GDP in consumption
units is lower than the growth rate of chained GDP by approximately 0.25% in both the
1947-1996 and 1997-2018 periods. As a result the Solow residual obtained using chained
                                                   62
GDP is higher than in our baseline approach (by 0.25%) in both periods. However, the
change in both GDP growth and the Solow residual is the almost identical under the two
approaches. This indicates that the bias created by the fact that Yt , in the model, does
not correspond to chained GDP in the data is stable across periods and does not aect our
measurement of the decline in the the Solow residual.


A.2.2        Methodology using only expenditure data
The value of the growth rate gQ2 such that all of the gap between true TFP growth and the
Solow residual g
               ^Z is due to mismeasurement is given by:
                                                  r                                                                      !
           1                                                                                 2
  g Q2   =        r
                  ^+   2    ^
                           +g        g
                                     ^K + ^            ^ + (^
                                                            r       ^
                                                                    g         gK +
                                                                             (^       2 ))           r
                                                                                                 + 4(^    ^)(^
                                                                                                          g  gK +   2)       ,
           2
       ^ =        s^L^
                     b
                                [~
                                 gZ        (^
                                            g     (1    )^
                                                         gL        g
                                                                   ^K )] ,
             (1   ^
                  b)(1      )

where r^= + g   ^. This result is derived as follows.
    Replacing gQ2 with x, and omitting the hat notation for measured variables, the condi-
tions from the balanced growth model are:

                           gZ = g           (1      )gL       gK +  (x                (g     gK ))
                                      1     
                           µ =
                                sb
                                1 br+                   2    x
                            = µ
                                  g+                    2    x

Substituting the expression for the markup,

                           gZ = g           (1      )gL       gK +  (x                (g     gK ))

                                      (1        b)(1    ) r +      2     x
                            =
                                                sb        g+       2     x

Substituting the expression for  into the expression for the production function,

                                                        (1       b)(1        ) r +    2      x
             gZ = g        (1     )gL            gK +                                          (x    (g    gK ))
                                                                  sb           g+     2      x

Let:
                                        sb
                                                       [gZ    (g        (1      )gL        gK )] ,
                                (1     b)(1       )

                                                             63
then we can write this as:

                         ((r +    2)   x) (x        (g     gK ))        (g +     2     x) = 0

Let:
                                               a  r+               2


                                               b  g             gK

                                               c  g+               2   <a
The solution must satisfy:
                                                 b < x < c < a.

Indeed, the condition b < x ensures that the implied growth rate of prices of omitted intan-
gible capital is higher than than the growth rate of prices of measured capital. The condition
x < c ensures that the detrended user cost of omitted intangible capital is strictly positive.
The equation for x can be rewritten as:

                                       (a   x) (x         b)     (c      x) = 0,

or:
                                            (a
                                            x)(x b)
                                                      = .
                                           c x
Using the fact that b < c < a, it can be shown that the left-hand side in this equation is a
strictly increasing mapping from ]b, c[ to ]0, +1[, so there is always a unique solution to this
equation in ]b, c[. The unique solution in this interval is given by:
                                               q                                                          
                     1                                                       2
                 x =           a+b+                 ( + ( a + b        2c)) + 4(a                c)(c    b) .
                     2

In terms of the original variables, the solution can be written as:
                                               q                                                                         
          1                                                                                  2
      x =        r+   2   +g      gK +          ( + ( r            g    (gK +        2 )))       + 4(r   g )(gK +   2)      ,
          2
                   sb
        =                        [gZ   (g      (1         )gL      gK )] .
            (1    b)(1     )




                                                           64
A.2.3       Other data sources
BLS price indices In Section 3.4, as an alternative empirical proxy for gQ2 , we use the
BLS' Producer Price Indices for commodities.34 There are a number of challenges in map-
ping these data to the Input-Output tables. The main one is that the level of aggregation
diers from that of the IO tables. Information on the producer prices for commodities are
substantially more granular than in the Input-Output tables; but it tends to be less granular
for service prices. We focus on BLS price indices reported at the 3- and 4-NAICS levels,
and match them, based on names, to the IO table classification. This matching is available
from the authors on request. Not all IO commodity and service groups are matched (for
instance, Data processing, in the IO tables, does not have a clear match to the BLS com-
modity groups), and for the IO groups with several more granular matches in the BLS PPI
tables, we take the simple average of prices across matches.
    Table A5 reports results from a simple regression using the matched BEA-BLS sample. In
                                                 (BEA)
all specifications, the dependent variable is gQ2 , the empirical proxy for gQ2 constructed
using the BEA GDP-by-industry data and described in Section 3.2, and the independent
variable is the equivalent empirical proxy constructed using the BLS price deflators. The
results of the table indicate that there is a robust correlation between the two variables, even
within industry and year, though there remains independent variation between the two sets
of price indices, with R2 s in the order of 65% across specifications.

Non-financial public firms We obtain data on spending on organization capital from
the sample of Compustat non-financial firms, for the 1997-2018 period. We use standard
selection criteria in order to obtain the sample of domestically incorporated, publicly traded-
firms not in the utility or financial sector.35 The sample we obtain covers approximately 70%
of aggregate investment and gross operating surplus in the corporate non-financial sector, as
documented in Crouzet and Eberly (2020).
    Our objective is to use this sample to construct an alternative measure of adjusted to
unadjusted GDP, after reclassifying expenditures on organization capital, M as investment:

                                                      ^CS
                                                      Y
                                          ^
                                          bCS =                ,
                                                  ^CS + M
                                                  Y     ^ CS

where Y^CS is total value added in the Compustat sample, and M     ^ CS are expenditures on
organization capital. As discussed in the main text, intermediate expenditures on the three
  34
     The PPI commodity tables are available at https://download.bls.gov/pub/time.series/wp/.
  35
     We use the same sample selection criteria as Crouzet and Eberly (2020); see the appendix of that paper
for more details.
                                                    65
key service groups closely relate to the notion of organization capital developed in the macro
and finance literature on intangible capital (Atkeson and Kehoe, 2005; Eisfeldt and Pa-
panikolaou, 2013). As an empirical proxy for M    ^ CS , we use the measure developed by Eis-
feldt and Papanikolaou (2013), who propose to measure organization capital spending as
0.3  (xsga xrd), where xsga denotes spending on sales and general and administrative
expenses, and xrd denotes R&D spending.
    Measuring value added, Y ^CS , is more challenging, because Compustat firms do not report
separate line items for wage payments. In order to address this issue, we map the Compustat
data to the 61 sectors of Make tables of the Input-Output accounts. This match uses the
NAICS-3 and NAICS-4 classification of firms in Compustat, and is available from the authors
on request. For each sector s, we then impute Compustat wages using:

                                                   (IO)
                                                  Ss
                                    Ws(CS )   =    (CS )
                                                           Ws(IO) ,
                                                  Ss
        (IO)                                                               (CS )
where Ss is sector gross output at producer prices from the IO tables, Ss  is total revenue
                                      (IO)
for the sector from Compsutat, and Ws      are total wage payments for the sector from the
IO tables. Given imputed wages for the sector, we then compute:

                              ^ (CS ) = (CS ) + W (CS ) + RD(CS ) ,
                              Y s       s        s          s

        (CS )                                                (CS )
where s      is total EBITDA in the sector, and RDs        are total R&D expenditures in the
sector. The former is the closest firm accounting counterpart to gross operating surplus, so
that adding back wages provides an estimate of value added. The main dierence with na-
tional accounting definitions of gross operating surplus is that R&D expenditures as treated
as intermediate expenditures (operating costs) in firm accounting data, so that they need
to be added back to EBITDA in order to obtain a measure of value added consistent with
the national accounts definition. Finally, we define the Compustat proxy for the ratio of
unadjusted to adjusted value added as:
                                               P ^ (CS )
                                 ^ (CS )        s Ys
                                 b       = P (CS               .
                                              ^s ) + M
                                              Y       ^s (CS )
                                            s


Figure A4 reports the resulting time series for ^
                                                b(CS ) , along with the ratio of nominal invest-
ment to value added, with and without adjustment for investment in organization capital.




                                                  66
A.2.4       Robustness
Other measures of relative price growth We use the Producer Price Indices for com-
modities from the Bureau of Labor Statistics as an alternative empirical proxy for gQ2 .
Appendix A.2.3 discusses the dierences between BLS and BEA data, and shows that there
is independent variation between the two sets of price measures, though they are highly cor-
related. Appendix Table A6 reports results obtained using this alternative empirical proxy
for gQ2 . For two of the three key service groups, gQ2 is lower than in our baseline analysis.36
As a result, the implied adjustments for TFP growth are lower than in the baseline; the total
adjustment is approximately 21bps, instead of 32bps in the baseline. However, the adjust-
ment remains positive, because even the BLS proxies for gQ2 are higher than our estimate
of gQ1 , which is negative throughout the 1997-2018 period.

Estimating organization capital spending from firm data We use firm accounting
data in order to construct an alternative proxy for ^
                                                    b. Our adjustment builds on the empirical
measures of investment in organization capital proposed by Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013).
Conceptually, this form of intangible investment corresponds most closely to what might be
misclassified as intermediate expenditures on the three key service groups highlighted in
our baseline analysis. Appendix A.2.3 explains in detail how the empirical proxy for ^      b is
constructed in Compustat data, and Appendix Figure A4 reports the resulting time-series.
    The most important point to note about this empirical proxy for ^b is that it contains both
externally purchased investments in organization capital (which is also what our baseline
approach estimates from the Use tables), and, potentially, own-account intangibles. Own-
account intangibles could include, for instance, worker training, in-house investments in
logistics, or expenditures on product management and branding, so long as they are not
externally contracted or purchased. Because these expenditures would not correspond to
service or commodity purchase in the Use tables, our baseline approach would not capture
them.37
    The inclusion of own-account intangibles in this alternative measure of ^
                                                                            b suggests that its
resulting values could be lower (i.e. the intangible adjustment larger) than those obtained
from the Use tables. On the other hand, the estimates of ^     b measure organization capital
investment as a constant fraction = 30% of sales, general and administrative expenses
(SG&A), but there is evidence that this fraction may vary across industries, and could be
as high as 50% in industries such as Healthcare and High-tech (Ewens et al., 2019). This

  36
    Price information in the BLS data is missing for the third key service group, Management.
  37
    The exception to this is managerial time spent on organization capital, as this may be as use of inter-
mediate inputs produced by the Management of Companies and Enterprises sector in the Use tables.
                                                    67
could lead the values of ^
                         b estimated from Compustat data to be lower than in the Use tables.
Appendix Figure A4 (top panel) reports the time series for the ratio of ^  b obtained from
Compustat data; it is generally close to our most extensive adjustments from the Use tables
(using Professional Services, Management, and Administrative Services), suggesting both
of the eects described (the higher estimates due to own-account spending on organization
capital, and the lower estimates due to the value of used) potentially aect estimates of ^b.
    The magnitude of the adjustment is similar to what we obtained in our baseline analysis
when reclassifying expenditures on PSTS and Management services in the Use tables. Table
4 then reports the implied TFP growth rates when using estimates for ^   b from Compustat
data.38 Our mechanisms explain 29bps of the 49bps TFP growth decline in that case.

Alternative breakpoints Our baseline analysis uses 1997 as the breakpoint relative to
which we analyze the decline of the Solow residual compared to its historical values. We
use this breakpoint as our baseline for two main reasons. First, after 1997, the ratio of
unadjusted GDP to GDP adjusted for misclassified investment stabilizes, after a long period
of decline that starts in the 1980s, as indicated by Figure 3. In other words, the size of
potentially misclassified investment, relative to GDP is closer to being constant after 1997,
consistent with the assumptions of our balanced growth in Section 2.2. Since our goal is to
understand the eects of misclassification of intangibles on TFP growth measurement, it is
natural to date our breakpoint using this change in the trend of the ratio of unadjusted to
adjusted GDP. Second, papers focusing on the slowdown in productivity growth have noted
that this slowdown in productivity growth in the US started some time between the late
1990s and the mid-2000s (Cette et al., 2016; Byrne et al., 2013; Fernald, 2015).39
    However, as emphasized in other papers, the breaks in the data is not sharp, so we
also consider results using alternative breakpoints. Following the literature, we look at
breakpoints in 2000 and 2004. Additionally, we consider an earlier breakpoint, 1993, as
further robustness check. In Appendix Table A3, we report key data moments (the growth
rate of inputs, output, and the resulting Solow residuals) for these three breakpoints. Using
the later breakpoints, the implied decline in TFP growth is higher, with the drop in measured
TFP growth rising to 0.68% for the 2004 breakpoint (compared to 0.49% in our baseline),
reflecting the brief acceleration of TFP growth in the late 1990s, also noted in Byrne et al.
(2013) and Fernald (2015).
    Table A4 then reports results analogous to those of Table 4 (the eect of adjusting

  38
     Appendix Figure A3 reports year-by-year results from this exercise for the 1997-2018 period.
  39
     Cette et al. (2016) dates the start of the slowdown in TFP growth relative to the US, in a sample
of advanced economies, in 1997. Fernald (2015) dates the slowdown in productivity growth in most US
industries to 2004.
                                                 68
for markups and misclassified intangible investment on measured TFP growth) for these
alternative breakpoints. The earlier breakpoint (1994) makes no notable dierence to the
results. However, the results for the later breakpoints are more muted than in our baseline.
For the 2000 breakpoint, markups and intangibles together account for half of the decline in
TFP growth (or 0.29% out of the 0.58%), while after 2004, they account for one-third of the
decline in TFP growth (or 0.22% out of 0.68%). By contrast, in our baseline, they account
for two-thirds (or 0.33% out of 0.49%) of the decline in TFP growth. The key reason for this
dierence is that the growth rate of the relative price of potentially misclassified intangibles
­ gQ2 ­ fell somewhat during the 2004-207 period, though it remains larger than the growth
rate of the price of measured capital (and positive overall, as indicated in Appendix Table
A3). Thus, to the extent that the growth in the relative price of misclassified intangibles
slowed down over time, the source of mismeasurement we highlight will also decline.

Values of 2 Appendix Figure A5 reports comparative statics for the adjusted Solow
residual obtained in Section 3.3.2, when changing the value of the rate of depreciation of
omitted intangibles. Our estimates are relatively insensitive to this parameter: compared to
our baseline estimate of 0.95% when adjusting for two of the three key service inputs, implied
TFP growth (the adjusted Solow residual) declines from 0.96% to 0.89% as 2 increases from
0.05 to 0.40. The intuition for the sign of the eect is that with lower depreciation, the stock
of omitted intangibles, and therefore its user cost share, is larger, magnifying the eect of
the capital growth mismeasurement on TFP growth.40




  40
     A potential alternative to calibrating the value of 2 is to try to estimate it directly. This could in
principle be done with data on the income share of omitted intangible capital and on the required rate of
return to capital rt . However, contrary to the measures of omitted intangible investment explored in this
section, an empirical proxy for the intangible capital income share is more challenging to construct.
                                                    69
                                              1947-1996   1997-2018    Change

                  Growth rate of K/L ratio       2.27        2.34       0.06
                  Measured labor share           0.68        0.64       -0.04

                  Bias (L = 1.00)                -0.73       -0.84      -0.11
                  Bias (L = 0.68)                0.00        -0.09      -0.09


Table A1: Potential size of the bias in measured TFP growth induced by markups. The first two
lines report sample averages of the measured rate of change of the capital to labor ratio and of
the labor income share). The last two lines report estimates of the bias in measured TFP growth;
the third line is the absolute upper bound, when all measured capital income is pure profits; and
the fourth line is the estimate obtained when setting the output elasticity of labor equal to the
1947-1996 sample average of the measured labor income share, s  ¯
                                                                ^L = 0.68.




                                               70
                                            1947-1996               1997-2018                Change
                                         GDP in      Chained     GDP in      Chained     GDP in      Chained
                                       cons. units    GDP      cons. units    GDP      cons. units    GDP


      GDP growth (p.p.)                  3.36        3.62        2.44        2.68       -0.92        -0.93
      TFP growth (p.p.)                  1.11        1.36        0.62        0.86       -0.49        -0.50
      TFP growth (util.-adj.; p.p.)      1.13        1.39        0.66        0.91       -0.47        -0.49


Table A2: Dierences in output growth and Solow residual using GDP in consumption units and
chained GDP growth. The data are the same as in Table 1, except that in the columns marked
"Chained GDP", the measure of GDP growth is the growth of business value added in chained
dollars; see Appendix A.2.1 for more details on data sources. TFP growth (the Solow residual) is
constructed as g^Z = g^ s   ^L (1 s
                         ^L g      ^L )^
                                       gK , where g
                                                  ^ is either the growth rate of output in consumption
units (as defined in Appendix A.2.1), or chained output growth; s    ^L is the average measured labor
income share; g ^L is the average growth rate of labor input; and g   ^K is the average growth rate of
capital. Utilization-adjusted TFP growth is constructed as g    ^Z = g
                                                                     ^ s   ^L (1 s
                                                                        ^L g         ^L )^
                                                                                         gK g ^u , where
g
^u is the average growth rate of utilization.




                                                     71
                                                        Average change
                                                (after minus before breakpoint)
     Breakpoint                        1997            2000         2004          1994

     GDP growth (p.p.)                  -0.92          -1.34        -1.22         -0.75
     Labor growth (p.p.)                -0.54          -0.80        -0.31         -0.15
     Capital growth (p.p.)              -0.48          -0.96        -1.30         -0.39
     Labor share of income              -0.04          -0.04        -0.05         -0.04
     TFP growth (p.p.)                  -0.49          -0.58        -0.68         -0.59
     TFP growth (util.-adj.; p.p.)      -0.47          -0.57        -0.87         -0.58


Table A3: Data moments with alternative breakpoints. This table reports the change average
output growth (with output measured in consumption units), labor growth, capital growth, the
labor share of income, TFP growth, and utilization-adjusted TFP growth, for alternative break-
points between the two samples we consider: 1997 (our baseline breakpoint); 2001; 2005; and 1993.
The data are the same as in Tables 1 and A2.




                                                 72
                                       ^
                                       b     g
                                             ^Q2   (%)   gZ   (%)    µ                                       ^
                                                                                                             b     g
                                                                                                                   ^Q2   (%)   gZ   (%)    µ      

           1947-1996                   0       0         1.11       1.00    0     1947-2000                  0       0         1.11       1.00    0

           1997-2018                                                              2001-2018
              No adj., no markups      0       0         0.62       1.00    0       No adj., no markups      0       0         0.53       1.00    0
              No adj., markups         0       0         0.71       1.06    0       No adj., markups         0       0         0.63       1.07    0
              Intan. adj., markups    0.89    0.65       0.95       1.19   0.50     Intan. adj., markups    0.89    0.36       0.82       1.20   0.51

                                 (a) Breakpoint: 1997                                                  (b) Breakpoint: 2000


                                       ^
                                       b     g
                                             ^Q2   (%)   gZ   (%)    µ                                       ^
                                                                                                             b     g
                                                                                                                   ^Q2   (%)   gZ   (%)    µ      
73




           1947-2003                   0       0         1.11       1.00    0     1947-1993                  0       0         1.17       1.00    0

           2004-2018                                                              1994-2018
              No adj., no markups      0       0         0.43       1.00    0       No adj., no markups      0       0         0.62       1.00    0
              No adj., markups         0       0         0.51       1.09    0       No adj., markups         0       0         0.71       1.06    0
              Intan. adj., markups    0.88    0.28       0.65       1.23   0.53     Intan. adj., markups    0.89    0.65       0.95       1.19   0.50

                                 (c) Breakpoint: 2004                                                  (d) Breakpoint: 1994


     Table A4: Results with alternative breakpoints. Each panel reports the eects of adjusting for markups and for intangibles when the
     breakpoints used are 1997 (our baseline); 2001; 2005; and 1993. The intangible adjustment used is for Professional Services, Management,
     and Administrative services (corresponding to the penultimate line of Table 4). The adjustments are made following the second of the
     two approaches described in Section 3.1, which uses data on both expenditures and prices of intangibles.
                                        (1)              (2)        (3)           (4)
           (BLS )
         g Q2                         0.97             0.97       1.04          1.05
                                      (0.18)           (0.18)     (0.17)        (0.18)
         Commodity/service FE           no               yes        no            yes
         Year FE                        no               no         yes           yes
                                    commodity +    commodity +   commodity +   commodity +
         Clustering of s.e.            year           year          year          year
         R2                            0.603           0.633       0.643         0.673
         N                              829             829         829           829

Table A5: Simple correlations in proxies for gQ2 , for BEA and PPI price indices. The sample
is the set of year and commodity or service gorups for which the BEA GDP-by-industry and the
BLS PPI commodity price indices can be matched. In all specification, the dependent variable is
  (BEA)
g Q2    , the empirical proxy for gQ2 derived from the BEA's GDP-by-industry tables and described
in Section 3.2.




                                                  74
                                                                    ^
                                                                    b    g Q2   (%, BEA)   g Q2    (%, BLS)



   Services
   Professional, scientific, and technical services            0.940           0.59           0.25
   Other real estate                                           0.952           -1.75              n.a.
   Administrative and support services                         0.964           0.20           0.33
   Insurance carriers and related activities                   0.972           -0.21          0.28
   Credit intermediation and related activities                0.973           1.06           1.59
   Management of companies and enterprises                     0.974         1.54 w               n.a.

   Commodities
   Chemical products                                           0.962           1.31           1.26
   Oil and gas extraction                                      0.972           2.09           1.38
   Petroleum and coal products                                 0.973           3.78           3.36
   Food and beverage and tobacco products                      0.976           1.12           0.37

                            (a) Individual commodity and service groups

                                                              BEA                          BLS
                                                     gZ (%)     µ               gZ (%)        µ           

   1947-1996                                          1.11     1.00      0        1.11      1.00          0

   1997-2018
      No adjustment, no markups                       0.62     1.00      0        0.62      1.00          0
      No adjustment, markups                          0.71     1.06      0        0.71      1.06          0

      Adjusted for Prof. services                     0.83     1.13     0.25      0.80      1.13         0.25
      Adjusted for Prof. services + Admin.            0.88     1.17     0.40      0.83      1.17         0.40
      Adjusted for Org. capital (Compustat)           0.88     1.16     0.38      0.83      1.16         0.38

                                    (b) Aggregated service groups

Table A6: Comparison of results using BEA and BLS price indices for mismeasured investment
goods. The top panel reports the 10 commodity or service groups with the smallest value of
unadjusted GDP to adjusted GDP, as in Table 2. The average is computed over the 1997-2018
period, for each commodity or service group. The second column reports average values for the
relative price growth of omitted capital, computed using price deflators from the BEA GDP-by-
industry tables, as described in Section 3.2. The third column reports price indices obtained from
the BLS, as described in Section 3.4. The bottom panel reports results from adjusting TFP growth
measures for intangibles and markups, as in Table 4.




                                                75
          g Q2         g Q1
          gZ      g Q1
                       + gL
            1                                             dK2,t
                                                   ? 0,         <0
                                                          K2,t

                                     dK2,t                                         gZ   gQ1 + (1    )g L
                              < 0,         >0
                                     K2,t
     gL + 2
                  gZ   g Q1
   gL +  +    2


                                                     dK2,t
                                            > 0,           >0
                                                      K2,t
                          0                                                        1      




Figure A1: Sign of the total bias in measured TFP growth on the balanced growth path, depending
on model parameters. The total bias is         = dZ^t /Zt dZt /Zt = dZ ^t /Zt gZ , where dZ  ^t /Z
                                                                                                 ^t
is measured TFP on the balanced growth path, and dZt /Zt = gZ is actual TFP growth. The
horizontal axis corresponds to dierent values of  , the Cobb-Douglas share of omitted capital in
production, and the vertical axis corresponds to dierent values of gQ2 gQ1 , the dierence between
the growth rate of prices of omitted and measured capital.




                                                76
                                       Ratio of unadjusted to adjusted GDP

   .94



   .92



    .9



   .88



   .86
     97

     98

     99

     00

     01

     02

     03

     04

     05

     06

     07

     08

     09

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17
   19

   19

   19

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20
                 IO tables, Prof. services                                    IO tables, Prof. services + Management
                 IO tables, Prof. services + Management + Admin.




          Nominal investment to GDP, after adjusting for omitted intangible investment
   .35



    .3



   .25



    .2



   .15
           98

           99

           00

           01

           02

           03

           04

           05

           06

           07

           08

           09

           10

           11

           12

           13

           14

           15

           16

           17

           18
         19

         19

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20
                                   IO tables, unadj.
                                   IO tables, adj. for Prof. services
                                   IO tables, adj. for Prof. services + Management
                                   IO tables, adj. for Prof. services + Management + Admin.



Figure A2: Time series for the ratio of unadjusted GDP to GDP adjusted for omitted intangibles
(top panel), and for the ratio of investment to GDP without and with adjustments for omitted
intangibles (bottom panel). The top panel reports the time series for ^  bt = Pt Yt /(Pt Yt + Mt ),
where Pt Yt is total GDP at producer prices, and Mt is the nominal value of intermediate input
use of a group of services, where the latter is obtained from the Use tables of the benchmark
Input-Output accounts. Each line corresponds to the ratio obtained when treating a dierent
group of services as misclassified intangible investment. The bottom panel reports the time series
t = (Qt It + Mt )/(Pt Yt + Mt ), where Qt It is measured aggregate spending on investment goods,
also obtained from the Input-Output accounts.

                                                          77
                                                        Unadjusted and adjusted TFP growth (%)
  3.00


  2.00


  1.00


  0.00


  -1.00
      98


             99


                    00


                           01


                                  02


                                          03


                                                  04


                                                           05


                                                                   06


                                                                            07


                                                                                     08


                                                                                            09


                                                                                                   10


                                                                                                           11


                                                                                                                    12


                                                                                                                            13


                                                                                                                                    14


                                                                                                                                               15


                                                                                                                                                      16


                                                                                                                                                             17


                                                                                                                                                                    18
    19


           19


                  20


                         20


                                20


                                        20


                                                20


                                                         20


                                                                 20


                                                                          20


                                                                                   20


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                       Unadjusted                                          Adj. for Prof. services
                                       Adj. for Prof. services + Management                Adj. for Prof. services + Management + Admin.
                                       Adj. for Organization capital (Compustat)




                                                                         Implied markup µ
  1.25



  1.20



  1.15



  1.10



  1.05
     98


             99


                    00


                           01


                                  02


                                          03


                                                  04


                                                          05


                                                                   06


                                                                           07


                                                                                     08


                                                                                            09


                                                                                                   10


                                                                                                           11


                                                                                                                   12


                                                                                                                            13


                                                                                                                                    14


                                                                                                                                               15


                                                                                                                                                      16


                                                                                                                                                             17


                                                                                                                                                                    18
   19


           19


                  20


                         20


                                20


                                        20


                                                20


                                                        20


                                                                 20


                                                                         20


                                                                                   20


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                       Adj. for Prof. services                                   Adj. for Prof. services + Management
                                       Adj. for Prof. services + Management + Admin.             Adj. for Organization capital (Compustat)




                                           Implied Cobb-Douglas share of omitted intangible capital 
  0.70


  0.60


  0.50


  0.40


  0.30


  0.20
     98


             99


                    00


                           01


                                  02


                                          03


                                                  04


                                                          05


                                                                   06


                                                                           07


                                                                                     08


                                                                                            09


                                                                                                   10


                                                                                                           11


                                                                                                                   12


                                                                                                                            13


                                                                                                                                    14


                                                                                                                                               15


                                                                                                                                                      16


                                                                                                                                                             17


                                                                                                                                                                    18
   19


           19


                  20


                         20


                                20


                                        20


                                                20


                                                        20


                                                                 20


                                                                         20


                                                                                   20


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                  20




                                       Adj. for Prof. services                                   Adj. for Prof. services + Management
                                       Adj. for Prof. services + Management + Admin.             Adj. for Organization capital (Compustat)



Figure A3: Time series for implied moments when adjusting for three key service groups. Ad-
justed TFP growth, markups, and the Cobb-Douglas share of omitted intangibles in the production
function are computed following the second of the two approaches described in Section 3.1, which
uses data on both expenditures and prices. The implied moments are constructed for each year
separately. The series marked "unadjusted TFP growth" is the simple Solow residual.

                                                                                   78
                                        Ratio of unadjusted to adjusted GDP

   .94



   .92



    .9



   .88



   .86
     97

     98

     99

     00

     01

     02

     03

     04

     05

     06

     07

     08

     09

     10

     11

     12

     13

     14

     15

     16

     17
   19

   19

   19

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20
                  IO tables, Prof. services                              IO tables, Prof. services + Management
                  IO tables, Prof. services + Management + Admin.        Compustat, organization capital




          Nominal investment to GDP, after adjusting for omitted intangible investment
   .35



    .3



   .25



    .2



   .15
           98

           99

           00

           01

           02

           03

           04

           05

           06

           07

           08

           09

           10

           11

           12

           13

           14

           15

           16

           17

           18
         19

         19

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20

         20
              IO tables, unadj.                                             Compustat, unadj.
              IO tables, adj. for Prof. services                            Compustat, adj. for Organization capital
              IO tables, adj. for Prof. services + Management
              IO tables, adj. for Prof. services + Management + Admin.



Figure A4: Compustat vs. IO tables: time series for unnadjusted GDP to GDP adjusted for om-
mited intangibles (top panel), and for the ratio of investment to GDP without and with adjustments
for omitted intangibles (bottom panel). Relative to Figure A2, the only dierence is the addition of
the Compustat time series. The top panel reports the time series for ^ bt = Pt Yt /(Pt Yt + Mt ), where
Pt Yt is total GDP at producer prices, and Mt is the nominal value of intermediate input use of a
group of services, where the latter is obtained from the Use tables of the benchmark Input-Output
accounts. The bottom panel reports the time series t = (Qt It + Mt )/(Pt Yt + Mt ), where Qt It
is measured aggregate spending on investment goods. See Section 3.2 for details on time series
constructed from the IO tables, and A.2.3 for the time series constructed from Compustat.

                                                            79
                                                           Implied TFP growth, gZ (%)
   0.97
   0.96
   0.95
   0.94
   0.93
   0.92
   0.91
   0.90
   0.89   Implied TFP growth at baseline (2=0.20)

   0.88
   0.87
       0.05                 0.10                  0.15          0.20            0.25       0.30      0.35   0.40
                                                                            2


                                               Implied Cobb-Douglas share of omitted intangibles, 
   0.50



   0.45



   0.40



   0.35   Implied share at baseline (2=0.20)



   0.30
       0.05                 0.10                  0.15          0.20            0.25       0.30      0.35   0.40
                                                                            2


Figure A5: Implied moments for alternative values of the depreciation rate of omitted capital,
 2 . The bottom graph reports implied productivity growth gZ , and the bottom graph reports the
implied value of the Cobb-Douglas share of intangible capital,  , obtained using the second of the
two approaches describes in Section 3.1. For the values of ^
                                                           b and g^Q2 , we use those corresponding
to the case when only intermediate expenditures on Professional, Technical and Scientific services
(PSTS) and Management services are reclassified as intangibles. This corresponds to the fifth line
in Table 4.




                                                                       80
References
Atkeson, A. and P. J. Kehoe (2005). Modeling and measuring organization capital. Journal of political
  Economy 113 (5), 1026­1053.

Basu, S., J. Fernald, J. Fisher, and M. Kimball (2013). Sector-specific technical change. Manuscript, Federal
  Reserve Bank of San Francisco .

Bureau of Economic Analysis (2017). NIPA Handbook: Concepts and Methods of the US National Income
  and Product Accounts.

Byrne, D. M., S. D. Oliner, and D. E. Sichel (2013). Is the information technology revolution over?

Cette, G., J. Fernald, and B. Mojon (2016). The pre-great recession slowdown in productivity. European
  Economic Review 88, 3­20.

Crouzet, N. and J. Eberly (2020). Rents and Intangibles: a Q+ Framework. Working paper, Northwestern
  University.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and D. Papanikolaou (2013). Organization capital and the cross-section of expected returns.
   The Journal of Finance 68 (4), 1365­1406.

Ewens, M., R. H. Peters, and S. Wang (2019). Measuring intangible capital with market prices. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fernald, J. (2014). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity. Federal Reserve Bank
  of San Francisco.

Fernald, J. G. (2015). Productivity and potential output before, during, and after the great recession. NBER
  macroeconomics annual 29 (1), 1­51.

Oulton, N. (2007). Investment-specific technological change and growth accounting. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 54 (4), 1290­1299.




                                                      81
