                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       RACIAL DISPARITIES IN THE HEALTH EFFECTS FROM AIR POLLUTION:
                            EVIDENCE FROM PORTS

                                        Kenneth Gillingham
                                            Pei Huang

                                        Working Paper 29108
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w29108


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2021




The authors gratefully acknowledge the constructive feedback from Janet Currie, Matt Kotchen,
Robert Mendelsohn, Kyle Meng, Marten Ovaere, Stephanie Weber, Richard Woodward, and the
participants at many conferences and seminars, including the 8th IZA Workshop on Environment,
Health and Labor Markets and the AERE Summer Conference. This publication was developed
under Assistance Agreement No. RD835871 awarded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to Yale University. It has not been formally reviewed by EPA. The views expressed in this
document are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Agency, nor of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. EPA does not endorse any products or commercial
services mentioned in this publication.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kenneth Gillingham and Pei Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Racial Disparities in the Health Effects from Air Pollution: Evidence from Ports
Kenneth Gillingham and Pei Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 29108
July 2021
JEL No. D63,I14,Q51,Q53,Q58,R41

                                             ABSTRACT

This study examines the uneven effects of air pollution from maritime ports on physical and mental
health across racial groups. We exploit quasi-random variation in vessels in port from weather events
far out in the ocean to estimate how port traffic influences air pollution and human health. We find
that one additional vessel in a port over a year leads to 3.0 hospital visits per thousand Black residents
within 25 miles of the port and only 1.0 per thousand for whites. We assess a port-related environmental
regulation and show that the policy can help alleviate racial inequalities in health outcomes.


Kenneth Gillingham
School of the Environment
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
kenneth.gillingham@yale.edu

Pei Huang
ZEW - Leibniz Center for
European Economic Research
L7, 1
68161 Mannheim
Germany
pei.huang@zew.de
1     Introduction
Air pollution is well known to negatively affect human health, most notably by contributing
to respiratory and cardiovascular illnesses. More perniciously, the health effects are often
unevenly distributed across the population, with some groups facing higher pollution
exposures (e.g., Currie, 2011; Colmer et al., 2020; Currie et al., 2020) and worse health
outcomes (e.g., Chay and Greenstone, 2003b; Currie and Walker, 2011; Deschênes et al.,
2017). There are rising concerns about environmental justice in the United States due to
these disproportionate exposures and health outcomes. Indeed, a key plank of President
Joseph Biden's campaign platform involved improving environmental and health outcomes
for communities of color.
    This paper examines racial inequity in health outcomes due to air pollution around
a major point source of air pollution: maritime ports. It also explores the sources of
this inequity, which could include differences in pollution exposure as well as differing
responses to such exposure. Port facilities are especially important to study not only
because they produce substantial pollution but also because they tend to be located in
highly populated and low-income areas. Around 39 million people live within close
proximity to ports in the United States (EPA, 2016), and many are people of color (Houston
et al., 2008). For example, Long Beach, California, has one of the largest ports in the country
and is 70% non-white. In standard port activities, marine ships, trucks, and cargo-handling
equipment often burn highly polluting fossil fuels, such as bunker fuel and diesel fuel. Yet
emissions from port activities tend to be poorly regulated.
    In this study, we estimate the contemporaneous effects of port activity-related air
pollution on physical and mental health, focusing on racial disparities in health outcomes.
The analysis consists of three steps. We first leverage quasi-experimental variation from
distant oceanic events several days prior that exogenously shift the vessel tonnage or counts
in port to identify the causal impact of port traffic on air pollution. The intuition for
our identification strategy is that lagged distant storms far out in the ocean will change
the path of ships and delay arrivals into port but do not otherwise affect the weather or
non-port-related economic activity in areas surrounding the ports.
    In the second step, we estimate the causal effect of daily pollution concentrations on
hospitalizations in port areas using quasi-random variation from the vessel tonnage in
ports (as predicted by distant oceanic storms several days prior) and local wind conditions.
Our results indicate that the health impact on the Black population is three times the
    See https://joebiden.com/climate-communities-of-color/.
    Throughout the rest of the paper, we use the term "ports" to refer to oceanic maritime port facilities. We
do not consider inland river or lake ports.


                                                      2
impact on the white population. We finally use a regression discontinuity design and
dynamic simulation to analyze a regulation that reduces fossil fuel use in ports to show
how policy can substantially reduce inequality in health outcomes.
    We find several compelling results. First, we show that a one percent increase in vessel
tonnage in port increases pollution concentrations for major air pollutants by 0.3­0.4%
within a 25-mile radius of the 27 largest ports in the United States. Second, we show that
air pollution is responsible for hospitalizations related to respiratory, heart, and psychiatric
problems near ports, and the Black population is disproportionately impacted. We find
that one additional average-tonnage vessel in a port over a year leads to 3.0 hospital visits
per thousand Black residents within 25 miles of a major port in California and only 1.0
hospital visits per thousand whites. We also provide evidence demonstrating differences
in pollution exposure and suggestive evidence of differences in the response to exposure,
indicating that the inequity in hospital admissions likely comes about from both sources.
Our results further show that a policy in California to reduce fossil fuel use in ports
significantly reduces pollutant concentrations, disproportionately benefiting the Black
population. The reduced pollution leads to 9.9 avoided hospital visits per thousand Black
residents per year and 3.4 avoided hospital visits per thousand white residents.
    This paper makes several important contributions to the literature. The paper con-
tributes to the economic literature on environmental inequalities by demonstrating how a
major point source of pollution leads to unequal health outcomes for minority populations
and how policy can ameliorate this inequality. This relates to the literature documenting
how low-income, minority groups are more likely than other groups to live adjacent to
environmental risks, such as Superfund hazardous waste sites (Currie, 2011) and power
plants (Davis, 2011). In addition, an emerging body of economic literature provides
estimates of heterogeneous marginal damages of pollution exposure, suggesting that
disproportionate pollution exposure or differing ability to cope with pollution damages
may translate into inequitable health and well-being (e.g., Chay and Greenstone, 2003b;
Currie and Walker, 2011; Knittel et al., 2016; Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Alexander and
Currie, 2017). Our paper is the first to examine inequality due to emissions from port facili-
ties, enriching our knowledge of the drivers of unequal health outcomes across racial groups.
    Our paper also contributes to the growing literature identifying the relationship be-
tween air pollution and human health using quasi-experimental methods (e.g., Chay and
Greenstone, 2003a,b; Currie and Neidell, 2005; Currie and Walker, 2011; Deryugina et al.,
2019). In many respects, our paper is most conceptually related to studies that estimate
    Epidemiological studies have also examined the effect of air pollution on human health. This paper
contributes to the literature by providing quasi-experimental evidence on the effect of short-run exposure to



                                                     3
the impact of air pollution on health using transportation traffic as the source of variation
in air pollution (Moretti and Neidell, 2011; Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Knittel et al.,
2016). For example, Moretti and Neidell (2011) estimate the effect of air pollution on
respiratory-related hospitalizations, using variation in local air pollution from moving
vessels in the Port of Los Angeles. Our paper differs in several fundamental ways. Our
focus is on racial disparities in health consequences. But equally importantly, our empirical
strategy is quite different in using lagged distant storms far out in the ocean as an exogenous
source of variation. In this sense, our empirical strategy can be seen as more conceptually
similar to how Schlenker and Walker (2016) use congestion in distant airports (possibly
caused by weather) to provide an exogenous source of variation in air pollution around
airports. In addition, our port traffic measure is more comprehensive in including both
moving and docked vessels. Docked vessels are major emitters of air pollution due to
diesel-fired auxiliary electricity generators. We also study a large set of ports and health
outcomes, providing a rich picture of the causal impacts relevant to policy.
    Finally, to the best of our knowledge, we provide the first quasi-experimental evidence
that short-term exposure to air pollution influences mental health differently across racial
groups using patient-level hospital records in the United States. Related work examines
the effects of air pollution on a variety of measures of human physical health, including
the studies mentioned above, but neglecting mental health impacts underestimates the
overall effect of air pollution in a non-negligible way. By including mental health, our work
contributes to the broader literature suggesting that air pollution affects human behavior
and well-being (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2013), such as diminished labor productivity (e.g.,
Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012; Hanna and Oliva, 2015; Chang et al., 2016; Borgschulte et al.,
2018; Chang et al., 2019), reduced cognitive performance (e.g., Sanders, 2012; Ebenstein
et al., 2016; Bishop et al., 2018), increased criminal activities (e.g., Burkhardt et al., 2019;
Bondy et al., 2020; Herrnstadt et al., 2021), and inflated road accidents (e.g., Sager, 2019).
Some of these outcomes, such as criminal activities and road accidents, may even come
about partly due to the impact of air pollution on mental health.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a brief background on port pollution
and human health. Section 3 describes our data and descriptive statistics. Section 4
discusses our empirical strategies and identification. Section 5 presents the main empirical
results. Section 6 discusses implications for policy, and Section 7 concludes.
air pollution on health that addresses several key estimation challenges.
      In concurrent related work, Ordonez (2020) estimates the effects of air pollutants from fossil-fuel power
plants on mental health in Colombia using a quasi-experimental framework and patient-level records. Zhang
et al. (2017) and Chen et al. (2018) find an effect of air pollution on mental health based on stated evidence
(i.e., survey data) in China.



                                                      4
2     Background
2.1    Air Pollution in Ports
Ports serve as a primary conduit for global trade and play a significant role in the local
economies for many coastal cities (EPA, 2017). The Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) projects that global marine freight will more than quadruple by
2050, and this expansion is expected to increase port activities further. Docked vessels in
ports can be one of the dirtiest emitters in terms of local air pollutants, as they often operate
auxiliary engines to generate onboard electricity by burning bunker fuel and diesel (Wan
et al., 2016). Other diesel-powered activities in ports, such as cargo handling equipment,
automated guided vehicles, and short-haul trucks, also emit a substantial amount of air
pollution (Agrawal et al., 2009). Hence, ports can be one of the largest contributors to air
pollution in surrounding regions. It is notable that approximately 30% of counties in the
United States that are currently out of compliance or previously failed to meet the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) either include or are adjacent to major ports (see
Figure B.1).
    Most ports are located in urban areas with high population density (e.g., Los Angeles
and New York), often surrounded by low-income, minority neighborhoods. For example,
around 40% of zip codes within a 25-mile radius of the major ports in California are
designated as "disadvantaged" communities, with concentrations of people that are of
low income, color, high unemployment, and/or low levels of educational attainment.
These low-income households and people of color living or working in port areas can
be significantly impacted by air pollution (Houston et al., 2014). Many studies have
consistently documented differences in air pollution exposure across socioeconomic groups
(see recent reviews in Mohai et al., 2009; Banzhaf et al., 2019a,b; Hsiang et al., 2019), and
ports are likely one contributing factor for these differences.
    See https://www.itf-oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/2015-01-27-outlook2015.pdf.
    See      https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-01-03/port-ships-are-becoming-la-worst-
polluters-regulators-plug-in.
    The National Ambient Air Quality Standards are specified under the Clean Air Act in the United States,
which determines maximum allowable concentrations of criteria air pollutants that have been proved to be
harmful to human health.
    Disadvantaged communities in California are often disproportionately impacted by environmental
hazards. They are determined based on Senate Bill 535 (SB 535). The bill requires a proportion of the revenue
from the Cap-and-Trade program auction to be allocated to projects that benefit disadvantaged communities.
The designation of disadvantaged communities uses the CalEnviroScreen tool, a scoring system with several
factors: pollution burden and socioeconomic characteristics.




                                                     5
2.2   Air Pollution and Health
Air pollution is well known to be detrimental to human health (Dockery et al., 1993).
Breathing in polluted air can affect lung development and cause respiratory diseases
(Dockery and Pope III, 1994), such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(DeVries et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019). Epidemiologists have also established an association
between air pollution and cardiovascular disease (Seaton et al., 1995), including impairing
blood vessel function (Riggs et al., 2020), speeding up artery calcification (Keller et al.,
2018), and increasing risk of hemorrhagic stroke (Sun et al., 2019). Moreover, studies have
also shown an association between air pollution and breast and lung cancer (Cheng et al.,
2020).
    A growing number of economic studies use quasi-experimental methods to estimate
the causal effects of air pollution exposure on human health, using health metrics such
as infant mortality and birth outcomes (e.g., Chay and Greenstone, 2003b; Currie and
Neidell, 2005; Currie et al., 2009; Currie and Walker, 2011; Sanders and Stoecker, 2015;
Arceo et al., 2016; Alexander and Schwandt, 2019), adult mortality (e.g., Deryugina et al.,
2019; Anderson, 2020), respiratory problems (e.g., Moretti and Neidell, 2011; Schlenker
and Walker, 2016), and cardiovascular diseases (e.g., Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Halliday
et al., 2019). While the focus of much of the literature has been on physical health, there is
growing epidemiological work showing an association between air pollution and mental
health (e.g., Sass et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018; Brokamp et al., 2019).
    Air pollution could adversely affect mental health through several channels. Air
pollution can lead to neuroinflammation and oxidative stress linked to anxiety, depression,
and cognitive dysfunction (Sørensen et al., 2003; Salim et al., 2011). In addition, people tend
to reduce outdoor activities due to pollution, which may induce mental disorders through
pathways such as vitamin D deficiency from limited access to sunlight (Anglin et al., 2013),
reduced exercise (Sua et al., 2013), restricted access to green space (Cohen-Cline et al.,
2015), and less social support (George et al., 1989). Moreover, some studies suggest that
worsened physical health caused by air pollution exposure may also lead to fear and stress,
which increases anxiety and other mental illnesses (Scott et al., 2007).


3     Data and Descriptive Statistics
This paper compiles a comprehensive data set from multiple sources on port traffic, air
pollution, health, local weather, and major oceanic storms.




                                              6
3.1    Port Traffic
We obtain port data from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) for 2001­2016. The
data contain dates on which ships enter and exit from ports, including container ships,
bulk carriers, tanker ships, and passenger ships. We match the entrance and clearance
records for each vessel visit based on vessel names or identity numbers, from which we can
approximate the number of days a vessel is at berth in a port. For each date in a port, we
then calculate gross vessel tonnage and the number of vessels, which serve as the core port
traffic measures for this study. Since different vessel types have different sizes and weights,
the calculated gross vessel tonnage variable represents vessel heterogeneity to some extent.
    One minor weakness of these data is that USACE mainly tracks waterborne transporta-
tion originating from or heading to foreign ports and does not have complete coverage
of ships traveling between domestic ports. According to the Bureau of Transportation
Statistics, foreign waterborne freight accounts for 85­90% of total shipping tonnage in
maritime ports in the United States. Hence, the USACE data should be a reasonable
representation of total vessel tonnage in the included ports in this study, even if it misses
a small fraction of the tonnage. This minor caveat about our data is analogous to one in
Schlenker and Walker (2016), where the data set they use for airport traffic only accounts
for major domestic airline passenger travel.
    Table A.1 contains the summary statistics of daily vessel tonnage and counts. In our
final data set, we focus on the 27 major maritime ports in the United States, six of which
are in California.


3.2    Air Pollution
We obtain daily air pollution concentration data from U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) Air Quality System (AQS) for five local air pollutants, carbon monoxide (CO),
nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ), ozone (O3 ), fine particulate matter (PM2.5 ), and sulfur dioxide
(SO2 ), for 2001­2016. The data contain daily maxima and means of pollution concentrations
at the pollution monitoring site level.
    The data contain some unmatched vessel entrance or clearance records. We treat these entries as a single
day in port since most vessels in the data sample enter and exit from ports on the same day.
    This estimate is obtained from https://www.bts.gov/content/us-waterborne-freight.
    The six major California ports are the Ports of Long Beach, Los Angeles, Oakland, San Diego, Hueneme,
and San Francisco.
    The EPA AQS reports various daily means with different time windows that air passes through the
monitoring device before it is analyzed. For example, for CO at certain monitoring sites, there are one-hour
and eight-hour run daily averages. We take averages for each monitor and day.




                                                     7
3.3    Health
We obtain patient-level administrative data from the California Office of Statewide Health
Planning and Development for 2010­2016. These include three types of data: Patient
Discharge Data (PDD), Emergency Department Data (EDD), and Ambulatory Surgery
Center Data (ASCD). The PDD consists of overnight stays from all California hospitals.
The EDD and ASCD keep track of patients who had single-day emergency treatment
in an Emergency Room or licensed freestanding Ambulatory Surgery Centers. Any pa-
tient initially logged in the EDD/ASCD that is subsequently admitted to a hospital for
overnight stays is dropped in the EDD/ASCD and then added to the PDD to eliminate
double-counting and ensure consistency.
    These three data sets provide dates for hospital visits, the zip codes of home addresses,
demographics (age, sex, and race), one principal diagnosis, and up to 24 secondary
diagnoses. In our primary specification, we pool the three data sets and count the daily
number of hospital visits at each zip code for patients who had either a principal or
secondary diagnosis related to the health problems examined in this paper. We then
merge in population data from the 2010 U.S. Census.              We next calculate the daily
hospitalization rate at the zip code level, indicating the number of hospital visits per million
residents per day. We focus on hospitalizations of six categories of illnesses: respiratory
(asthma, acute upper respiratory, all respiratory), mental (anxiety, all psychiatric), and
heart-related. We also include three diseases for placebo checks: arterial embolism (i.e.,
stuck blood clots), external neck wounds, and appendicitis. Figure B.2 illustrates that our
sample includes large sections of the largest urban areas in California.


3.4    Weather
We acquire weather data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) Integrated Surface Database for 2001­2016. We construct daily measures of
weather variables from hourly readings at the weather station level. These variables include
     We conduct several robustness checks by exploring only principal diagnoses and each of the three data
sets separately.
     U.S. Census data is based on the zip code tabulation area (ZCTA), so we merge in based on the ZCTA.
We exclude the ZCTAs with fewer than 5,000 residents (or those with fewer than 1,000 residents in each
socioeconomic group for heterogeneity analysis), which only accounts for 2% of the total California population.
For the remainder of the paper, we refer to `zip codes' for simplicity.
     The administrative data sets adopt what are called `ICD codes' to record diagnoses. In October 2015, the
codes were upgraded from ICD-9-CM codes to the ICD-10-CM codes. Table A.2 presents the ICD codes for
this study. The codes that fall into the psychiatric categories follow Brokamp et al. (2019) by excluding those
associated with suicides. The table also presents the corresponding Medicare Severity Diagnosis Related
Group (MS-DRG) codes for calculating the medical costs of illnesses from the Medicare data.



                                                      8
dew point, minimum and maximum temperatures, precipitation, wind speed, and wind
direction. The minimum and maximum temperatures are the lowest and highest hourly
readings in a day, and the daily precipitation is the summation of hourly records. We
then calculate daily means for dew point temperature, wind speed, and wind direction.
The wind direction blowing north is normalized to zero, and it increases up to 360 degrees
clockwise.


3.5    Tropical Cyclones
Tropical cyclones are rapidly rotating storms that originate in the tropical oceans. Those
occurring in the northeastern Pacific Ocean or the Atlantic Ocean are called hurricanes,
while those in the northwestern Pacific Ocean are called typhoons. We obtained tropical
cyclone data from the NOAA National Hurricane Center for 2001­2016. The data track
dates, times, center locations, maximum wind, central pressure, and wind radii of historical
cyclones every six hours in the Northeast and North-central Pacific Ocean and the Atlantic
Ocean.
    Figure 1(a) shows all hurricanes that occurred in 2016 and the locations of the 27 major
ports in the United States. The figure shows that cyclones can strike ports, which may
directly impact local weather and air pollution. Our primary results only use data when
cyclones are at least 500 miles away from the 27 major ports to avoid any direct impacts.
We chose 500 miles because cyclones are documented to have a typical radius in the range
of 125­310 miles, so we can be assured that the ports are well outside the scope of the
cyclones included in our study. The path of cyclones at least 500 miles away from ports
can be seen in the colored dotted lines in Figure 1(a).
    Tropical cyclones are especially useful for our study because they can dramatically
affect the number of ships and gross tonnage in port. For example, StormGeo--a global
weather service provider--observes that "[t]ropical cyclones [raging in the ocean] have an
enormous impact on ships and shipping logistics. Entire supply chains can be disrupted
when ships are delayed due to the presence of a cyclone." To illustrate this effect, Figure
1(b) shows how two paths of ships headed for U.S. ports were taken off track by Hurricane
Leslie from August 30 to September 12, 2012. Typically, vessels would take the efficient
routes following the shortest distances (the dashed lines) to travel between ports. In this
    For missing hourly precipitation readings, we assume they are the same as the most recent available
reading.
    See       https://public.wmo.int/en/our-mandate/focus-areas/natural-hazards-and-disaster-risk-
reduction/tropical-cyclones.
    See https://www.stormgeo.com/products/s-suite/s-routing/articles/the-effects-of-tropical-cyclones-
on-shipping/.



                                                  9
case, we have ships traveling from the Port of Marseille, France, to the Port of Houston and
the Port of Santos, Brazil, to the Port of New York and New Jersey. Around September 8,
2012, the vessels took longer alternative routes (the solid lines) to avoid Hurricane Leslie,
which led to additional transit time and delays in reaching their final destinations. This
influence of distant storms on shipping paths will provide an exogenous source of variation
in our study, as will be discussed.


3.6    Data Compilation
We compile two data sets for this study. For the analysis of air pollution, we construct the
data at the paired monitor-port level with the following steps: (1) we map all pollution
monitors within a 25-mile radius of the 27 major ports; (2) we calculate the Vincenty
distance and direction between a monitor and its mapped port based on their latitudes
and longitudes; (3) we select all weather stations within a 50-mile radius of pollution
monitors and calculate inverse distance-weighted averages of weather measures at the
monitor level; and (4) we calculate the relative wind direction between a monitor and a
port to determine whether a monitor is downwind or upwind of its paired port, i.e., the
difference in angles between the wind direction observed at a monitor and a perpendicular
ray from the port to the monitor.
    For our analysis of health impacts, we construct the data at the paired zip code-port
level with similar steps: (1) we select all zip codes within a 25-mile radius of the six major
ports in California; (2) we calculate the Vincenty distance and the relative direction between
a paired zip code and port; (3) we calculate the zip code-level pollution measures by taking
inverse distance-weighted averages of the monitor-level data within 25 miles of zip code
centroids; (4) we calculate zip code-level weather measures by selecting all weather stations
within 50 miles of zip code centroids and take inverse distance-weighted averages.
    Table A.3 contains the summary statistics for the main variables (i.e., port traffic,
pollution, and hospitalization rate) in this study. Tables A.4­A.8 present the summary
statistics of hospitalization rates for various slices of the data.
    In our data set, a monitor can be mapped to multiple ports, since ports can be close to each other (e.g.,
Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach).
    Vincenty distance is a commonly used distance measure between two points on the surface of a spheroid
developed by Thaddeus Vincenty (for examples of economics papers adopting this distance measure, see
Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011) and Currie et al. (2017)). The distance measure assumes that the shape of
the Earth is an oblate spheroid, which is more accurate than other distance measures, such as great-circle
distance, which assume a spherical Earth.




                                                     10
3.7    Descriptive Statistics on Racial Disparities
Before diving into the empirical modeling, we present descriptive statistics on racial dispar-
ities in pollution exposure and hospitalizations near ports in California. Following Currie
et al. (2020), we primarily focus on comparing non-Hispanic white and Black populations
in this paper because the disparities between these two groups have been well-documented
(Boustan, 2012; Boustan et al., 2016). In addition, the Hispanic ethnic identity is often
described as more fluid over time than non-Hispanic white or Black groups, which may
introduce measurement errors in comparing Hispanics and non-Hispanics (Liebler et al.,
2017). However, for the interested reader, we also present some descriptive statistics for
Hispanics in Figure B.3.
    Figure 2(a) shows distributions of the Black and white populations residing in California
port areas by distance to their nearest mapped ports. We observe that the Black population
tends to live closer to ports, while the white population is more uniformly distributed,
suggesting that ports may disproportionately impact Blacks simply due to differences in
exposure to air pollution.
    Figure 2(b) presents distributions of populations for the two racial groups by decile of
mean PM2.5 exposure at the zip code level over 2010­2016. We see that Blacks live in areas
that are exposed to higher pollution concentrations than whites. As further evidence, Table
A.9 presents the average pollution exposure for Blacks and whites in port areas, weighted
by the population of each race at the zip code level. The evidence indicates that Blacks
face substantially higher exposure to air pollution in areas around ports than whites.
    Next, we examine the racial gaps in health outcomes. Figure 3 plots probability density
functions of annual hospitalization rates for the Black and white populations for zip codes
within 0­12.5 miles to ports and zip codes within 12.5­25 miles to ports. In both panels,
the distributions for the Black population lie to the right of the distributions for whites.
The gaps in mean hospitalization rates between Blacks and whites become slightly wider
closer to ports. Further, Figure B.4 shows that annual air pollution exposure for individuals
visiting hospitals is notably higher for Blacks than whites. These figures provide descriptive
evidence of racial disparities in pollution exposure and health outcomes in port areas.
     This analysis focuses on differences in exposure across zip codes and ignores any within-zip code
differences in exposure, so it may slightly underestimate disparities in pollution exposure. That said, this
approach is standard in the literature (see a review of this approach in Banzhaf et al. (2019b)).
     The corresponding boxplots are shown in Figure B.5.




                                                    11
4     Empirical Strategy
4.1    Effect of Vessels in Ports on Air Pollution
We begin our analysis by estimating the effect of port traffic on daily air pollution
concentrations. Our empirical specification is as follows:

                                    =        +X      +    +       +       ,                         (1)

where        is the log of local air pollutant concentrations at monitor that is mapped
to port on day . The variable            is either the log of the gross vessel tonnage or the
number of vessels in port. The set of variables X includes weather controls consisting
of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures; precipitation; wind speed; and
relative wind direction (indicating whether a monitor is downwind or upwind of the
mapped port). X also includes quadratic terms for each of the weather controls (except
for the relative wind direction). We incorporate temporal fixed effects           that consist
of county-by-year, month, day-of-week, and holiday fixed effects. Since there may be
unobserved time-invariant effects, we further include monitor-port fixed effects       .     is
the error term. The parameter of interest, , can be interpreted as the effect of port traffic
on local air pollutant concentrations for a given day.
    There are several potential concerns in estimating equation (1) using ordinary least
squares (OLS) that may lead to biased estimates of . One concern is that there may be some
measurement error in the port traffic measures because we observe vessels originating
from or heading to foreign ports (85-90% of tonnage), so we miss some vessels in our
analysis. A second concern is the possibility of omitted variables, such as unobserved
economic or weather factors that affect port traffic and local air pollution.
    To address these concerns, our empirical approach leverages quasi-random variation
from distant tropical cyclones several days prior to the day under consideration. Specifically,
we instrument for        using the existence of lagged tropical cyclones far out in the ocean.
As mentioned above, these cyclones often disrupt travel for marine vessels, delaying their
arrival into ports, leading to fewer ships and less tonnage in ports several days later (recall
Figure 1). The first stage relies on this disruptive impact on shipping.
    To be precise, the first stage of our instrumental variables approach is:

                                        =       -   +W        +       ,                             (2)
   The holidays include New Year, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas, as well as the three-day prior
and post the holiday.


                                                    12
where       - is an indicator variable equal to one if there are one or more tropical cyclones
far out in the ocean (i.e., at least 500 miles away from ports) on day - . We use a
seven-day lag ( = 7) in our primary specification, but we run robustness checks with
different lags. A cyclone can last anywhere from a few days to weeks. Thus, to create this
lagged variable, we first identify the days when there are one or more cyclones that are
at least 500 miles away from ports, and then take the seven-day lag. The variable W
includes the exogenous variables defined in equation (1): weather controls, temporal fixed
effects, and monitor-port fixed effects.
    To be a valid instrument,      - must satisfy the exclusion restriction, i.e., it is uncorre-
lated with the error term       in equation (1). A direct threat to the exclusion restriction
would be if the tropical cyclones hit the ports several days later, directly affecting pollution.
We avoid this concern by removing the observations during the days when cyclones appear
within a 300-mile radius of ports. We also remove observations two days prior and after the
cyclones are within a 300-mile radius to be even more confident that the direct threat is not an
issue. Another concern could be that lagged distant cyclones not only impact vessel tonnage
or counts in ports but also substantially influence the composition of vessels, which may, in
turn, affect air pollution in ports. Figure B.6 shows that lagged tropical cyclones far out in
the ocean do not appear to have any notable effect on the composition of vessel types in ports.
    A more modest threat could be if lagged tropical cyclones far out in the ocean sufficiently
impact meteorological patterns that they indirectly affect current-day weather in the ports.
We explore this by dividing the sample into month-days when                  -7 = 1 and those
when it is zero. Figure 4 shows distributions of the six weather variables across the two
subsamples. The distributions between the two grouped samples are almost identical,
confirming that the weather in the ports is no different when there are tropical cyclones in
the distant ocean seven days prior than when there are not.
    Thus, for there to be remaining identification concerns, there would have to be some
other localized source of air pollution that happens to be correlated with distant storms
seven days earlier. This seems unlikely to us. But we will also perform a placebo test and a
     The choice of seven days is motivated both because it is a week after the storm was out at sea and because
we to observe a drop in vessel tonnage in ports seven days later.
     We expect lagged distant tropical cyclones always to reduce the number of vessels and gross tonnage in
ports, so the monotonicity condition should hold.
     Because the number of observations in the two subsamples is different, we randomly draw a subset of
observations in the second subsample, so the number of observations is the same between the samples, but
statistical tests of differences in means are no different if we use the each of the full subsamples.
     To provide further evidence, Table A.10 presents the standardized mean differences, variance ratio, and
Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics for the weather variables. We also create boxplots and empirical quantile-
quantile (QQ) plots for the weather variables (see Figures B.7 and B.8). Except for a few outliers, these
supplementary figures confirm that the weather is no different.



                                                     13
set of robustness checks to further support the instrument's validity.


4.2    Effect of Air Pollution on Health
To estimate the relationship between air pollution and health outcomes in port areas, we
specify the following linear regression model:

                                      =         +X        +   +      +     ,                              (3)

where       is the hospitalization rate (i.e., hospital visits per million residents) associated
with an illness in zip code that is mapped to port on day . The variable                is the air
pollutant concentration. We run the regression separately for each of four pollutants--CO,
NO2 , PM2.5 , and SO2 --that are shown to be detrimental to human health. In an extension
in Section 5.3, we also consider including sets of these pollutants that might be co-emitted.
The remaining variables are similar to those specified in equation (1), where X is a set
of weather controls;        is the set of temporal fixed effects;       is a zip code-port fixed
effect. The coefficient of interest indicates the effect of a one-unit increase in air pollution
concentrations on the daily hospitalization rate associated with an illness.
    Again, estimating equation (3) using OLS may lead to a biased estimate of . One
potential concern is that exposure to air pollution is not randomly assigned to residents,
and thus sorting of individuals may be present. People with preferences for better air
quality may choose to live in cleaner areas or adjust their daily activities based on pollution
forecasts. Another potential concern is that there may be measurement errors in pollution
exposure. Our pollution measures at the zip code level may deviate from residents' actual
exposure since we do not observe their exact home addresses. People are also unlikely to
be stationary all the time. In addition, there may be omitted variables correlated with both
air pollution and health. For example, unobserved macroeconomic factors may affect air
pollution levels and bring about changes in income or health care access.
    To address these concerns, we employ an over-identified instrumental variables ap-
proach (Knittel et al., 2016; Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Deryugina et al., 2019), where the
    In this choice of pollutants to study, we follow the existing evidence of the health effects of common air
pollutants (e.g., Dominici et al., 2006; Bell et al., 2008; Brokamp et al., 2019).




                                                     14
first-stage regression is specified as:

                                        7                                                7
              =   1    +    2       +           3           +    4       ×           +        5       ×       +
                                        =1                                               =1
                                                                                                                  (4)
                  7                                 7
                       6        ×           +           7        ×           ×           +W       +       .
                  =1                            =1

    In this equation,       represents wind speed.         is an indicator variable for wind
direction, which is equal to one if the daily mean wind direction in zip code falls in each
45-degree interval [45s, 45s+45), where  {1, ..., 7} is the interval. The variable      is the
fitted vessel tonnage in port on day , which is obtained using the following regression:

                                            =           1 ×          -   +       ,                                (5)


where       - is the tropical cyclone indicator variable. The variable 1 is an indicator for
port , which allows the effect of the instrument to vary across locations.
    The intuition for the identification in this empirical strategy is that we are isolating and
leveraging the variation in vessel tonnage that comes about because of distant tropical
cyclones several days prior. This approach avoids using any variation in vessel tonnage
related to localized economic or other factors that may also influence hospitalization rates.
For there to be a remaining identification concern, one must believe that tropical cyclones
in the distant ocean several days prior influence hospitalizations in areas around ports
through a channel outside of port traffic. This seems unlikely.
    Our specification also includes local wind direction and wind speed in the set of
instruments, which adds statistical power because local wind affects the spatial distribution
of air pollutants. A large body of meteorological literature has shown that wind direction
and speed are strong predictors of local pollutant concentrations (e.g., Chaloulakou et al.,
2003; Kukkonen et al., 2005; Karner et al., 2010). Based on this scientific evidence, a growing
number of studies in the economics literature exploit variation in local wind as the driver
for air pollution (e.g., Moeltner et al., 2013; Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Keiser et al., 2018;
Deryugina et al., 2019; Bondy et al., 2020; Anderson, 2020; Herrnstadt et al., 2021).
    We exclude the interval [0, 45) in regressions as the base, and no observations fall in the interval [315,
360) in our data set, so this interval is also excluded. W includes the same weather controls (except for
wind direction and wind speed) and fixed effects as in equation (2)
    Wooldridge (2002, p. 117) discusses the assumptions for using fitted variables as instruments, which
requires the exogenous regressors for generating fitted instruments to be orthogonal with the error term in
the main estimation equation, i.e., equation (3). See Dahl and Lochner (2012) and Schlenker and Walker
(2016) for recent papers using fitted variables as instruments.


                                                            15
5     Results
5.1    Effect of Vessels in Port on Air Pollution
We begin our analysis by demonstrating a causal relationship between port traffic and
air pollution. We estimate the model given in equation (1) using two-stage least squares,
with the existence of distant tropical cyclones seven days prior as the instrument. We
perform this estimation using all 27 major ports in the United States. The standard errors
are two-way clustered by monitor-port and day.
    In the first stage, we estimate equation (2). We find a strong first-stage relationship
(Table A.11), consistent with lagged distant tropical cyclones affecting vessel tonnage
and the number of vessels. The point estimates are all significant, suggesting that the
existence of lagged distant tropical cyclones results in 0.4­0.5% less tonnage (or 0.5 fewer
vessels) in ports per day. The first-stage F-statistics range from 31 to 37 in Panel A and
from 13 to 20 in Panel B across columns in Table A.11. These are well above standard
thresholds for weak instruments to be a concern (e.g., Andrews et al. (2019) suggest that
instruments are weak below a threshold of ten). We also present two tests for weak
instruments, the Anderson-Rubin Wald statistic and the related Stock and Wright (2000)
LM S statistic. The null hypothesis of the two tests is that the coefficient of the endoge-
nous variable is equal to zero in the structural equation (i.e., we have a weak instrument).
The p-values for these two tests indicate that the null hypothesis is rejected at the 1­5% levels.
    Estimating the second stage shows the effect of port traffic on the concentration of the
four major air pollutants, which are shown in Table 1. Each entry is a separate estimation.
Panel A shows the results using vessel tonnage as the covariate of interest, while Panel B
shows the results using the number of vessels as the covariate of interest. Using vessel
tonnage accounts for the fact that larger ships with greater capacity are more likely to have
greater emissions. In contrast, using the number of vessels allows for a straightforward
interpretation by quantifying the effect of an average ship. Hence, we show both. All
results include county-by-year, day-of-week, holiday, and monitor-port fixed effects.
    The results in Table 1 show a significant effect of both vessel tonnage and the number
of vessels on pollution concentrations for CO, NO2 , PM2.5 , and SO2 . Looking across the
    We cluster by monitor-port because we exploit the relative wind direction between a port and monitor,
and a monitor can be mapped to multiple ports.
    The specifications are the same across the columns. The number of observations differs across columns
due to the minor differences in data availability for each pollutant.
    All first-stage F statistics reported in this paper are cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistics
(Kleibergen and Paap, 2006), which are much smaller than the standard Cragg-Donald Wald F statistics
assuming i.i.d. errors (not reported in the paper) (Cragg and Donald, 1993).



                                                    16
columns, we find that a one percent increase in vessel tonnage in a port in a day results
in 0.25­0.43% increases in pollution concentrations within a 25-mile radius of the port.
The results in Panel B can help to contextualize the results better and indicate that one
additional vessel in a port in a day results in 2­4% increases in pollution concentrations
within a 25-mile radius of the port. This increase in pollution from added port traffic can be
interpreted as the combined effect from the direct emissions from the additional ship in port
and the indirect emissions due to the complementary activities associated with handling
goods from the ship. For example, cargo handling equipment and short-haul trucks are of-
ten powered with diesel fuel and can be expected to add to the emissions from the ship itself.
    In contrast to the pollutants in Table 1, O3 is a secondary pollutant, which is formed
through complex chemical reactions with NOx and volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
in the presence of warm temperatures and sunlight. Yet O3 is well-known to negatively
affect human health (Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011). We thus conduct the same analysis
for O3 in Table A.12 to more deeply understand how port traffic influences important air
pollutants. The estimates are significant and have a negative sign. This negative effect
associated with O3 may be driven by increases in NOx from port traffic (shown in Table 1),
which can also interact with existing O3 in the air and in some cases actually reduce the
total O3 concentrations (Sillman, 1999; Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016; He et al., 2020). In the
remainder of the paper, we focus on the four criteria air pollutants (CO, NO2 , PM2.5 , and
SO2 ), noting that they can all affect human health via channels separate from O3 .
    While there are no other estimates like ours in the literature, to our knowledge, the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency estimates that emissions associated with marine
traffic account for 7­61% of NOx and SOx in certain port areas (EPA, 2003). In a rough
calculation, our estimates suggest that marine shipping in the 27 major ports in the United
States contributes 40% of air pollution within a 25-mile radius (see Appendix C.1).
    We also estimate the model given in equation (1) using OLS for comparison purposes.
These results using vessel tonnage as the covariate of interest are shown in Table A.13. The
estimated coefficients are much smaller than those in Table 1, and not all are significant.
The smaller values of these coefficients may be the result of attenuation bias due to
     NOx is a generic term for chemical compounds of oxygen and nitrogen (i.e., mainly NO and NO2 ) that
are related to the formation of smog, acid rain, and ozone. Similarly, SOx are chemical compounds of oxygen
and sulfur, such as SO2 .
     This finding is the opposite to Moretti and Neidell (2011), where port traffic results in an increase
in O3 concentrations in the port areas of Los Angeles. This discrepancy may be due to different studied
locations. Auffhammer and Kellogg (2011) show that southern California, including Los Angeles, tends to be
VOC-limited for O3 formation (the opposite is NOx -limited), where the NOx concentrations are relatively
high, and increases in NOx emissions may not change O3 concentrations. Our study covers a larger set of
port locations that likely consists of both NOx -limited and VOC-limited areas.



                                                    17
measurement errors, which are exacerbated by our fixed effects (see Schlenker and Walker
(2016) and Deryugina et al. (2019) for similar findings).


5.2    Racial Disparities in the Effects of Air Pollution on Health
We now turn to the effects of air pollution on health outcomes--and how they differ by
race. We estimate the model given in equation (3) using two-stage least squares, where we
instrument for air pollution using the fitted vessel tonnage and local wind conditions.
We perform this estimation using the data from California to leverage our hospital admis-
sions data. The standard errors for the health analysis are clustered by zip code-port and day.
    Table 2 presents the results of the second stage of the instrumental variables estimation,
showing the effect of increased air pollutant concentrations on hospital visits per million
residents for respiratory, heart, and psychiatric problems. Panel A shows the results for the
overall population within 25 miles of port facilities, while Panels B and C show the results
for Blacks and whites, respectively. Each estimate represents an individual regression.
    The results in Panel A show significant effects of all four pollutants we are studying
on hospital visits for the overall population. For example, a one part per billion (ppb)
increase in CO leads to an additional 0.05 visits for all respiratory illnesses, 0.01 visits for
all heart-related diseases, and 0.01 visits related to all psychiatric conditions (per million
residents per day). The effects of a one-unit increase in SO2 are substantial. There are
apparent effects of NO2 and PM2.5 as well, but they are an order of magnitude smaller
than SO2 (of course, the units are different). The results for psychiatric disorders are
especially notable as there are no similar estimates in the literature. For respiratory
and heart ailments, we find that our results are roughly in line with the literature, al-
though somewhat smaller than some estimates and larger than others, depending on
the exact health effect and pollutant (see Appendix C.1). This may not be surprising
because we are focusing on the area around ports, which may be different than other areas.
    The results in Panels B and C of Table 2 show striking differences in hospital visits
between Blacks and whites. The rate of hospital visits per million residents is more than
double for Blacks than for whites in nearly all categories of pollutants we study. For
     We obtain fitted vessel tonnage from equation (5) using the full data sample for the 27 U.S. ports from
2001 to 2016.
     Tables A.14­A.16 also present more details behind the compiled Table 2, including adjusted R2 and the
numbers of observations. Importantly, they show that we again have a strong first stage. For the pooled
estimation, the first-stage F-statistics range from 28 to 79. The first stage is also strong when we split the
sample by race (Tables A.15 and A.16). In addition, the p-values from the Anderson-Rubin and Stock-Wright
tests help us further rule out the presence of weak instruments.
     Table A.17 presents the OLS estimates for the same specifications. Some OLS estimates are insignificant,
and nearly all OLS estimates have a smaller magnitude than their corresponding instrumented estimates.



                                                     18
instance, there are only 18.3 visits related to respiratory illnesses per million residents
due to a one-unit increase in SO2 exposure for whites, and 85.7 for Blacks. The rate of
heart ailments is also higher for Blacks. While we showed an economically and statistically
significant effect of air pollution on psychiatric-related hospital visits for the overall popu-
lation nearby ports, the effects are not significant when using only the Black subsample,
possibly due to the smaller sample size. On the white subsample, we observe significant
results (at the 5% level) similar to those in the overall results for the all psychiatric category.
    While the focus of this paper is the racial gap between Blacks and whites, we also
estimate the effects of air pollution on hospitalizations for Hispanics, which are shown in
Figure A.19. When compared to the results in Table 2, Hispanics have higher hospitaliza-
tion rates associated with respiratory ailments than whites but lower rates than Blacks.
Hispanics have lower hospitalization rates associated with heart diseases than Blacks and
whites. We also see more significant estimates associated with psychiatric illnesses for
Hispanics.
    When interpreting these estimates, it is also important to keep in mind several crucial
points. The estimated health effects may not be entirely attributable to a single pollutant
since some pollutants may be co-emitted with others. In an extension, we also estimate
the joint effects of certain pollutants on hospitalization rates, presented in the next sub-
section. Another crucial point is that some people who are ill may choose not to visit
hospitals due to restricted access to medical resources or the opportunity costs of spend-
ing time in a hospital. These are common caveats in the literature using hospitalization data.
    Another important point is that these estimates of health effects focus on the con-
temporaneous effects of air pollution on health. There may also be longer-term effects,
including cumulative effects or symptoms that arise a few days later. Thus, we estimate
our model using different time windows up to 28 days following a pollution exposure for
the overall population, Blacks, and whites. Figures B.9­B.11 illustrate that the estimates
gradually increase with the length of the time window for respiratory illnesses, suggesting
cumulative health effects of air pollution. For psychiatric and heart illnesses, the effect of
     Table A.18 presents the estimation results using differences in hospitalization rates between Blacks
and whites as the dependent variable. All estimates associated with respiratory ailments are positive and
statistically significant. Most estimates associated with heart and psychiatric illnesses are not significant. In
addition, Figure C.1 presents results using the recentered influence function approach pioneered by Firpo
et al. (2009) and used recently by Currie et al. (2020). Appendix C.2 provides more details on this approach.
We find that most air pollutants have a much larger impact on Blacks than whites at the upper quantiles of
the hospitalization rate distribution, providing deeper insight into our primary results.
     We also explore heterogeneous effects of air pollution by age and sex. Table A.20 shows that there are
larger effects on children for respiratory illnesses and larger effects on the elderly for psychiatric and heart
maladies. Table A.21 shows little difference in the effect between males and females.
     These estimations include the commensurate number of leading weather controls.



                                                      19
air pollution appears to be flat and even decreasing for Blacks and whites after 21 days.
    To provide further context, we calculate the effects of one additional average-tonnage
vessel in a port over a year on air pollution-induced annual hospitalizations and hospital
medical costs, as shown in Table 3. Panel A shows the results of annual hospitalizations
for residents living within 25 miles of a major port facility. For Blacks, one additional
vessel in port results in 2,400 respiratory hospital visits, 510 heart-related visits, and
130 psychiatric visits (per million residents in a year in California). This amounts to 3.0
additional hospital visits per thousand Black residents in a year. For whites, one additional
vessel in port results in 520 respiratory hospital visits, 280 heart-related visits, and 230
psychiatric visits (per million residents in a year). This adds up to 1.0 additional hospital
visits per thousand white residents in a year, only one-third of the visits for Black residents.
    Panel B of Table 3 calculates the cost of these additional hospital visits. For this calcula-
tion, we use the 2017 inpatient discharge data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS). The results of the calculation show that one more average-tonnage vessel
in port over a year leads to $27 in medical costs per capita for Black residents and $10 for
white residents.
    These findings show clear racial disparities in the health effects of air pollution in port
areas. A natural question that arises is whether these disparities are due to Blacks living
in more polluted areas or Blacks having greater vulnerability to air pollution exposure
(Hsiang et al., 2019). The evidence presented in Section 3.7 clearly shows that the Black
population tends to live closer to ports and thus is highly likely to have greater exposure to
pollution than the white population. In the population of hospital patients, Blacks are from
zip codes that also face higher exposure. This underscores that differences in exposure are
at least part of the story.
    To explore whether Blacks have higher marginal damages in response to the same
pollutant exposures than whites (i.e., are more vulnerable to exposure), we identify a set of
    We calculate the results in the following steps: (1) calculate pollution concentration changes for the
studied pollutants due to one more vessel in ports (i.e., a 12.6% increase in vessel tonnage) based on
the estimates in Panel A of Table 1; (2) calculate changes in annual hospital visits due to the changes in
concentrations of CO, NO2 , PM2.5 , and SO2 based on the estimates in Table 2; (3) select the largest values
across the air pollutants for each illness category.
    The Medicare data provide national average inpatient payments and total discharges for each diagnosis,
which is categorized by the MS-DRG code (see https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/
Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-Provider-Charge-Data/Inpatient2017). We use the web service
(http://icd10cmcode.com) based on CMS's ICD-10 MS-DRG Conversion Project to convert the ICD-10
diagnosis codes to the MS-DRG codes. The mapped MS-DRG codes for the studied primary illness groups
are presented in Table A.2. We calculate the average medical costs for each of the illness groups, weighted by
the total number of discharges.
    We also calculate the effects of one standard deviation increase in pollution concentrations on annual
hospitalizations and medical costs. The results are presented in Table A.22.



                                                     20
zip codes that have similar distances to ports and similar pollution levels. Some of these
zip codes are predominantly Black, which we define as at least 50% Black, and others are
over 50% white. Specifically, we find zip codes that are 11-20 miles from ports and that
have 11-12 g/m3 annual PM2.5 concentrations based on the CalEnviroScreen data. Thus,
we have zip codes with similar pollution exposure but different racial composition.
    We then run the regressions in equations (3)­(5) for each of the two groups of zip codes.
Figure 5 shows the results and illustrates that the four pollutants have larger significant
effects on hospitalization rates related to respiratory, heart, and psychiatric for Blacks than
whites. While we cannot entirely rule out differences of exposure to air pollution within zip
codes, we see these results as highly suggestive that Blacks face higher marginal damages
from air pollution exposure than whites even if exposure is held constant. This may be
due to differences in baseline health, income, avoidance behavior, defensive investments,
or other socioeconomic factors between the racial groups. We cannot distinguish between
these explanations but view assessing these explanations as an important area for future
work.


5.3   Placebo Tests, Extensions, and Robustness Checks
In this section, we conduct two placebo tests and a set of extensions and robustness checks
to support our identification and highlight the channels driving our results.

Placebo Tests. In the first placebo test, we consider the possibility that lagged distant
tropical cyclones might affect air pollution through channels other than port traffic that still
have effects days later. Should this be the case, it would imply that our instrument directly
affects air pollution through a channel outside of port traffic. To test this possibility, we
examine air pollutant concentrations in areas far from ports (e.g., 75­100 miles) but similarly
distant from the tropical cyclones as the ports. We regress air pollution concentrations in
these "control" areas far from the ports on the lagged distant tropical cyclone instrument.
Table 4 shows that the coefficients from this estimation are close to zero and are not
significant for any of the pollutants, in clear contrast to our results in Table 1. This finding
supports our argument that lagged distant tropical cyclones are unlikely to have a lingering
effect on weather patterns and air pollution through channels other than port traffic.
    In our second placebo test, we consider the possibility that some other factor relating to
port traffic may be influencing hospital admissions besides air pollution. If this were the
case, one would expect hospital admissions for other illnesses that are clearly unrelated
to pollution exposure also to increase with port traffic. For example, arterial embolisms,
external neck wounds, and appendicitis are all maladies that are highly unlikely to relate

                                              21
to air pollution exposure. Table A.23 estimates the same specifications for the overall
population as in Panel A of Table 2 for these prognoses. All of the coefficients are small
and not statistically significant. This result supports our contention that air pollution is
actually the cause of the health impacts we estimate.

Extensions and Robustness Checks. Table A.24 presents a set of robustness checks
that use slightly different model specifications of the effect of vessels in port on pollutant
concentrations. Panels A­C show that temporal fixed effects and weather controls are
important for identification. Panel D shows that the results with fewer weather controls
are reasonably close to the primary specification, suggesting that the results are not very
sensitive to the exact specification of weather controls. Panel E presents the results of
pollution monitors within 12.5 miles of the major ports rather than 25 miles. Some point
estimates become insignificant, likely due to the reduced sample size, but the results for
PM2.5 and SO2 are reasonably close to the baseline estimates.
    We also run robustness checks relating to the exact definition of our lagged distant
tropical cyclone instrument. In the primary specification presented above, we used a
dummy variable for the existence seven days prior of tropical cyclones that are at least 500
miles away from ports (and we exclude any observations where a cyclone is within 300
miles within a two-day window). Table A.25 presents a variety of the robustness checks
relating to the instrument. These include using an 800-mile threshold to exclude cyclone
observations to further reduce the likelihood of tropical cyclones influencing air pollution
directly, using different numbers of days for the lag instead of seven days, using multiple
lags as instruments, using limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) to address any
chance of a weak instrument, and using the count of cyclones rather than a dummy for the
existence of tropical cyclones. The results are reasonably close to the primary results in
Table 1 for all specifications.
    Another important analysis, which also sheds light on the drivers of our results, is to
examine the joint effects of air pollutants on health outcomes. Our primary specifications
examine each air pollutant separately, following the standard in the literature. However, air
pollutants may be co-emitted and co-transported, so some of the coefficients for individual
pollutants may include the effects of multiple pollutants. Identifying joint effects is often
more challenging due to the need to instrument for more than one variable, but it is
    The estimations of Table A.23 use principal diagnoses in the OSHPD data set for the placebo illnesses to
avoid including diagnoses that could be indirectly related to pollution exposure.
    In addition, we run a specification including all of the removed observations due to the tropical cyclones
being close to the ports. Table A.26 shows that the estimates remain significant and are quite similar to our
primary results.



                                                     22
possible. Local wind can impact the spatial dispersion of pollutants differently, and higher
wind speeds may even influence the need for ship engine thrust and the rate of pollutant
emissions. Thus, wind direction and wind speed continue to be useful instruments,
providing a sufficient number of instruments. We focus on the joint effects of CO, NO2 ,
and SO2 that are directly emitted from engine combustion in ports. Because NO2 and SO2
are precursors to PM2.5 with an conversion rate of several percent per hour (Luria et al.,
2001; Lin and Cheng, 2007), it is difficult to differentiate the effects between PM2.5 , NO2 ,
and SO2 (Deryugina et al., 2019). We use the sample of zip code-port-days for estimations
where measurements for CO, NO2 , and SO2 are all available.
    Table A.27 presents the results of the joint estimations. For the joint effects of CO
and NO2 on respiratory ailments (column (1)), the estimates associated with CO are
significantly positive, and the estimates associated with NO2 are negative and insignificant
for the overall population. The negative sign is consistent with findings on near-source
atmospheric chemistry, indicating that an increase in NO2 may decrease O3 concentrations
in certain settings (Sillman, 1999; Seinfeld and Pandis, 2016). It is also consistent with
results in Schlenker and Walker (2016). The coefficients for whites mirror those for the
entire population, while for Blacks we find a positive coefficient.
    The coefficients on CO in column (2) of Table A.27 are significant for the overall pop-
ulation and the white subsample. For Blacks, SO2 appears to be the driver for health
outcomes. Blacks tend to live closer to ports and thus are more likely to be exposed to
emissions from fossil fuels with high sulfur content (Wan et al., 2016). We see similar
results when examining the combination of CO, NO2 , and SO2 in column (3), with SO2
having the strongest effect of increasing hospitalizations, and with NO2 having a negative
coefficient for all three groups (at the 1% significance level for the overall population
and 10% significance level for Blacks and whites). The remaining columns show fewer
significant results, but the explanations are likely similar. These results underscore the
complexity of joint estimation of co-pollutants.
    In another robustness check, we explore whether additional road congestion due to
more port activity may be causing some of our health effects findings rather than air
pollution. When there are more vessels in ports and greater tonnage being transferred,
one would expect there to be more truck traffic. Our primary findings include the effect of
     While some first-stage F statistics (i.e., the cluster-robust Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistics) are below the
threshold of ten, the Anderson-Rubin and Stock-Wright LM S statistics suggest that weak instruments should
not be a concern. The standard Cragg-Donald Wald F statistics are also larger than ten (not reported). For
joint estimations, we only report the results for the overall categories of respiratory, heart, and psychiatric
illnesses.
     We also jointly estimate the model only using zip codes closer to ports, finding mostly larger estimates
(see columns (1) and (3) in Table A.28).


                                                        23
additional air pollution from increased truck traffic. Still, one might be concerned that
some of the estimates--such as those relating to mental health--could be influenced by
additional road congestion. Thus, we bring in vehicle detection data from the California
Department of Transportation Performance Measurement System, which contains daily
highway traffic data at the `vehicle detection station' level for 2010­2016. For each hour of
the day, these data include average daily delays (measured in vehicle hours spent to pass a
freeway segment) at various threshold speeds (i.e., 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, and 60 miles per hour)
for each station.
    Our analysis selects all of the stations located within 10 miles of the six major ports
in California, and we include the station-days with at least 40% of observations. We
then regress traffic delay measures at the various threshold speeds on the fitted vessel
tonnage or the fitted vessel count. Table A.29 presents these results, which show no
significant coefficients across panels and columns, despite very large samples. We take
this as suggestive evidence that our instrument--vessels in ports predicted by distant and
lagged cyclones--is unlikely to substantially influence road congestion, indicating that air
pollution is much more likely to be the channel through which our results occur.
    We also consider whether wind may affect hospitalizations through factors other than
air pollution. Strong winds may lead to fewer outdoor activities, thus reducing exposure
to air pollutants. We run a robustness check excluding days with wind speeds greater than
3.3 meters per second, with this threshold chosen because it is the upper end of the "light
breeze" designation under the Beaufort Wind Scale. The results are reasonably robust to
the exclusion of intense windy days (see Table A.30).
    Finally, we run a set of further robustness checks. We calculate hospitalization rates
based only on principal diagnoses rather than the combination of principal and secondary
diagnoses. The results (Table A.31) are similar to our baseline results, although the effects
are a bit smaller. We estimate the model separately for each of the three hospitalization data
sets we pool for our health results. Tables A.32­A.34 illustrate that we still find significant
health effects (and racial disparities) from air pollution, and emergency room visits logged
in the Emergency Department Data seem the main driver, although again the effects are
smaller, as would be expected. We run our primary specification using LIML instead of
two-stage least squares (Table A.35) and again find very similar results.
   The data are obtained from http://pems.dot.ca.gov.




                                                24
6     Policy Implications
Our results showing racial disparities in the effects of port pollution on health outcomes
raise the question of whether policy can help alleviate the disparities. Policy could directly
reduce exposures by cutting emissions or address the drivers of the racial gap in the air
pollution response functions. However, the latter is more difficult because of our limited
knowledge of the explanations for the different response functions across races. Thus,
policy has largely focused on reducing exposures. One example is a regulation in California
to reduce emissions from port facilities by reducing fossil fuel usage in ports, perhaps most
importantly by electrifying major port activities. We first employ a regression discontinuity
design (RDD) to find the causal effect of the policy. Then we use dynamic simulation to
explore whether generating additional electricity to power docked ships produces sufficient
emissions to offset the health improvements from reduced ship emissions.

6.1    Brief Background on Port-related Policies
To date, several policies have been implemented to regulate emissions from marine ships.
Perhaps the most prominent policy, the MARPOL Annex VI Protocol by International
Maritime Organization, adopted in 1997, regulates sulfur content in marine fossil fuels
to limit emissions of NOx , SOx , PM, and VOCs in the ocean. More recently, attention
has turned to replace fossil fuels altogether by electrifying port activities. This could
include allowing docked vessels to turn off their auxiliary electricity-generating engines and
instead use onshore electricity from the grid. Other port activities could also be electrified.
    California has the strongest regulations on port emissions in the United States. The
centerpiece policy is the "Ocean-Going Vessel At-Berth Regulation," which was adopted
in December 2007. This regulation limited air pollutant emissions from container ships,
passenger ships, and refrigerated cargo ships at the six major California ports. There
are two compliance options: use onshore electricity when docked or find an equivalent
emission reduction through alternative fuels or emission control equipment. Beginning on
January 1, 2010, vessel operators were required to reduce at-berth emissions of NOx and
PM by 10%, and since then the policy has been tightened further. Our analysis focuses
     See http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/PollutionPrevention/AirPollution/Pages/Air-
Pollution.aspx.
     At the national level, United States has implemented several programs to reduce emissions from port
facilities, including the Ports Initiative, EPA's Diesel Emissions Reduction Act (DERA) grant program,
Department of Transportation's Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery (TIGER) and
Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) programs, and the Department of Energy's
Clean Cities program (EPA, 2016).
     See https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/resources/documents/berth-faqs.
     For instance, beginning on January 1 2014, at least 50% of a fleet's visits must use onshore electricity each

                                                       25
on the first phase of the regulation beginning on January 1, 2010.


6.2    Effect of California's Regulation on Air Pollutant Concentrations
Empirical Strategy. Our empirical strategy relies on the sharp discontinuity in how port
activities were fueled on January 1, 2010. Onshore electricity and cleaner fossil fuels are
more expensive than conventional fuels, and thus there was no incentive for ship operators
and port operators to comply before this date (EPA, 2017). It is likely that some of the
at-berth charging infrastructure was already installed prior to this date, but it was not
being used.
    Our regression discontinuity design follows a model specification similar in principle to
several recent studies (e.g., Davis, 2008; Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011; Chen and Whalley,
2012; Anderson, 2014; Bento et al., 2014):

                        =             + (         )+        +W       +     +     +      .               (6)

    The dependent variable        is the log of the concentration of a local air pollutant in
monitor that is mapped to port on day .                  is a dummy variable that is equal to
one when the policy is in effect on day and zero otherwise. The expression (                ) is a
flexible function of the date. The dates are normalized to be zero at the first date of the
policy; hence, the coefficient represents the treatment effect of the policy. The variable
is the log vessel tonnage in port instrumented using our lagged distant tropical cyclones
instrument. We include this variable for good measure, as this avoidance response may
be somewhat unlikely given the evidence in Figure B.12, which shows that the number of
vessels visiting the six major California ports exhibits no drastic changes before and after
the policy. We also include the same weather controls (W ) and fixed effects ( and                )
as in equation (1).
    The flexible function of the date is crucial for identification, as it controls for potential
endogeneity from time as the running variable (Imbens and Lemieux, 2008). We specify
  (      ) with two terms:          and           ×        . Thus, our final specification is a
local linear regression discontinuity design, following Imbens and Lemieux (2008):

            =               +   1     +   2          ×         +         +W      +    +      +      .   (7)
quarter of a year and auxiliary engine power generation must be reduced by 50%.
   We include the instrumented vessel tonnage because it controls for possible abrupt changes in the
number of vessels visiting ports that might occur if there is an avoidance response of vessels to the policy
implementation (Klotz and Berazneva, 2021).




                                                    26
     We estimate this equation using an augmented local linear approach to increase the
power of estimation (Hausman and Rapson, 2018). The approach consists of two steps.
We first use the full data sample to regress log pollution measures on the exogenous
variables (e.g., weather controls, instrumented log vessel tonnage, and fixed effects). We
then regress the residuals obtained from the first step on the regression discontinuity terms
(i.e.,       ,      , and         ×       ) within a narrow bandwidth of dates. We choose
a bandwidth of 65 days on each side of the policy threshold in the primary specification
and run robustness checks with different bandwidths.

Results. Following the augmented local linear approach, we first obtain the residuals by
regressing air pollution concentrations on all exogenous regressors specified in equation (7)
using the full data sample (2001­2016) across the six major California ports. Figure 6 plots
daily average residuals for NO2 with a shorter time window around the first policy date
(normalized to be zero). Each point is an average of residuals across all monitor-port pairs.
We see clear downward breaks of linear trends occurring at the first date of the California
at-berth regulation, suggesting that the regulation results in lower concentrations of NO2
in port areas (we observe similar declines for most other pollutants but without statistical
significance).
    Table 5 presents the regression results, where each column reports results from a
separate regression for a pollutant. The estimates in the first row indicate the effect of
the regulation. Consistent with Figure 6, the coefficient for NO2 is significant at the 5%
level, as shown in columns (2). The regulation leads to a decrease in average pollution
concentrations by 20% for NO2 . There also appear to be reductions in CO emissions, but
the coefficient is not significant at the 5% level.
    We next calculate the avoided annual hospital visits and hospital-related medical costs
per capita by race due to the California regulation. Table 6 shows that the regulation
results in 9.9 avoided hospital visits per thousand Black residents per year associated with
psychiatric, respiratory, and heart-related illnesses. It also leads to 3.4 avoided hospital
visits per thousand white residents per year. The avoided medical costs per capita per year
     We conduct bootstrap inference to test the estimates associated with the policy variable, following the fast
wild cluster bootstrap algorithm in Roodman et al. (2019). For each regression, we obtain 10,000 bootstrap
draws with replacement clustered by monitor-port and day, which is comparable to the primary specification
with clustering by monitor-port and day. Figure B.13 presents the bootstrap 95% confidence intervals, which
are fairly close to the primary specification results.
     We calculate the results with the following steps: (1) calculate absolute pollution concentration changes
based on the estimates in Table 5; (2) calculate changes in annual hospital visits due to the changes in CO,
NO2 , PM2.5 , and SO2 concentrations based on the estimates in Table 2; (3) for each illness category, select the
largest values across the air pollutants (to avoid double-counting due to the possibility of joint emissions).
Note that these results do not account for any increases in emissions from the power sector.


                                                      27
for Black residents come out to $88, which is much larger than the $31 for whites. These
results highlight how the policy alleviated the Black-white gaps in air pollution-induced
hospitalizations around ports.
    Simple calculations suggest that the benefits of avoiding adverse health outcomes from
this policy outweigh the costs. The California Air Resources Board estimates that the
annual regulatory costs for affected businesses and port authorities due to the Ocean-Going
Vessel At-Berth Regulation vary from $36 million to $167 million in 2017 USD. Our
estimates suggest that the first phase of the regulation leads to a saving of $558 million in
medical costs per year.
    We also run two placebo tests for the RDD analysis. The first test moves the discontinuity
from the actual date of policy implementation to a different date: either January 1, 2009,
or January 1, 2011. If seasonal effects drive our results, the coefficients would be similar
to our primary results. The second placebo test examines regions further away from the
ports to confirm that something else statewide was not affecting air pollution on January 1,
2010. We use the data from air pollution monitors 75­100 miles from the California ports.
Table A.36 shows the results of these placebo tests. The coefficients tend to be insignificant
and generally close to zero, providing further evidence supporting our identification.
    The results from varying the bandwidth are shown in Figure B.14, and indicate that the
exact choice of bandwidth makes little difference to our estimates. We also specify a `donut'
model in which a certain number of days are removed on either side of the policy threshold
(Barreca et al., 2011). This specification addresses a potential concern about short-term
avoidance behaviors by vessels in response to the policy (Hausman and Rapson, 2018).
Figure B.15 presents the results with various donut periods, showing that the results do
not deviate substantially from our primary estimates.


6.3    Dynamic Simulation
If the California regulation reduced fossil fuel use in ports but increased fossil fuel use
from electricity generation, it is possible that the pollution was just shifted from one
place to another. To explore this possibility, we use a dynamic simulation of the entire
energy system in the United States. Specifically, we implement a reference case scenario
based on the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) Annual Energy Outlook and
a scenario that gradually shifts at-berth energy consumption from fossil fuel-powered
     See https://ww3.arb.ca.gov/regact/2007/shorepwr07/tsd.pdf.
     Table 6 presents that the California at-berth regulation results in $37 savings per capita for illnesses
related to respiratory, heart, and psychiatric illnesses. There are 15.08 million residents living within 25 miles
of the major ports in California. The medical costs of $558 million are the multiplication of $37 and 15.08
million.


                                                       28
auxiliary engines to electricity across all ports in the United States. Then we examined
how electricity generation and emissions change.
    To perform this exercise, we use the National Energy Modeling System (NEMS) run
on a Yale server. This model is a general equilibrium model that includes all major
energy markets and explicitly depicts major energy supply sectors (coal, natural gas,
oil), demand sectors (residential, industrial, commercial, and transportation), conversion
sectors (electricity and liquid fuels), macroeconomic activities, and international energy
markets (EIA, 2009). It has an electricity dispatch model with geographic disaggregation
based on the actual fleet of generating plants in the United States. Besides producing
well-respected government forecasts, it has been used for decades by researchers to analyze
energy market transitions and policies (e.g., Palmer et al., 2010; Auffhammer and Sanstad,
2011; Wilkerson et al., 2013; Gillingham and Huang, 2019, 2020). It is especially useful for
our research question in that it contains a detailed link between energy consumption in
ports and electricity generation. Appendix D contains more details on the model and the
two scenarios.
    Figure B.16 presents the simulation modeling results for CO, NOx , PM2.5 , and SO2
emissions from vessels and electricity generation in the United States for the reference
case and the policy scenario. Notably, the reduction in emissions from marine vessels
is substantial and notable, while the increase in emissions from electricity generation is
extremely small. The reason for this result is simple: the power sector uses much cleaner
energy sources on average (i.e., natural gas and renewables) and is adopting technologies
to mitigate emissions over time. Line losses are modeled and make a negligible impact.
While every simulation model should be viewed as an informed approximation and should
not be taken as a causal estimate, this finding from the simulation modeling suggests that
the localized air pollution benefits from a policy to reduce emissions from port activities
are very likely to outweigh any negative effects of additional air pollution from increased
electricity generation. The result is likely to be even stronger in California, which has an
especially clean electricity grid.


7    Conclusions
This paper establishes a set of causal relationships from port traffic to air pollution and
racial disparities in health outcomes. We use a quasi-experiment, where port traffic
    The model we use is identical to EIA's NEMS with minor configuration adjustments to enable us to run it
on a Yale server.
    Table A.37 presents the associated fossil fuel and electricity consumptions by marine vessels across the
scenarios.



                                                    29
is influenced by lagged distant tropical cyclones, to ascertain the effect of port traffic
on local air pollution and hospitalizations. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to investigate how a very highly emitting point source--port facilities--can influ-
ence racial disparities in health and how policy can bring about distributional consequences.
    Our results show that adding another vessel or increasing the overall vessel tonnage in
ports will increase air pollution concentrations in the areas surrounding the ports. This
leads to increased hospitalizations for respiratory, heart-related, and psychiatric ailments
that disproportionately affect Black residents. One additional vessel in port over a year
leads to 3.0 additional hospital visits per thousand Black residents per year and 1.0 visits
per thousand whites. We provide evidence that the two racial groups are receiving
different pollution exposures and may have differing response functions. Policy to reduce
emissions from ships at berth may help reduce the disparities, and we show that a major
California regulation disproportionately benefits Black residents. This California regula-
tion reduces hospital visits by 9.9 per thousand Blacks per year and 3.4 per thousand whites.
    The findings of this study lay the groundwork for further research uncovering racial
disparities in air pollution in a variety of settings with highly polluting point sources,
informing discussions about environmental justice, and providing guidance to policymakers
aiming to improve public health and reduce inequality.


References
Agrawal, H., Eden, R., Zhang, X., Fine, P. M., Katzenstein, A., Miller, J. W., Ospital, J., Teffera,
 S., and Cocker, D. R. (2009). Primary particulate matter from ocean-going engines in the
 Southern California Air Basin. Environmental Science & Technology, 43(14):5398­5402.

Alexander, D. and Currie, J. (2017). Is it who you are or where you live? Residential
  segregation and racial gaps in childhood asthma. Journal of Health Economics, 55:186­200.

Alexander, D. and Schwandt, H. (2019). The Impact of Car Pollution on Infant and Child
  Health: Evidence from Emissions Cheating.

Anderson, M. L. (2014). Subways, strikes, and slowdowns: The impact of public transit on
 traffic congestion. American Economic Review, 104(9):2763­2796.

Anderson, M. L. (2020). As the Wind Blows: The Effects of Long-Term Exposure to Air
 Pollution on Mortality. Journal of the European Economic Association, 18(4):1886­1927.

Andrews, I., Stock, J. H., and Sun, L. (2019). Weak Instruments in Instrumental Variables
 Regression: Theory and Practice. Annual Review of Economics, 11(1):727­753.

                                                30
Anglin, R. E., Samaan, Z., Walter, S. D., and Sarah, D. M. (2013). Vitamin D deficiency and
 depression in adults: Systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry,
 202(2):100­107.

Arceo, E., Hanna, R., and Oliva, P. (2016). Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality
  Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City. The
 Economic Journal, 126(591):257­280.

Auffhammer, M. and Kellogg, R. (2011). Clearing the air? the effects of gasoline content
 regulation on air quality. American Economic Review, 101(6):2687­2722.

Auffhammer, M. and Sanstad, A. H. (2011). Energy efficiency in the residential and
 commercial sectors. RFF Backgrounder.

Banzhaf, H. S., Ma, L., and Timmins, C. (2019a). Environmental Justice: Establishing
  Causal Relationships. Annual Review of Resource Economics, 11:377­398.

Banzhaf, H. S., Ma, L., and Timmins, C. (2019b). Environmental justice: The economics of
  race, place, and pollution. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1):185­208.

Barreca, A. I., Guldi, M., Lindo, J. M., and Waddell, G. R. (2011). Saving babies? Revisiting
  the effect of very low birth weight classification. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4):2117­
  2123.

Bell, M. L., Ebisu, K., Peng, R. D., Walker, J., Samet, J. M., Zeger, S. L., and Dominici, F.
  (2008). Seasonal and regional short-term effects of fine particles on hospital admissions
  in 202 US counties, 1999-2005. American Journal of Epidemiology, 168(11):1301­10.

Bento, A. M., Kaffine, D. T., Roth, K., and Zaragoza-Watkins, M. (2014). The effects
  of regulation in the presence of multiple unpriced externalities: Evidence from the
  transportation sector. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(3):1­29.

Bishop, K., Ketcham, J., and Kuminoff, N. (2018). Hazed and Confused: The Effect of Air
  Pollution on Dementia.

Bondy, M., Roth, S., and Sager, L. (2020). Crime Is in the Air: The Contemporaneous
  Relationship between Air Pollution and Crime. Journal of the Association of Environmental
  and Resource Economists, 7(3):555­585.

Borgschulte, M., Molitor, D., and Zou, E. Y. (2018). Air Pollution and the Labor Market:
  Evidence from Wildfire Smoke.


                                               31
Boustan, L., Margo, R. A., Boustan, L., and Margo, R. A. (2016). Racial Differences in
  Health in the United States. In The Oxford Handbook of Economics and Human Biology,
  pages 729­750. Oxford University Press.

Boustan, L. P. (2012). Racial Residential Segregation in American Cities. In The Oxford
  Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning. Oxford University Press.

Brokamp, C., Strawn, J. R., Beck, A. F., and Ryan, P. (2019). Pediatric Psychiatric Emer-
  gency Department Utilization and Fine Particulate Matter: A Case-Crossover Study.
  Environmental Health Perspectives, 127(9):097006.

Burkhardt, J., Bayham, J., Wilson, A., Carter, E., Berman, J. D., O'Dell, K., Ford, B., Fischer,
  E. V., and Pierce, J. R. (2019). The effect of pollution on crime: Evidence from data
  on particulate matter and ozone. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
  98:102267.

Chaloulakou, A., Kassomenos, P., Spyrellis, N., Demokritou, P., and Koutrakis, P. (2003).
 Measurements of PM10 and PM2.5 particle concentrations in Athens, Greece. Atmospheric
 Environment, 37(5):649­660.

Chang, T. Y., Graff Zivin, J., Gross, T., and Neidell, M. (2016). Particulate pollution and the
 productivity of pear packers. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(3):141­169.

Chang, T. Y., Graff Zivin, J., Gross, T., and Neidell, M. (2019). The Effect of Pollution on
 Worker Productivity: Evidence from Call Center Workers in China. American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 11(1):151­172.

Chay, K. Y. and Greenstone, M. (2003a). Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air
 Act of 1970.

Chay, K. Y. and Greenstone, M. (2003b). The impact of air pollution on infant mortality:
 evidence from geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 118(3):1121­1167.

Chen, S., Oliva, P., and Zhang, P. (2018). Air Pollution and Mental Health: Evidence from
 China.

Chen, Y. and Whalley, A. (2012). Green infrastructure: The effects of urban rail transit on
 air quality. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(1):58­97.




                                              32
Cheng, I., Tseng, C., Wu, J., Yang, J., Conroy, S. M., Shariff-Marco, S., Li, L., Hertz, A.,
 Gomez, S. L., Le Marchand, L., Whittemore, A. S., Stram, D. O., Ritz, B., and Wu, A. H.
 (2020). Association between ambient air pollution and breast cancer risk: The multiethnic
 cohort study. International Journal of Cancer, 146(3):699­711.

Cohen-Cline, H., Turkheimer, E., and Duncan, G. E. (2015). Access to green space, physical
  activity and mental health: A twin study. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health,
  69(6):523­529.

Colmer, J., Hardman, I., Shimshack, J. P., and Voorheis, J. (2020). Disparities in PM 2.5 air
 pollution in the United States. Science, 369(6503):575­578.

Cragg, J. G. and Donald, S. G. (1993). Testing Identifiability and Specification in Instrumental
  Variable Models. Econometric Theory, 9(2):222­240.

Currie, J. (2011). Inequalities at birth: Some causes and consequences. American Economic
 Review: Papers & Proceedings, 101(3):1­22.

Currie, J., Greenstone, M., and Meckel, K. (2017). Hydraulic fracturing and infant health:
 New evidence from Pennsylvania. Science Advances, 3(12):e1603021.

Currie, J. and Neidell, M. (2005). Air pollution and infant health: What can we learn from
 Claifornia's recent experience. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):1003­1030.

Currie, J., Neidell, M., and Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Air pollution and infant health: Lessons
 from New Jersey. Journal of Health Economics, 28(3):688­703.

Currie, J., Voorheis, J., and Walker, W. R. (2020). What Caused Racial Disparities in
 Particulate Exposure to Fall? New Evidence from the Clean Air Act and Satellite-Based
 Measures of Air Quality.

Currie, J. and Walker, W. R. (2011). Traffic congestion and infant health: Evidence from
 E-Zpass. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1):65­90.

Dahl, G. B. and Lochner, L. (2012). The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
 Evidence from the Earned Income. American Economic Review, 102(5):1927­1956.

Davis, L. W. (2008). The effect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico City. Journal
 of Political Economy, 116(1):38­81.

Davis, L. W. (2011). The Effect of Power Plants on Local Housing Values and Rents. Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 93(4):1391­1402.

                                              33
Deryugina, T., Heutel, G., Miller, N. H., Molitor, D., and Reif, J. (2019). The Mortality and
 Medical Costs of Air Pollution: Evidence from Changes in Wind Direction. American
 Economic Review, 109(12):4178­4219.

Deschênes, O., Greenstone, M., and Shapiro, J. S. (2017). Defensive Investments and the
 Demand for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program. American Economic
 Review, 107(10):2958­2989.

DeVries, R., Kriebel, D., and Sama, S. (2017). Outdoor Air Pollution and COPD-Related
 Emergency Department Visits, Hospital Admissions, and Mortality: A Meta-Analysis.
 COPD: Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 14(1):113­121.

Dockery, D. W. and Pope III, C. A. (1994). Acute Respiratory Effects of Particulate Air
 Pollution. Annual Review of Public Health, 15(1):107­132.

Dockery, D. W., Pope III, C. A., Xu, X., Spengler, J. D., Ware, J. H., Fay, M. E., Ferris, B. G.,
 and Speizer, F. E. (1993). An Association between Air Pollution and Mortality in Six U.S.
 Cities. New England Journal of Medicine, 329(24):1753­1759.

Dominici, F., Peng, R. D., Bell, M. L., Pham, L., McDermott, A., Zeger, S. L., and Samet,
 J. M. (2006). Fine particulate air pollution and hospital admission for cardiovascular and
 respiratory diseases. JAMA, 295(10):1127­34.

Ebenstein, A., Lavy, V., and Roth, S. (2016). The Long-Run Economic Consequences of
  High-Stakes Examinations: Evidence from Transitory Variation in Pollution. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(4):36­65.

EIA (2009). The National Energy Modeling System: An Overview 2009. Technical report,
  United State Energy Information Administration, Washington, DC.

EPA (2003). Control of Emissions From New Marine Compression-Ignition Engines at or
  Above 30 Liters Per Cylinder. Technical report, United States Environmental Protection
  Agency, Washington, DC.

EPA (2016). National Port Strategy Assessment: Reducing Air Pollution and Greenhouse
  Gses at U.S. Ports. Technical report, Office of Transportation Air Quality, EPA, Washington,
  DC.

EPA (2017). Shore Power Technology Assessment at U.S. Ports. Technical report, Offce of
  Transportation and Air Quality, EPA, Washington, DC.


                                               34
Firpo, S., Fortin, N. M., and Lemieux, T. (2009). Unconditional Quantile Regressions.
  Econometrica, 77(3):953­973.

George, L. K., Blazer, D. G., Hughes, D. C., and Fowler, N. (1989). Social support and the
 outcome of major depression. British Journal of Psychiatry, 154(APR.):478­485.

Gillingham, K. and Huang, P. (2019). Is abundant natural gas a bridge to a low-carbon
  future or a dead-end? Energy Journal, 40(2):1­26.

Gillingham, K. and Huang, P. (2020). Long-Run Environmental and Economic Impacts of
  Electrifying Waterborne Shipping in the United States. Environmental Science & Technology,
  54(16):9824­9833.

Graff Zivin, J. and Neidell, M. (2012). The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity.
 American Economic Review, 102(7):3652­3673.

Graff Zivin, J. and Neidell, M. (2013). Environment, Health, and Human Capital. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 51(3):689­730.

Halliday, T. J., Lynham, J., and De Paula, A. (2019). Vog: Using Volcanic Eruptions to
 Estimate the Health Costs of Particulates. Economic Journal, 129(620):1782­1816.

Hanna, R. and Oliva, P. (2015). The effect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence from a
 natural experiment in Mexico City. Journal of Public Economics, 122:68­79.

Hausman, C. and Rapson, D. S. (2018). Regression discontinuity in time: Considerations
 for empirical applications. Annual Review of Resource Economics, 10(1).

He, G., Pan, Y., and Tanaka, T. (2020). The short-term impacts of COVID-19 lockdown on
 urban air pollution in China. Nature Sustainability, 3(12):1005­1011.

Herrnstadt, E., Heyes, A., Muehlegger, E., and Saberian, S. (2021). Air Pollution and
 Criminal Activity: Microgeographic Evidence from Chicago. American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics.

Houston, D., Krudysz, M., and Winer, A. (2008). Diesel Truck Traffic in Low-Income and
 Minority Communities Adjacent to Ports: Environmental Justice Implications of Near-
 Roadway Land Use Conflicts. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
 Research Board, 2067(1):38­46.




                                            35
Houston, D., Li, W., and Wu, J. (2014). Disparities in exposure to automobile and truck
 traffic and vehicle emissions near the Los Angeles-long beach port complex. American
 Journal of Public Health, 104(1):156­164.

Hsiang, S., Oliva, P., and Walker, W. R. (2019). The Distribution of Environmental Damages.
 Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 13(1):83­103.

Imbens, G. W. and Lemieux, T. (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to
  practice. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):615­635.

Karner, A. A., Eisinger, D. S., and Niemeier, D. A. (2010). Near-roadway air quality:
 Synthesizing the findings from real-world data. Environmental Science & Technology,
 44(14):5334­5344.

Keiser, D. A., Lade, G. E., and Rudik, I. (2018). Air pollution and visitation at U.S. national
  parks. Science Advances, 4(7).

Keller, J. P., Larson, T. V., Austin, E., Barr, R. G., Sheppard, L. E., Vedal, S., Kaufman, J. D.,
  and Szpiro, A. A. (2018). Pollutant composition modification of the effect of air pollution
  on progression of coronary artery calcium. Environmental Epidemiology, 2(3):e024.

Kim, S. H., Shin, S. D., Song, K. J., Ro, Y. S., Kong, S. Y., Kim, J., Ko, S. Y., and Lee, S. Y. (2018).
  Association between ambient PM2.5 and emergency department visits for psychiatric
  emergency diseases. American Journal of Emergency Medicine.

Kleibergen, F. and Paap, R. (2006). Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value
  decomposition. Journal of Econometrics, 133(1):97­126.

Klotz, R. and Berazneva, J. (2021). Correlated Pollutants, Avoidance, and Local Environ-
  mental Policy.

Knittel, C. R., Miller, D. L., and Sanders, N. J. (2016). Caution, drivers! children present:
 Traffic, pollution, and infant health. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2):350­366.

Kukkonen, J., Pohjola, M., Sokhi, R. S., Luhana, L., Kitwiroon, N., Fragkou, L., Rantamäki,
 M., Berge, E., Ødegaard, V., Slørdal, L. H., Denby, B., and Finardi, S. (2005). Analysis and
 evaluation of selected local-scale PM10 air pollution episodes in four European cities:
 Helsinki, London, Milan and Oslo. Atmospheric Environment, 39:2759­2773.

Liebler, C. A., Porter, S. R., Fernandez, L. E., Noon, J. M., and Ennis, S. R. (2017). America's
  Churning Races: Race and Ethnicity Response Changes Between Census 2000 and the
  2010 Census. Demography, 54(1):259­284.

                                                  36
Lin, Y. C. and Cheng, M. T. (2007). Evaluation of formation rates of NO2 to gaseous and
  particulate nitrate in the urban atmosphere. Atmospheric Environment, 41(9):1903­1910.

Luria, M., Imhoff, R. E., Valente, R. J., Parkhurst, W. J., and Tanner, R. L. (2001). Rates of
  conversion of sulfur dioxide to sulfate in a scrubbed power plant plume. Journal of the
  Air & Waste Management Association, 51(10):1408­13.

Moeltner, K., Kim, M. K., Zhu, E., and Yang, W. (2013). Wildfire smoke and health
 impacts: A closer look at fire attributes and their marginal effects. Journal of Environmental
 Economics and Management, 66(3):476­496.

Mohai, P., Pellow, D., and Roberts, J. T. (2009). Environmental justice. Annual Review of
 Environment and Resources, 34:405­430.

Moretti, E. and Neidell, M. (2011). Pollution, health, and avoidance behavior: evidence
 from the Ports of Los Angeles. Journal of Human Resources, 46(1):154­175.

Ordonez, P. (2020). Power Plants, Air Pollution, and Health in Colombia.

Palmer, K. L., Sweeney, R., and Allaire, M. (2010). Modeling policies to promote renewable
  and low-carbon sources of electricity.

Riggs, D. W., Zafar, N., Krishnasamy, S., Yeager, R., Rai, S. N., Bhatnagar, A., and O'Toole,
  T. E. (2020). Exposure to airborne fine particulate matter is associated with impaired
  endothelial function and biomarkers of oxidative stress and inflammation. Environmental
  Research, 180.

Roodman, D., Nielsen, M. Ø., MacKinnon, J. G., and Webb, M. D. (2019). Fast and wild:
  Bootstrap inference in Stata using boottest. The Stata Journal, 19(1):4­60.

Sager, L. (2019). Estimating the effect of air pollution on road safety using atmospheric
  temperature inversions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 98:102250.

Salim, S., Asghar, M., Taneja, M., Hovatta, I., Chugh, G., Vollert, C., and Vu, A. (2011).
  Potential contribution of oxidative stress and inflammation to anxiety and hypertension.
  Brain Research, 1404:63­71.

Sanders, N. J. (2012). What Doesn't Kill You Makes You Weaker: Prenatal Pollution
  Exposure and Educational Outcomes. Journal of Human Resources, 47(3):826­850.

Sanders, N. J. and Stoecker, C. (2015). Where have all the young men gone? Using sex
  ratios to measure fetal death rates. Journal of Health Economics, 41:30­45.

                                              37
Sass, V., Kravitz-Wirtz, N., Karceski, S. M., Hajat, A., Crowder, K., and Takeuchi, D. (2017).
  The effects of air pollution on individual psychological distress. Health & Place, 48:72­79.

Schlenker, W. and Walker, W. R. (2016). Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous
  health. Review of Economic Studies, 83(2):768­809.

Scott, K. M., Von Korff, M., Ormel, J., Zhang, M. y., Bruffaerts, R., Alonso, J., Kessler,
  R. C., Tachimori, H., Karam, E., Levinson, D., Bromet, E. J., Posada-Villa, J., Gasquet, I.,
  Angermeyer, M. C., Borges, G., de Girolamo, G., Herman, A., and Haro, J. M. (2007).
  Mental disorders among adults with asthma: results from the World Mental Health
  Survey. General Hospital Psychiatry, 29(2):123­133.

Seaton, A., Godden, D., MacNee, W., and Donaldson, K. (1995). Particulate air pollution
  and acute health effects. The Lancet, 345(8943):176­178.

Seinfeld, J. H. and Pandis, S. N. (2016). Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics: From Air Pollution
  to Climate Change, 3rd Edition. John Wiley & Sons, 3rd editio edition.

Sillman, S. (1999). The relation between ozone, NO(x) and hydrocarbons in urban and
  polluted rural environments. Atmospheric Environment, 33(12):1821­1845.

Sørensen, M., Daneshvar, B., Hansen, M., Dragsted, L. O., Hertel, O., Knudsen, L., and
  Loft, S. (2003). Personal PM2.5 exposure and markers of oxidative stress in blood.
  Environmental Health Perspectives, 111(2):161­166.

Stock, J. H. and Wright, J. H. (2000). GMM with weak identification. Econometrica,
  68(5):1055­1096.

Sua, K., Timonen, M., Suviola, M., Jokelainen, J., Järvelin, M.-R., and Tammelin, T. (2013).
  The association between physical fitness and depressive symptoms among young adults:
  results of the Northern Finland 1966 birth cohort study. BMC Public Health, 13(1):535.

Sun, S., Stewart, J. D., Eliot, M. N., Yanosky, J. D., Liao, D., Tinker, L. F., Eaton, C. B., Whitsel,
  E. A., and Wellenius, G. A. (2019). Short-term exposure to air pollution and incidence of
  stroke in the Women's Health Initiative. Environment International, 132.

Wan, Z., Zhu, M., Chen, S., and Sperling, D. (2016). Pollution: Three steps to a green
 shipping industry. Nature, 530(7590):275­277.

Wang, M., Aaron, C. P., Madrigano, J., Hoffman, E. A., Angelini, E., Yang, J., Laine, A.,
 Vetterli, T. M., Kinney, P. L., Sampson, P. D., Sheppard, L. E., Szpiro, A. A., Adar, S. D.,


                                                 38
  Kirwa, K., Smith, B., Lederer, D. J., Diez-Roux, A. V., Vedal, S., Kaufman, J. D., and
  Barr, R. G. (2019). Association between long-term exposure to ambient air pollution and
  change in quantitatively assessed emphysema and lung function. JAMA, 322(6):546­556.

Wilkerson, J. T., Cullenward, D., Davidian, D., and Weyant, J. P. (2013). End use technology
 choice in the National Energy Modeling System (NEMS): An analysis of the residential
 and commercial building sectors. Energy Economics, 40:773­784.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press,
 Cambridge, MA.

Zhang, X., Zhang, X., and Chen, X. (2017). Happiness in the air: How does a dirty sky
  affect mental health and subjective well-being? Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management, 85:81­94.




                                            39
Tables and Figures


Table 1: Effect of vessels in ports on air pollutant concentrations in the United States,
instrumental variable estimation

                                                 Dependent variable: log of pollution concentration
                                        CO                    NO2                   PM2.5                   SO2
                                        (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Panel A: Vessel tonnage
Log of Vessel Tonnage                  0.37                   0.25                   0.43                  0.43
                                       (0.13)                 (0.12)                 (0.17)                (0.19)
Adjusted R2                            0.50                    0.72                  0.27                  0.47
Observations                          502,631                587,833                423,200               431,574

Panel B: Number of vessels
Number of Vessels                     0.030                  0.023                  0.043                  0.042
                                      (0.012)                (0.012)                (0.019)                (0.021)
Adjusted R2                            0.54                    0.74                  0.37                  0.48
Observations                          502,631                587,833                423,200               431,574

  Notes: Panel A presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of log vessel tonnage on air pollutant
 concentrations within a 25-mile radius of ports in the United States. Panel B presents the same instrumental
 variable estimation using the number of vessels in ports as the variable of interest. Each entry presents an
 individual regression on a local air pollutant. The endogenous variables, vessel tonnage and the number of
 vessels, are instrumented by an indicator of seven-day lagged cyclones at least 500-mile distant from ports.
 All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point tem-
 perature, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a monitor-port pair. All regressions
 also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and monitor-port fixed effects. An observation is a
 monitor-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by monitor-port pair and day. Significance levels are indicated
 by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                        40
Table 2: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates in California port areas, instrumental
variable estimation

                                          Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                       Respiratory                          Heart                    Psychiatric

                                       Upper                All              All                               All
                      Asthma         Respiratory        Respiratory         Heart         Anxiety           Psychiatric
                         (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)            (5)                   (6)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)               0.01             0.01                0.05            0.01           0.003              0.01
                       (0.002)          (0.003)             (0.01)          (0.003)        (0.001)            (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)              0.28             0.34                1.04            0.37           0.09               0.23
                        (0.05)           (0.07)             (0.19)           (0.07)         (0.03)             (0.07)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )         0.35             0.42                1.28            0.43            0.10              0.26
                        (0.06)           (0.10)             (0.26)           (0.09)         (0.04)             (0.09)
SO2 (ppb)              7.36             9.25               27.47            9.99           2.68               6.95
                        (1.36)           (2.11)             (5.57)           (1.98)         (0.85)             (2.04)

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)               0.04              0.03               0.09            0.03            0.004             -0.0001
                       (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.02)           (0.01)        (0.004)             (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)             0.83               1.03               2.73            0.71             0.14               0.08
                       (0.20)            (0.17)             (0.50)           (0.22)         (0.10)             (0.23)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )         1.07              1.22               3.45            0.73             0.07              -0.09
                       (0.24)            (0.22)             (0.62)           (0.27)         (0.12)             (0.28)
SO2 (ppb)             23.44             35.53              85.74            17.99            4.50               4.55
                       (5.28)            (5.13)            (14.16)           (6.11)         (2.80)             (6.34)

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)               0.01             0.01                0.04            0.02            0.001              0.01
                       (0.002)          (0.002)             (0.01)           (0.01)        (0.002)             (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)              0.21             0.21                0.80            0.42             0.03              0.29
                        (0.05)           (0.05)             (0.17)           (0.12)         (0.06)             (0.13)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )         0.29             0.28                1.04            0.55             0.05              0.37
                        (0.08)           (0.07)             (0.24)           (0.17)         (0.08)             (0.19)
SO2 (ppb)              4.68             5.23               18.26            10.01            1.22              8.12
                        (1.47)           (1.24)             (4.48)           (3.17)         (1.46)             (3.43)

 Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on contemporaneous
 hospitalization rate for the overall population, Blacks, and whites. Each entry presents an individual regression of
 an air pollutant on an illness category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports,
 wind direction, wind speed, and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics
 of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year,
 month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard
 errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population.
 Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         41
Table 3: Effect of one additional vessel in a port over an entire year on hospitalizations and
medical costs in California

                                                 All                           All                           All
                                             Respiratory                      Heart                       Psychiatric
                                                 (1)                           (2)                            (3)
 Panel A: Hospital visits per million residents
 Black                                          2,400                          510                            130
 White                                           520                           280                            230
 Overall Population                              780                           280                            200
 Panel B: Medical costs per capita (2017 USD)
 Black                                           21                             5                              1
 White                                            5                             3                              2
 Overall Population                               7                             3                              2

  Notes: Panel A presents the back-of-the-envelope calculations of the effect of one additional vessel in port
 on annual hospitalizations, based on the instrumental variable estimates in Tables 1 and 2. Panel B presents
 the medical costs associated with the hospitalizations in Panel A based on the payment data from the Centers
 for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The average medical costs are $8,917 for psychiatric illnesses, $8,715 for
 respiratory illnesses, and $9,679 for heart-related illnesses. Based on the U.S. 2010 Decennial Census, the total
 population residing in the zip codes within 25 miles of California's major ports is 15.08 million, where 1.12 million
 are Black, and 5.07 million are white. All numbers are rounded to two significant figures.




Table 4: Placebo test on the effect of the cyclone instrument on air pollutant concentrations
in distant areas

                                                  Dependent variable: log of pollution concentration
                                     CO                         NO2                   PM2.5                     SO2
                                     (1)                        (2)                     (3)                        (4)
Tropical Cyclone                     0.01                    -0.01                    -0.01                    -0.03
                                    (0.01)                   (0.01)                   (0.01)                   (0.02)
Adjusted R2                         0.47                     0.77                      0.40                     0.54
Observations                       85,970                   141,201                   101,324                  61,458

  Notes: This table presents the placebo test on regressing the instrumental variable of seven-day lagged cyclones
 that are at least 500-mile distant from ports on air pollutant concentrations in certain areas that are far from
 ports (i.e., 75­100 miles from major U.S. ports). Each column presents an individual regression on a local air
 pollutant. All regressions include weather controls, such as quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point
 temperatures, precipitation, wind speed, and wind direction. All regressions also include county-by-year,
 month, day-of-week, holiday, and pollution monitor fixed effects. An observation is a monitor-day. Standard
 errors are clustered by pollution monitor and day. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                           42
Table 5: Effect of California Ocean-Going Vessel At-Berth Regulation on air pollution, RDD
estimation

                                              Dependent variable: residual of log pollution concentration
                                        CO                     NO2                   PM2.5                   SO2
                                        (1)                     (2)                    (3)                   (4)
CA Regulation                          -0.12                 -0.20                    0.17                  -0.17
                                       (0.07)                 (0.09)                 (0.10)                 (0.21)
Date                                  0.005                  0.004                   0.002                  0.01
                                      (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.004)
CA Regulation × Date                  -0.01                  -0.004                 -0.01                   -0.01
                                      (0.003)                (0.002)                (0.003)                 (0.01)
Pre-policy Mean                        608.01                 18.36                  14.54                  1.83
Observations                            4,710                 5,288                  2,928                  3,171

  Notes: This table presents the second-stage augmented local linear RDD estimation of the effect of the Cal-
 ifornia at-berth regulation on air pollutant concentrations. The second-stage RDD dependent variable is
 taken from the residuals by regressing log pollution concentrations on weather controls (i.e., the quadratics of
 maximum, minimum, and dew point temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction
 between a monitor-port pair), fixed effects (i.e., county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and port-monitor
 pair), and log vessel tonnage (instrumented by seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant cyclones from ports).
 The local linear bandwidth is specified as 65 days on both sides of the policy threshold. An observation is a
 monitor-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by monitor-port pair and normalized day. Significance levels
 are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




Table 6: Effect of California Ocean-Going Vessel At-Berth Regulation on annual hospital-
izations and medical costs

                                              All                           All                           All
                                          Respiratory                      Heart                       Psychiatric
                                              (1)                           (2)                            (3)
 Panel A: Hospital visits per million residents
 Black                                        -7,900                       -1,600                         -420
 White                                        -1,700                        -920                          -740
 Overall Population                           -2,500                        -920                          -640
 Panel B: Medical costs per capita (2017 USD)
 Black                                          -69                          -15                            -4
 White                                          -15                           -9                            -7
 Overall Population                             -22                           -9                            -6

 Notes: Panel A presents the back-of-the-envelope calculations of the effect of the California at-berth regulation
 on annual hospitalizations based on the estimates in Tables 2 and 5. Panel B presents the medical costs associated
 with the hospital visits in Panel A based on the payment data from Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
 The average medical costs are $8,917 for psychiatric illnesses, $8,715 for respiratory illnesses, and $9,679 for
 heart-related illnesses. Based on the US 2010 Decennial Census, total population residing in the zip codes within
 25 miles of the major ports in California is 15.08 million, in which 1.12 million are Black and 5.07 million are
 white. All numbers are rounded to two significant figures.




                                                        43
                  (a)




                  (b)                                               Shipping Route
                                                                        Distorted      Normal


                                                                    Cyclone Track
                                                                        Hurricane Leslie (2012)




Figure 1: (a) Locations of major ports and tracks of tropical cyclones. (b) Illustrative
shipping routes and a tropical cyclone track.

Notes: Panel (a) plots the locations of major ports (red diamonds) in the United States and the tracks of tropical
cyclones (colored dots) in the Northeast and North Central Pacific Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean in 2016. The
gray × dots indicate the cyclone observations within 500 miles of ports or on land. Panel (b) plots two shipping
routes to U.S. ports and the track of Hurricane Leslie in 2012. The solid lines indicate the distorted routes
in response to the cyclone, while the dashed lines represent the normal routes. The grey dots and round
represent Hurricane Leslie. The hurricane data are obtained from the NOAA National Hurricane Center,
and the shipping routes are approximated based on data from the online tool: https://www.shipmap.org.




                                                       44
                  (a)                                                                     (b)
                                                                                          0.20
                                                                                                         Black
                                    0.15
                                                                                                         White

                                                                                          0.15




                 Population Share
                                    0.10

                                                                                          0.10


                                    0.05
                                                                                          0.05



                                    0.00                                                  0.00

                                                5       10        15         20   25                 1   2   3      4    5    6    7      8     9   10
                                                    Distance to Port (Miles)                                        Pollution Decile


Figure 2: (a) Distribution of population by distance to major California ports. (b) Distribu-
tion of the population in California port areas by decile of PM2.5 concentration.

Notes: Panel (a) plots population distribution in the California port areas by the distance between census
tract and port, separately for non-Hispanic Black and white populations. We obtain population data at the
census tract level and assign a distance between a census tract to its nearest mapped port to all race-specific
populations within the census tract. Panel (b) plots population distribution in the California port areas by
decile of PM2.5 concentration, separately for non-Hispanic Black and white population. Larger pollution
deciles represent higher pollution exposures. The data are acquired from the U.S. 2010 Decennial Census
and U.S. EPA Air Quality System.

                                                         0-12.5 Miles to Ports                                   12.5-25 Miles to Ports

                                    0.006
                                                                                                                                                Black

                                                                                                                                                White


                                    0.004
                 Density




                                    0.002




                                    0.000

                                            0          300             600        900            0           300             600              900
                                                             Annual Hospitalization Rate (Hospital Visits per 1,000 Residents)


      Figure 3: Distribution of annual hospitalizations rates in California port areas.

Notes: This figure plots the distribution density of annual hospitalization rates separately for non-Hispanic
Black and white population in the areas within 0­12.5 miles from ports and 12.5­25 miles from ports in
California. The hospitalization rate is calculated as the annual total hospital visits related to psychiatric,
respiratory, and heart-related illnesses in each zip code for 2010­2016. The dashed lines represent sample
means. The gap between the dashed lines in the left panel is 87, while the gap in the right panel is 81. We
exclude the zip codes having less than 1,000 race-specific populations in our analysis. The data are obtained
from the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development of California.




                                                                                        45
                                        Wind Speed (m/s)                       Wind Direction (degree)                       Max Temperature (C)

                            0.4                                    0.006                                        0.08


                            0.3                                                                                 0.06
                                                                   0.004

                            0.2                                                                                 0.04

                                                                   0.002
                            0.1                                                                                 0.02


                            0.0                                    0.000                                        0.00
                 Density




                                  0         5        10      15            0      100        200   300                 -10   0    10       20    30    40

                                       Min Temperature (C)                       Precipitation (mm)                      Dew Point Temperature (C)
                           0.08                                                                                0.100


                           0.06                                                                                0.075
                                                                      2

                           0.04                                                                                0.050

                                                                      1
                           0.02                                                                                0.025


                           0.00                                       0                                        0.000
                                      -10   0   10    20   30              0     10     20    30   40     50             -20 -10       0    10    20    30

                                                                  Existence of seven-day                Yes       No
                                                                  lagged cyclones


                                  Figure 4: Distribution of local weather in port areas.

Notes: This figure presents the density of weather measures in the U.S. port areas, separately for the
month-days when there exist seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant tropical cyclones in the ocean and the
same month-days when there are no such cyclones. The dashed lines represent the means of the distributions.
We do not plot the observations with precipitation greater than 50. The data are obtained from the NOAA
Integrated Surface Database.




                                                                                      46
                                                                                        CO                                NO2




                                                                                                              3
                                                                        0.10


                                                                                                              2
                 Marginal effect of pollution on hospitalization rate




                                                                        0.05
                                                                                                              1



                                                                        0.00                                  0


                                                                               Black           White              Black         White

                                                                                       PM2.5                              SO2
                                                                          4                                 150



                                                                          3
                                                                                                            100

                                                                          2


                                                                                                            50
                                                                          1



                                                                          0                                   0

                                                                               Black           White              Black         White



Figure 5: Marginal effects of pollution on hospitalization rates by race in zip codes with a
similar distance to ports and pollution exposures.

Notes: This figure plots marginal effects of pollution on total hospitalization rates related to respiratory,
heart, and psychiatric illnesses by race in zip codes with a similar distance to ports (within 11­20 miles to
ports) and pollution exposures (with 11­12 g/m3 annual PM2.5 concentrations). Error bars correspond to
95% confidence intervals, where standard errors from regressions are clustered by port-zip code and day. An
observation is a zip code-port-day.




                                                                                                       47
                                                 1.0




                                                 0.5
                            Residuals for NO2




                                                 0.0




                                                -0.5




                                                -1.0

                                                       -60   -30         0          30   60
                                                                   Normalized Day


               Figure 6: Residuals of NO2 concentrations for the RDD analysis.

Notes: This figure plots daily average residuals across all monitor-port pairs for NO2 . The grey solid lines
are linear fitted lines of the residuals. The policy date is normalized to be zero, indicated by the vertical
dotted lines. A few extreme values are not shown in the figure.




                                                                    48
A     Supplementary Tables (For Online Publication)


              Table A.1: Summary statistics of the major ports in United States

                                     Vessel Tonnage (100,000 Mt)                     Vessel Counts
                                          Standard                                 Standard
                                Mean      Deviation     Min       Max    Mean      Deviation      Min     Max
Houston, TX                      12.38        3.39         1.34    36     53.93       12.24       8.00     157
Long Beach, CA                    9.77        3.44         0.00    25     18.75        5.78       0.00      55
New York, NY and NJ               8.23        2.81         0.41    49     21.02        7.21       1.00     142
Los Angeles, CA                   7.41        2.99         0.00    26     15.25        5.64       0.00      49
South Louisiana, LA, Port of      7.18        2.75         0.98    18     22.77        7.25       4.00      51
New Orleans, LA                   4.89        1.55         0.29    12     19.39        5.69       2.00      46
Baltimore, MD                     4.87        2.10         0.09    16     12.91        4.24       1.00      50
Savannah, GA                      3.94        1.74         0.00    12     10.51        3.49       0.00      29
Oakland, CA                       3.71        1.94         0.00    24      6.92        3.50       0.00      53
Seattle, WA                       3.53        1.48         0.24    11     24.43        5.05       1.00      46
Miami, FL                         3.51        1.88         0.11    11     24.39        7.17       5.00      57
Port Everglades, FL               3.33        2.24         0.04    14     17.75        4.40       4.00      40
Charleston, SC                    3.23        1.19         0.00     9      8.40        2.90       0.00      26
Tacoma, WA                        2.85        1.49         0.04    14     14.43        4.46       1.00      34
Beaumont, TX                      2.70        1.20         0.00     8      7.27        2.93       0.00      20
Mobile, AL                        2.68        1.03         0.06     7     12.17        3.95       1.00      31
Jacksonville, FL                  2.20        1.00         0.00     8      8.07        3.03       0.00      23
Portland, OR                      1.80        1.00         0.00     7      7.66        3.92       0.00      29
Philadelphia, PA                  1.61        1.02         0.00     6      3.76        2.07       0.00      21
Tampa, FL                         1.61        0.82         0.00     6      7.56        3.30       0.00      25
Baton Rouge, LA                   1.47        0.79         0.00     6      5.27        2.48       0.00      17
Galveston, TX                     1.46        1.05         0.00     7     10.92        4.69       0.00      31
Lake Charles, LA                  1.43        0.72         0.00     4      7.70        3.35       0.00      23
San Diego, CA                     0.83        0.67         0.00     6      4.34        2.37       0.00      15
Port Hueneme, CA                  0.46        0.40         0.00     2      1.67        1.28       0.00       6
Palm Beach, FL                    0.33        0.22         0.00     3      6.16        3.25       0.00      19
San Francisco, CA                 0.30        0.48         0.00     4      0.71        1.07       0.00      11

 Notes: This table presents the summary statistics of daily vessel tonnage and daily mean vessel counts for the
 27 major ports in the United States. The data are obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.




                                                      49
                   Table A.2: ICD-9-CM, ICD-10-CM, and MS-DRG codes

                              ICD-9 Code                   ICD-10 Code                MS-DRG Code
Panel A: Respiratory
Asthma                 493                           J45                         202, 203
Upper Respiratory      460-465                       J00-J06                     011-013, 152, 153
                                                                                 011-013, 152-156, 177-182,
All Respiratory        460-519                       J00-J99                     186-206, 793, 865, 866,
                                                                                 919-921, 928, 929, 951
Panel B: Heart
                                                                                 175, 176, 222-227, 280-285,
All Heart              410-429                       I20-I52                     288-293, 296-298, 302, 303,
                                                                                 306-311, 314-316, 793
Panel C: Psychiatric
Anxiety                300.0, 300.2                  F40, F41                    880, 882
                       300.0, 300.2, 296.0,
                       296.4-296.9, 309.0,
                       309.2-309.4, 295, 308.9,
                       309.8, 314.0, 314.2, 314.9,
                                                     F43.2, F43.8, F43.9, F20,
                       312.0-312.2, 312.8, 312.9,
                                                     F22-F25, F28, F29, F43.0,
                       313.8, 299.0, 299.8, 312.3,
All Psychiatric                                      F43.1, F90, F91, F84.0,     880-886
                       307.9, 311, 296.2, 296.3,
                                                     F84.5, F84.8, F63, F32,
                       296.8, 296.9, 298.0, 300.4,
                                                     F33, F34.0, F34,1, F60
                       625.4, 301.10, 301.12,
                       301.13, 301.0, 301.3,
                       301.4, 301.6-301.9, 301.50,
                       301.59
Panel D: Placebo
Arterial Embolism      444                           I74                         .
Neck Wound             874                           S11                         .
Appendicitis           540-543                       K35-K38                     .

Notes: Table presents the ICD-9-CM, and ICD-10-CM codes for counting hospital visits for the illness
groups examined in the paper and the corresponding MS-DRG code for calculating average medical
costs for each illness group. The codes include the ranges of themselves and any subcategories. We do
not calculate medical costs for the placebo diseases.




                                                     50
                         Table A.3: Summary statistics of main variables

                                 Within 25 Miles of US Ports                    Within 25 Miles of CA Ports
                                    Standard                                       Standard
                          Mean      Deviation     Min          Max       Mean      Deviation     Min      Max
Panel A: Port
Tonnage (100,000 Mt)        3.63         3.47      0.00          49.30     3.75         4.21      0.00        26.07
Vessel Counts              13.11        11.59      0.00         157.00     7.94         7.77      0.00        55.00

Panel B: Pollution
CO Max (ppb)              808.17       661.10      0.00       12950.00   900.77       769.08      0.00   12950.00
CO Mean (ppb)             485.97       360.64      0.00        4994.11   525.60       394.61      0.00    4994.11
NO2 Max (ppb)              25.17        15.48      0.00         268.00    28.11        16.63      0.00     163.00
NO2 Mean (ppb)             13.27         9.97      0.00          83.43    15.66        10.91      0.00      83.43
O3 Max (ppb)               37.52        14.69      0.00         144.00    37.04        13.19      0.00     114.00
O3 Mean (ppb)              26.98        11.73      0.00         100.71    26.46        11.23      0.00      84.77
PM2.5 Max ( g/m3 )         11.58         7.17      0.00         265.90    13.25         7.93      0.00     112.40
PM2.5 Mean ( g/m3 )        10.67         6.66      0.00          90.30    11.56         7.47      0.00      90.30
SO2 Max (ppb)               6.01         9.72      0.00         346.65     3.03         3.26      0.00      96.50
SO2 Mean (ppb)              2.32         3.29      0.00          78.61     1.44         1.48      0.00      20.90

Panel C: Health (hospital visits per million residents)
Asthma                       .           .           .           .        65.92        63.32      0.00    3572.04
Upper Respiratory            .           .           .           .        41.46        49.29      0.00    3912.23
All Respiratory              .           .           .           .       222.98       145.24      0.00   12791.29
All Heart                    .           .           .           .       140.10        92.56      0.00    1339.42
Anxiety                      .           .           .           .        46.08        47.71      0.00     743.83
All Psychiatric              .           .           .           .       138.82       108.83      0.00    2231.48
Arterial Embolism            .           .           .           .         0.66         5.14      0.00     297.53
Neck Wound                   .           .           .           .         0.23         3.10      0.00     392.62
Appendicitis                 .           .           .           .         4.03        12.72      0.00     431.78

Notes: This table presents summary statistics of the main variables, including mean, standard deviation,
minimum, and maximum. The variables are split into three panels, i.e., port, pollution, and health. The data are
obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S. EPA Air Quality System, and the Office of Statewide
Health Planning and Development of California.




                                                         51
             Table A.4: Summary statistics of hospitalization rate by race group

                                   Respiratory                            Heart                 Psychiatric

                                   Upper                 All               All                             All
                 Asthma          Respiratory         Respiratory          Heart         Anxiety         Psychiatric
Panel A: Black
Mean               197.97             91.91              513.65           234.94           66.26           272.53
Std. Dev.          291.81            201.14              548.76           318.45          169.37           404.21
Min                  0.00              0.00                0.00             0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               5771.08           4488.62            16992.63          4664.18         2991.03          6511.63

Panel B: White
Mean                78.47             33.89               286.53          227.15           74.07           243.01
Std. Dev.          133.41             90.76               312.34          235.70          125.22           304.28
Min                  0.00              0.00                 0.00            0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               4248.09           3992.02              9398.50         4436.56         2851.71          8458.65

Notes: This table presents summary statistics of hospitalization rates (i.e., hospital visits per million residents)
by race group, including mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum. The data are obtained Office of
Statewide Health Planning and Development of California.

             Table A.5: Summary statistics of hospitalization rate by age group

                                   Respiratory                            Heart                 Psychiatric

                                   Upper                 All               All                             All
                 Asthma          Respiratory         Respiratory          Heart         Anxiety         Psychiatric
Panel A: Ages 5 and under
Mean                72.39            244.92              479.01             8.16            0.70             5.42
Std. Dev.          185.40            360.17              589.39            61.62           17.46            50.16
Min                  0.00              0.00                0.00             0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               4634.99           5867.56            11973.74          1988.07          983.28          2320.19

Panel B: Ages between 5 and 19
Mean                56.02             49.55              146.44             4.68           13.32            54.33
Std. Dev.          116.40            109.09              220.10            33.52           57.33           132.52
Min                  0.00              0.00                0.00             0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               4779.84           4490.15            13035.92          1937.98         1937.98          3875.97

Panel C: Ages between 20 and 64
Mean                58.16             23.87              155.89            69.97           50.86           148.31
Std. Dev.           71.24             42.25              141.49            73.55           60.99           134.39
Min                  0.00              0.00                0.00             0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               3310.12           4280.33            13640.00          1416.43         1045.21          2351.71

Panel D: Ages 65 and above
Mean               120.55             18.44              573.24           780.55           96.32           285.57
Std. Dev.          199.89             76.38              486.90           529.20          175.61           345.58
Min                  0.00              0.00                0.00             0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               3791.47           2521.01            11764.71          7582.94         3731.34          6529.85

Notes: This table presents summary statistics of hospitalization rates (i.e., hospital visits per million residents)
by age group, including mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum. The data are obtained Office of
Statewide Health Planning and Development of California.


                                                        52
             Table A.6: Summary statistics of hospitalization rate by sex group

                                   Respiratory                            Heart                 Psychiatric

                                   Upper                 All               All                             All
                  Asthma         Respiratory         Respiratory          Heart         Anxiety         Psychiatric
Panel A: Male
Mean                52.42             39.32              207.14           151.64           33.22           114.51
Std. Dev.           70.79             59.99              166.07           128.72           54.41           126.34
Min                  0.00              0.00                0.00             0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               3523.27           3252.25            11518.40          2088.62         1135.07          2683.96

Panel B: Female
Mean                79.31             43.74              238.96           129.20           58.69           162.38
Std. Dev.           90.99             64.77              187.83           111.88           72.75           149.32
Min                  0.00              0.00                0.00             0.00            0.00             0.00
Max               3621.21           4782.73            14006.56          1642.58         1314.06          2956.64

Notes: This table presents summary statistics of hospitalization rates (i.e., hospital visits per million residents)
by sex group, including mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum. The data are obtained Office of
Statewide Health Planning and Development of California.




                                                        53
Table A.7: Summary statistics of hospitalization rate by time window following pollution
exposure

                                        All                                  All                                All
                                    Respiratory                             Heart                            Psychiatric
 Panel A: 3-day Time Window
 Mean                                    668.91                              420.41                              416.56
 Std. Dev.                               354.38                              199.19                              250.32
 Min                                       0.00                                0.00                                0.00
 Max                                   34903.90                             3044.14                             4077.47

 Panel B: 5-day Time Window
 Mean                                   1114.78                              700.86                              694.46
 Std. Dev.                               555.92                              294.57                              383.89
 Min                                       0.00                                0.00                                0.00
 Max                                   49124.00                             4566.21                             5861.37

 Panel C: 9-day Time Window
 Mean                                   2006.08                             1261.76                             1250.37
 Std. Dev.                               954.46                              485.81                              649.77
 Min                                       0.00                                0.00                                0.00
 Max                                   66643.99                             7549.47                             9599.05

 Panel D: 14-day Time Window
 Mean                                   3119.73                             1963.07                             1945.63
 Std. Dev.                              1445.75                              722.09                              979.93
 Min                                       0.00                                0.00                                0.00
 Max                                   78278.62                            10776.26                            14186.20

 Panel E: 21-day Time Window
 Mean                                   4677.94                             2944.93                             2919.29
 Std. Dev.                              2125.54                             1053.05                             1441.61
 Min                                       0.00                                0.00                                0.00
 Max                                   86205.14                            15220.70                            20642.20

 Panel F: 28-day Time Window
 Mean                                   6235.21                             3926.76                             3893.20
 Std. Dev.                              2798.02                             1382.92                             1902.21
 Min                                       0.00                                0.00                                0.00
 Max                                   89607.08                            19969.56                            26333.67

  Notes: This table presents summary statistics of hospitalization rates (i.e., hospital visits per million residents) by
 time window following pollution exposure, including mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum. The
 data are obtained Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development of California.




                                                           54
         Table A.8: Summary statistics of hospitalization rate by data specification

                                      All                               All                              All
                                  Respiratory                          Heart                          Psychiatric
 Panel A: Principal Diagnosis
 Mean                                   86.86                            32.09                             29.23
 Std. Dev.                              76.26                            38.47                             40.36
 Min                                     0.00                             0.00                              0.00
 Max                                  6089.47                           728.97                            999.29

 Panel B: Patient Discharge Data (PDD)
 Mean                                   78.88                            77.26                            60.22
 Std. Dev.                              67.20                            61.90                            61.71
 Min                                     0.00                             0.00                             0.00
 Max                                  2652.14                          1231.35                          1142.04

 Panel C: Emergency Department Data (EDD)
 Mean                                  127.12                            46.38                            68.94
 Std. Dev.                             112.51                            49.86                            72.42
 Min                                     0.00                             0.00                             0.00
 Max                                 12519.14                           791.48                          1190.12

 Panel D: Ambulatory Surgery Center Data (ASCD)
 Mean                                   16.98                            16.47                              9.66
 Std. Dev.                              31.06                            29.79                             23.76
 Min                                     0.00                             0.00                              0.00
 Max                                   785.24                           691.92                            691.92

  Notes: Table presents summary statistics of hospitalization rate in various data specifications, including mean,
 standard deviation, minimum, and maximum. Panels A­C show statistics for different OSHPD data sets. Panel
 D presents the statistics by only counting principal diagnoses (i.e., secondary diagnoses are excluded). The data
 are obtained Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development of California.




Table A.9: Average pollution exposure weighted by Black and white population in port
areas

                                                          Black                       White
                    CO (ppb)                             419.19                       402.06
                    NO2 (ppb)                             15.25                        13.68
                    PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                       10.54                         10.02
                    SO2 (ppb)                              0.61                         0.58

                     Notes: This table presents average pollution exposure for Blacks and
                     whites for 2010­2016, weighted by the zip code-level Black and white
                     population. The population data are obtained from U.S. 2010 Decen-
                     nial Census. The pollution data are from the U.S. EPA Air Quality
                     System.




                                                       55
               Table A.10: Balance statistics for weather variables in port areas

                                           Standardized                     Variance              Kolmogorov-Smirnov
                                          Mean Differences                   Ratio                     Statistics
Wind Speed (m/s)                                -0.012                       1.070                       0.019
Wind Direction (degree)                         -0.011                       1.041                       0.012
Max Temperature (C)                              0.006                       0.989                       0.009
Min Temperature (C)                             -0.005                       0.998                       0.010
Precipitation (mm)                              -0.015                       1.016                       0.008
Dew Point Temperature (C)                       -0.015                       0.985                       0.014

  Notes: This table presents the balance statistics of weather variables in the U.S. port areas, separately for the
 month-days when there exist seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant tropical cyclones in the ocean and the
 same month-days when there are no such cyclones. Balanced sub-samples indicate that standardized mean
 differences are close to zero, variance ratios are close to one, and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistics are close
 to zero. The data are obtained from the NOAA Integrated Surface Database.




       Table A.11: First-stage relationship between tropical cyclones and port traffic

                                                                 Dependent variable: port traffic

                                             (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
Panel A: Log of vessel tonnage
Tropical Cyclone                           -0.04                  -0.04                  -0.05                   -0.04
                                            (0.01)                 (0.01)                 (0.01)                  (0.01)
First-Stage F Stat.                         32.88                  37.42                  36.52                   30.89
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val                  0.0021                 0.0402                 0.0080                  0.0268
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val                  0.0012                 0.0216                 0.0066                  0.0154
Observations                               502,631                587,833                423,200                 431,574

Panel B: Number of vessels
Tropical Cyclone                           -0.54                  -0.48                  -0.48                   -0.45
                                            (0.13)                 (0.10)                 (0.13)                  (0.12)
First-Stage F Stat.                         16.69                  20.78                  12.96                   13.64
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val                  0.0021                 0.0402                 0.0080                  0.0268
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val                  0.0012                 0.0216                 0.0066                  0.0154
Observations                               502,631                587,833                423,200                 431,574

 Notes: Panel A presents the first-stage results for the instrumental variable estimation in Panel A in Table 1, where
the port traffic is measured as log of daily vessel tonnage. Panel B presents the the first-stage results for the instru-
mental variable estimation Panel B, using the number of vessels as the variable of interest. Each entry orresponds
to an individual regression. The instrument is an indicator of seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant cyclones in
the ocean. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum
temperature, dew point temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a monitor-port
pair. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and monitor-port pair fixed effects.
An observation is a monitor-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by monitor-port pair and day. Significance levels
are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                          56
      Table A.12: 2SLS estimation of the effect of vessels in port on ozone pollution

                                                         Dependent variable: log of pollution concentration
                                                                                  O3
          Panel A: Vessel tonnage
          Log of Vessel Tonnage                                                 -0.39
                                                                                (0.17)
          Adjusted R2                                                            0.19
          Observations                                                          827,569

          Panel B: Number of vessels
          Number of Vessels                                                     -0.042
                                                                                (0.019)
          Adjusted R2                                                            0.27
          Observations                                                          827,569

               Panel A presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of log vessel tonnage on air
              pollutant concentrations within a 25-mile radius of ports in the United States. Panel B presents
              the same instrumental variable estimation using the number of vessels in ports as the variable
              of interest. Each entry presents an individual regression on a local air pollutant. The endoge-
              nous variables, vessel tonnage and the number of vessels, are instrumented by an indicator of
              seven-day lagged cyclones that are at least 500-mile distant from ports. All regressions include
              weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperature,
              precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a monitor-port pair. All regres-
              sions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and monitor-port fixed effects.
              An observation is a monitor-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by monitor-port pair and
              day. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




    Table A.13: OLS estimation of the effect of vessel tonnage in port on air pollution

                                                     Dependent variable: log of pollution concentration
                                           CO                      NO2                     PM2.5                   SO2
                                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)
Log of Vessel Tonnage                     0.001                   0.01                      0.01                   0.01
                                         (0.003)                  (0.004)                 (0.003)                 (0.01)
Adjusted R2                               0.57                     0.75                    0.46                    0.50
Observations                             502,631                 587,833                  423,200                 431,574

 Notes: This table presents the OLS estimation of the effect of vessel tonnage in port on air pollution. Each
column presents an individual regression on a local air pollutant. All regressions include weather controls,
such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature, precipitation,
wind speed, and relative wind direction between a monitor-port pair. All regressions also include county-by-
year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and monitor-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a monitor-port-day.
Standard errors are clustered by monitor-port pair and day. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%,
and * 10%.




                                                            57
Table A.14: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates for the overall population in
California port areas, instrumental variable estimation

                                                          Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                                      Respiratory                            Heart                     Psychiatric

                                                      Upper                  All              All                                 All
                                    Asthma          Respiratory          Respiratory         Heart           Anxiety           Psychiatric
                                       (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)             (5)                   (6)
Panel A: CO
CO (ppb)                             0.01              0.01                0.05              0.01            0.003               0.01
                                     (0.002)           (0.003)             (0.01)            (0.003)         (0.001)             (0.003)
Adjusted R2                           0.39               0.34                0.47             0.35             0.22                0.40
First-stage F Stat.                  57.71              57.71               57.71            57.71            57.71               57.71
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         3.35e-10           3.35e-10            3.35e-10         3.35e-10         3.35e-10            3.35e-10
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         4.64e-06           4.64e-06            4.64e-06         4.64e-06         4.64e-06            4.64e-06
Observations                       1,782,266          1,782,266           1,782,266        1,782,266        1,782,266           1,782,266

Panel B: NO2
NO2 (ppb)                            0.28              0.34                1.04              0.37             0.09               0.23
                                     (0.05)            (0.07)              (0.19)            (0.07)           (0.03)             (0.07)
Adjusted R2                           0.39               0.33                0.47             0.35             0.22                0.40
First-stage F Stat.                  78.53              78.53               78.53            78.53            78.53               78.53
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         2.75e-09           2.75e-09            2.75e-09         2.75e-09         2.75e-09            2.75e-09
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         1.50e-05           1.50e-05            1.50e-05         1.50e-05         1.50e-05            1.50e-05
Observations                       1,812,210          1,812,210           1,812,210        1,812,210        1,812,210           1,812,210

Panel C: PM2.5
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                       0.35              0.42                1.28              0.43             0.10               0.26
                                     (0.06)            (0.10)              (0.26)            (0.09)           (0.04)             (0.09)
Adjusted R2                           0.39               0.34                0.47             0.35             0.22                0.40
First-stage F Stat.                  28.42              28.42               28.42            28.42            28.42               28.42
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         5.12e-09           5.12e-09            5.12e-09         5.12e-09         5.12e-09            5.12e-09
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         1.99e-05           1.99e-05            1.99e-05         1.99e-05         1.99e-05            1.99e-05
Observations                       1,720,810          1,720,810           1,720,810        1,720,810        1,720,810           1,720,810

Panel D: SO2
SO2 (ppb)                            7.36              9.25                27.47             9.99             2.68               6.95
                                     (1.36)            (2.11)               (5.57)           (1.98)           (0.85)             (2.04)
Adjusted R2                           0.39               0.33                0.47             0.35             0.22                0.40
First-stage F Stat.                  29.97              29.97               29.97            29.97            29.97               29.97
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         4.80e-10           4.80e-10            4.80e-10         4.80e-10         4.80e-10            4.80e-10
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         6.13e-06           6.13e-06            6.13e-06         6.13e-06         6.13e-06            6.13e-06
Observations                       1,749,073          1,749,073           1,749,073        1,749,073        1,749,073           1,749,073

  Notes: This table presents the detailed results of Panel A in Table 2. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant
 on an illness category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed,
 and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point
 temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair
 fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are
 weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                                    58
Table A.15: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates for Blacks in California port areas,
instrumental variable estimation

                                                          Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                                      Respiratory                            Heart                     Psychiatric

                                                      Upper                  All              All                                All
                                    Asthma          Respiratory          Respiratory         Heart           Anxiety          Psychiatric
                                       (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)             (5)                   (6)
Panel A: CO
CO (ppb)                             0.04              0.03                0.09              0.03             0.004             -0.0001
                                     (0.01)            (0.01)              (0.02)            (0.01)          (0.004)             (0.01)
Adjusted R2                            0.17              0.10                0.23              0.13            0.05                0.19
First-stage F Stat.                   46.66             46.66               46.66             46.66           46.66               46.66
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val              0                 0                   0                 0                0                  0
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val          0.000400          0.000400            0.000400          0.000400        0.000400            0.000400
Observations                         877,508           877,508             877,508           877,508         877,508             877,508

Panel B: NO2
NO2 (ppb)                            0.83              1.03                2.73              0.71              0.14               0.08
                                     (0.20)            (0.17)              (0.50)            (0.22)           (0.10)             (0.23)
Adjusted R2                            0.17              0.10                0.23              0.13            0.05                0.19
First-stage F Stat.                   61.27             61.27               61.27             61.27           61.27               61.27
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val          5.31e-11          5.31e-11            5.31e-11          5.31e-11        5.31e-11            5.31e-11
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val          0.000385          0.000385            0.000385          0.000385        0.000385            0.000385
Observations                         888,231           888,231             888,231           888,231         888,231             888,231

Panel C: PM2.5
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                       1.07              1.22                3.45              0.73              0.07              -0.09
                                     (0.24)            (0.22)              (0.62)            (0.27)           (0.12)             (0.28)
Adjusted R2                            0.17              0.10                0.23              0.13            0.05                0.19
First-stage F Stat.                   24.07             24.07               24.07             24.07           24.07               24.07
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val          4.35e-10          4.35e-10            4.35e-10          4.35e-10        4.35e-10            4.35e-10
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val          0.000605          0.000605            0.000605          0.000605        0.000605            0.000605
Observations                         847,682           847,682             847,682           847,682         847,682             847,682

Panel D: SO2
SO2 (ppb)                            23.44             35.53               85.74             17.99             4.50               4.55
                                      (5.28)            (5.13)             (14.16)            (6.11)          (2.80)             (6.34)
Adjusted R2                            0.17              0.10                0.23              0.13            0.05                0.19
First-stage F Stat.                   20.99             20.99               20.99             20.99           20.99               20.99
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val              0                 0                   0                 0                0                  0
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val          0.000331          0.000331            0.000331          0.000331        0.000331            0.000331
Observations                         872,257           872,257             872,257           872,257         872,257             872,257

  Notes: This table presents the detailed results of Panel B in Table 2. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant
 on an illness category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed,
 and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point
 temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair
 fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are
 weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                                    59
Table A.16: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates for whites in California port areas,
instrumental variable estimation

                                                          Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                                      Respiratory                            Heart                     Psychiatric

                                                      Upper                  All              All                                 All
                                    Asthma          Respiratory          Respiratory         Heart           Anxiety           Psychiatric
                                       (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)             (5)                   (6)
Panel A: CO
CO (ppb)                             0.01              0.01                0.04              0.02             0.001              0.01
                                     (0.002)           (0.002)             (0.01)            (0.01)          (0.002)             (0.01)
Adjusted R2                           0.17               0.09                0.34             0.28             0.15                0.32
First-stage F Stat.                  59.79              59.79               59.79            59.79            59.79               59.79
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         6.28e-10           6.28e-10            6.28e-10         6.28e-10         6.28e-10            6.28e-10
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         7.37e-06           7.37e-06            7.37e-06         7.37e-06         7.37e-06            7.37e-06
Observations                       1,657,238          1,657,238           1,657,238        1,657,238        1,657,238           1,657,238

Panel B: NO2
NO2 (ppb)                            0.21              0.21                0.80              0.42              0.03              0.29
                                     (0.05)            (0.05)              (0.17)            (0.12)           (0.06)             (0.13)
Adjusted R2                           0.17               0.09                0.34             0.28             0.15                0.32
First-stage F Stat.                  82.91              82.91               82.91            82.91            82.91               82.91
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         1.73e-08           1.73e-08            1.73e-08         1.73e-08         1.73e-08            1.73e-08
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         3.15e-05           3.15e-05            3.15e-05         3.15e-05         3.15e-05            3.15e-05
Observations                       1,687,158          1,687,158           1,687,158        1,687,158        1,687,158           1,687,158

Panel C: PM2.5
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                       0.29              0.28                1.04              0.55              0.05              0.37
                                     (0.08)            (0.07)              (0.24)            (0.17)           (0.08)             (0.19)
Adjusted R2                           0.17               0.09                0.34             0.28             0.15                0.32
First-stage F Stat.                  27.86              27.86               27.86            27.86            27.86               27.86
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         2.33e-08           2.33e-08            2.33e-08         2.33e-08         2.33e-08            2.33e-08
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         3.70e-05           3.70e-05            3.70e-05         3.70e-05         3.70e-05            3.70e-05
Observations                       1,605,247          1,605,247           1,605,247        1,605,247        1,605,247           1,605,247

Panel D: SO2
SO2 (ppb)                            4.68              5.23                18.26            10.01              1.22              8.12
                                     (1.47)            (1.24)               (4.48)           (3.17)           (1.46)             (3.43)
Adjusted R2                           0.17               0.09                0.33             0.28             0.15                0.32
First-stage F Stat.                  34.08              34.08               34.08            34.08            34.08               34.08
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         8.89e-10           8.89e-10            8.89e-10         8.89e-10         8.89e-10            8.89e-10
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val         9.39e-06           9.39e-06            9.39e-06         9.39e-06         9.39e-06            9.39e-06
Observations                       1,624,191          1,624,191           1,624,191        1,624,191        1,624,191           1,624,191

  Notes: This table presents the detailed results of Panel C in Table 2. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant
 on an illness category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed,
 and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point
 temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair
 fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are
 weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                                    60
Table A.17: OLS estimates of the effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates in California
port areas

                                          Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                       Respiratory                           Heart                   Psychiatric

                                       Upper                 All              All                              All
                      Asthma         Respiratory         Respiratory         Heart        Anxiety           Psychiatric
                         (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)            (5)                   (6)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)              0.005             0.003              0.02             0.01           0.0004              0.002
                      (0.001)          (0.002)             (0.004)          (0.001)        (0.001)            (0.002)
NO2 (ppb)             0.15             -0.0003             0.50             0.38           0.07               0.25
                       (0.03)           (0.05)              (0.12)           (0.05)         (0.02)             (0.05)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )        0.08               0.06               0.23             -0.03          0.004              0.004
                       (0.02)           (0.04)              (0.10)           (0.04)         (0.02)             (0.04)
SO2 (ppb)             1.31             -0.94                -0.66            0.96           0.36               0.93
                       (0.29)           (0.38)              (1.06)           (0.39)         (0.18)             (0.45)

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)               0.01             -0.004              0.03            0.01            0.002               0.01
                       (0.004)          (0.004)             (0.01)          (0.004)        (0.002)            (0.004)
NO2 (ppb)              0.46               0.02              1.23            0.58           0.18               0.54
                        (0.13)           (0.11)             (0.32)           (0.14)         (0.06)             (0.14)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )         0.32              -0.05               0.38             0.01           0.05               0.02
                        (0.10)           (0.09)             (0.26)           (0.11)         (0.05)             (0.11)
SO2 (ppb)              6.74              -0.17               6.37             1.29          -0.25               1.48
                        (1.60)           (1.32)             (3.82)           (1.37)         (0.60)             (1.56)

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)               0.01             0.0000             0.02             0.02            0.002              0.01
                       (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.004)          (0.002)        (0.001)            (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)              0.24              -0.02             0.84             0.80           0.18               0.59
                        (0.04)           (0.03)             (0.11)           (0.09)         (0.03)             (0.09)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )           0.05            0.005               0.10            -0.04          0.002               0.03
                        (0.03)           (0.02)             (0.08)           (0.07)         (0.03)             (0.07)
SO2 (ppb)              1.24             -0.60                0.31            1.58            0.21               1.00
                        (0.34)           (0.23)             (0.87)           (0.70)         (0.33)             (0.75)

 Notes: This table presents the OLS estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization rates for the overall
 population, Blacks, and whites. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness
 category. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum tem-
 perature, dew point temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a zip code-port
 pair. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects.
 An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are
 weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         61
Table A.18: Effect of air pollution on differences of hospitalizaton rates between Blacks and
whites in California port areas, instrumental variable estimation

                                Dependent variable: hospitalization rate for Blacks ­ hospitalization rate for whites
                                           Respiratory                           Heart                    Psychiatric

                                           Upper                 All              All                                All
                       Asthma            Respiratory         Respiratory         Heart          Anxiety           Psychiatric
                         (1)                  (2)                 (3)              (4)             (5)                  (6)
CO (ppb)                0.03                0.03                0.05             -0.004          -0.002              -0.03
                        (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.02)           (0.01)          (0.01)              (0.02)
NO2 (ppb)               0.74                1.08                2.05             -0.09           -0.07               -0.62
                        (0.28)              (0.20)              (0.58)           (0.34)          (0.20)              (0.43)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )          0.95                1.29                2.59             -0.26           -0.13               -0.93
                        (0.37)              (0.28)              (0.78)           (0.43)          (0.26)              (0.58)
SO2 (ppb)              21.41               32.06               67.07             -0.32           -1.49              -12.08
                        (6.88)              (5.41)             (15.07)           (8.52)          (4.88)             (10.15)

  Notes: This table presents the effects of pollution on the differences of hospitalizaton rates between Blacks and whites.
 Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category. Pollution concentrations are
 instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and their interactions. All regressions
 include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperature, and precipitation.
 All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An
 observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted
 by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.



Table A.19: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates for Hispanics in California port
areas

                                             Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                           Respiratory                           Heart                    Psychiatric

                                           Upper                 All              All                               All
                       Asthma            Respiratory         Respiratory         Heart         Anxiety           Psychiatric
                          (1)                 (2)                 (3)              (4)            (5)                   (6)
CO (ppb)                0.01                0.02                0.05             0.01           0.004              0.01
                        (0.002)            (0.004)              (0.01)           (0.002)        (0.001)            (0.002)
NO2 (ppb)               0.30                0.49                1.30             0.21           0.10               0.23
                         (0.05)             (0.10)              (0.24)            (0.05)         (0.03)             (0.06)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )          0.35                0.59                1.53             0.20           0.13               0.26
                         (0.06)             (0.13)              (0.31)            (0.06)         (0.03)             (0.07)
SO2 (ppb)               9.76               17.16               43.82             5.88           3.56               7.75
                         (1.74)             (3.46)              (7.95)            (1.63)         (0.96)             (1.95)

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
 rates for the Hispanic population. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness
 category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed,
 and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature,
 minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year,
 month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard
 errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population.
 Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.



                                                             62
Table A.20: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates in California port areas by age

                                Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents in each age group
                                      Respiratory                           Heart                    Psychiatric

                                       Upper                All              All                               All
                     Asthma          Respiratory        Respiratory         Heart         Anxiety           Psychiatric
                        (1)              (2)                  (3)             (4)            (5)                   (6)
Panel A: Ages 5 and under
CO (ppb)              0.01             0.06                0.10              0.002         0.0005             0.004
                      (0.01)            (0.02)              (0.04)          (0.001)       (0.0004)            (0.001)
NO2 (ppb)             0.37             1.67                 2.37              0.06          0.01               0.09
                      (0.14)            (0.50)              (0.95)           (0.03)        (0.01)              (0.03)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )        0.42             1.73                  2.31             0.05          0.01               0.14
                      (0.18)            (0.64)              (1.25)           (0.04)        (0.01)              (0.03)
SO2 (ppb)             9.37             37.91                44.44             1.60          0.33               2.41
                      (4.43)           (14.92)             (28.59)           (0.93)        (0.29)              (0.75)

Panel B: Ages between 5 and 19
CO (ppb)              0.01              0.02               0.04              0.001        -0.0004              0.002
                      (0.003)           (0.01)             (0.01)           (0.001)       (0.001)             (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)             0.29              0.41               0.79               0.02        -0.003                0.10
                       (0.08)           (0.12)             (0.26)            (0.01)        (0.02)              (0.06)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )        0.36              0.53               1.02               0.02          0.01                0.13
                       (0.10)           (0.16)             (0.34)            (0.02)        (0.03)              (0.08)
SO2 (ppb)             7.92             13.48              23.83               0.39         -0.15                3.01
                       (2.44)           (3.61)             (7.63)            (0.38)        (0.65)              (1.81)

Panel C: Ages between 20 and 64
CO (ppb)              0.01             0.01                0.04             0.01           0.004               0.01
                      (0.002)          (0.002)             (0.01)           (0.002)        (0.002)            (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)             0.23             0.26                0.87             0.15           0.11                0.18
                       (0.04)           (0.04)             (0.13)            (0.05)         (0.04)             (0.08)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )        0.29             0.34                1.10             0.16           0.13                 0.19
                       (0.06)           (0.05)             (0.18)            (0.06)         (0.05)             (0.11)
SO2 (ppb)             6.15             8.22               25.36             4.13           3.25                5.42
                       (1.29)           (1.23)             (4.04)            (1.30)         (1.05)             (2.31)

Panel D: Ages 65 and above
CO (ppb)              0.02              0.002              0.07            0.08             0.003              0.03
                      (0.01)           (0.002)             (0.02)           (0.02)         (0.004)             (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)            0.48               0.11               1.71            2.02              0.11              0.71
                      (0.12)            (0.05)             (0.42)           (0.42)          (0.10)             (0.22)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )        0.58               0.11              2.13            2.46              0.10              0.81
                      (0.16)            (0.07)             (0.59)           (0.58)          (0.14)             (0.30)
SO2 (ppb)            13.16              3.37              44.62            50.78             4.78             22.07
                      (3.32)            (1.50)            (11.51)          (11.72)          (2.71)             (6.15)

 Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
rates by age. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category. Pollution
concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and their interactions.
All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature,
dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday,
and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip
code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated
by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.

                                                         63
Table A.21: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates in California port areas by sex

                                Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents in each sex group
                                      Respiratory                           Heart                    Psychiatric

                                       Upper                All              All                               All
                     Asthma          Respiratory        Respiratory         Heart         Anxiety           Psychiatric
                        (1)              (2)                  (3)             (4)            (5)                   (6)
Panel A: Male
CO (ppb)              0.01             0.01                0.04             0.01           0.003              0.01
                      (0.002)          (0.003)             (0.01)           (0.004)        (0.001)            (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)             0.22             0.28                0.89             0.33           0.07               0.22
                       (0.04)           (0.07)             (0.18)            (0.08)         (0.03)             (0.07)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )        0.27             0.34                1.10             0.35            0.08              0.23
                       (0.06)           (0.09)             (0.25)            (0.11)         (0.03)             (0.09)
SO2 (ppb)             5.24             7.17               22.98             8.52           2.16               6.22
                       (1.32)           (2.02)             (5.24)            (2.40)         (0.73)             (1.92)

Panel B: Female
CO (ppb)              0.02              0.02               0.05            0.02            0.004               0.01
                      (0.002)          (0.003)             (0.01)          (0.003)         (0.002)            (0.004)
NO2 (ppb)             0.34              0.41               1.18             0.40            0.10              0.25
                       (0.06)           (0.08)             (0.21)           (0.07)          (0.04)             (0.09)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )        0.43              0.49               1.46             0.50            0.12               0.29
                       (0.08)           (0.11)             (0.29)           (0.09)          (0.06)             (0.12)
SO2 (ppb)             9.44             11.28              31.83            11.42           3.24               7.72
                       (1.71)           (2.37)             (6.25)           (2.03)          (1.23)             (2.67)

 Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
rates by sex. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category. Pollution
concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and their interactions.
All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature,
dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday,
and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip
code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated
by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         64
Table A.22: Effect of one standard deviation increase of air pollution on annual hospitaliza-
tions and medical costs in California port areas

                                               All                              All                           All
                                           Respiratory                         Heart                       Psychiatric
                                               (1)                              (2)                            (3)
 Panel A: Hospital visits per million residents
 Black                                        46,000                           9,700                           2,500
 White                                         9,900                           5,400                           4,400
 Overall Population                           15,000                           5,400                           3,800
 Panel B: Medical costs per capita (2017 USD)
 Black                                          401                             94                              22
 White                                           86                             52                              39
 Overall Population                             131                             52                              34

  Notes: Panel A presents the back-of-the-envelope calculations of the effect of one standard deviation increase of
 air pollution on daily hospital visits in the port areas of California, based on the instrumental variable estimates
 in Panel A of Table 2. Panel B presents the medical costs associated with the hospital visits in Panel A based on
 the payment data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The average medical costs are $8,917 for
 psychiatric illnesses, $8,715 for respiratory illnesses, and $9,679 for heart-related illnesses. Based on the U.S. 2010
 Decennial Census, the total population residing in the zip codes within 25 miles of California's major ports is 15.08
 million, of which 1.12 million are Black 5.07 million are white. All numbers are rounded to two significant figures.




                                                          65
Table A.23: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates of placebo illnesses for the overall
population in California port areas, instrumental variable estimation

                                                  Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                       Arterial                          Neck
                                      Embolism                          Wound                           Appendicitis
                                          (1)                              (2)                               (3)
Panel A: CO
CO (ppb)                                0.0000                          -0.0000                            0.0003
                                       (0.0000)                         (0.0000)                          (0.0002)
Adjusted R2                              0.00                             0.00                               0.01
Observations                          2,215,370                        2,215,370                          2,215,370

Panel B: NO2
NO2 (ppb)                              0.0003                           -0.0002                             0.01
                                       (0.001)                          (0.001)                            (0.01)
Adjusted R2                              0.00                             0.00                               0.01
Observations                          2,288,952                        2,288,952                          2,288,952

Panel C: PM2.5
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                          0.001                           -0.0002                             0.01
                                       (0.001)                          (0.001)                            (0.01)
Adjusted R2                              0.00                             0.00                               0.01
Observations                          2,184,088                        2,184,088                          2,184,088

Panel D: SO2
SO2 (ppb)                                0.01                            -0.02                              0.20
                                        (0.04)                           (0.03)                            (0.19)
Adjusted R2                              0.00                             0.00                               0.01
Observations                          1,938,097                        1,938,097                          1,938,097

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
 rates for placebo illnesses. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category.
 Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and
 their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature,
 minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year,
 month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard
 errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population.
 Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         66
Table A.24: Robustness check for the effect of vessel tonnage in port on air pollution,
various model specifications

                                                 Dependent variable: log of pollution concentration
                                       CO                    NO2                   PM2.5                  SO2
                                        (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)
Panel A: No weather controls and temporal fixed effects
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 10.34                  10.66                  1.16                  19.66
                                      (8.35)                 (6.94)                (0.76)                (22.17)
Adjusted R2                           -62.20                 -64.60                -1.44                  -87.77
Observations                         502,631                587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel B: No weather controls
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.35                    0.12                  0.45                   0.34
                                      (0.17)                 (0.18)                (0.23)                 (0.23)
Adjusted R2                           0.42                    0.62                 0.02                   0.43
Observations                         502,631                587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel C: No temporal fixed effects
Log of Vessel Tonnage                  4.65                   0.96                 3.67                    2.33
                                      (2.83)                 (0.88)                (1.08)                 (2.09)
Adjusted R2                           -12.30                  0.11                 -15.14                 -0.99
Observations                         502,631                587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel D: No quadratic weather terms
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.33                    0.23                  0.34                   0.29
                                      (0.13)                 (0.12)                (0.18)                 (0.19)
Adjusted R2                           0.51                    0.72                 0.28                   0.48
Observations                         502,631                587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel E: Monitors within 12.5 miles of ports
Log of Vessel Tonnage                  0.23                   0.16                 0.45                   0.50
                                      (0.15)                 (0.13)                (0.18)                 (0.25)
Adjusted R2                           0.54                    0.73                 0.23                   0.43
Observations                         258,799                278,898               229,503                256,711

 Notes: This table presents the robustness check results for Table 1 with various model specifications. Each
 panel presents regressions using an alternative model specification. Log vessel tonnage is instrumented by
 an indicator of seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant cyclones from ports. All regressions include weather
 controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature,
 precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a monitor-port pair. All regressions also include
 county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and monitor-port pair fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
 by monitor-port pair and day. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                       67
Table A.25: Robustness check for the effect of vessel tonnage in port on air pollution,
various instrumental variable specifications

                                                Dependent variable: log of pollution concentration
                                       CO                    NO2                  PM2.5                  SO2
                                       (1)                    (2)                   (3)                   (4)
Panel A: Exclude cyclones within 800 miles of ports
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.41                  0.28                  0.40                   0.56
                                      (0.13)                (0.13)                (0.18)                 (0.24)
Adjusted R2                           0.48                   0.71                 0.30                   0.44
Observations                         502,631               587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel B: Six-day lagged cyclones
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.33                  0.31                  0.40                   0.45
                                      (0.12)                (0.12)                (0.18)                 (0.19)
Adjusted R2                           0.51                   0.70                 0.29                   0.46
Observations                         502,631               587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel C: Eight-day lagged cyclones
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.40                   0.18                 0.49                    0.36
                                      (0.16)                (0.14)                (0.23)                 (0.27)
Adjusted R2                           0.49                   0.74                 0.21                   0.48
Observations                         502,631               587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel D: Six-, seven-, and eight-day lagged cyclones (2SLS)
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.35                  0.27                  0.42                   0.44
                                      (0.12)                (0.12)                (0.17)                 (0.18)
Adjusted R2                           0.51                   0.72                 0.28                   0.47
Observations                         502,631               587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel E: Six-, seven-, and eight-day lagged cyclones (LIML)
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.35                  0.28                  0.42                   0.45
                                      (0.12)                (0.12)                (0.17)                 (0.18)
Adjusted R2                           0.51                   0.71                 0.28                   0.46
Observations                         502,631               587,833               423,200                431,574

Panel F: Cyclone counts
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.34                  0.29                  0.39                    0.35
                                      (0.14)                (0.13)                (0.17)                 (0.20)
Adjusted R2                           0.51                   0.71                 0.30                   0.48
Observations                         502,631               587,833               423,200                431,574

  Notes: This table presents the results of robustness check for Table 1 with various instrumental variable
 specifications. Each panel presents regressions using an alternative instrumental variable specification. All
 regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature,
 dew point temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a monitor-port pair.
 All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and monitor-port pair fixed effects.
 Standard errors are clustered by monitor-port pair and day. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%,
 and * 10%.



                                                      68
Table A.26: Robustness check for the effect of vessel tonnage in port on air pollution,
including the observations where cyclones are close to ports

                                                 Dependent variable: log of pollution concentration
                                       CO                    NO2                   PM2.5                  SO2
                                        (1)                   (2)                   (3)                    (4)
Log of Vessel Tonnage                 0.34                   0.23                  0.40                    0.38
                                      (0.13)                 (0.12)                (0.17)                 (0.20)
First-Stage F Stat.                   30.88                  36.64                 34.19                  28.69
Adjusted R2                           0.51                    0.72                 0.29                   0.47
Observations                         513,256                600,681               433,377                442,141

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of vessel tonnage in ports on air
 pollution, where we include the dates when there exist tropical cyclones near ports (e.g., within the 300-mile
 radius of ports) and two days before and after the events. Each column presents an individual regression on a
 local air pollutant. Log of vessel tonnage is instrumented by an indicator of seven-day lagged and 500-mile
 distant cyclones from ports. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum
 temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind di-
 rection between a monitor-port pair. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday,
 and monitor-port pair fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by monitor-port pair and day. Significance
 levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                       69
Table A.27: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rates in California port areas ­ joint
estimation with zip codes within a 25-mile radius from ports

                                                         Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                          All Respiratory                         All Heart                         All Psychiatric

                                  (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)           (9)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)                        0.07          0.05        0.10         0.003         0.01       0.01       -0.003       0.0004        0.002
                                (0.02)        (0.01)      (0.03)       (0.01)      (0.005)     (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.005)       (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)                       -0.63                    -2.66          0.30                    0.08        0.30                      -0.10
                                (0.58)                    (1.00)       (0.18)                  (0.35)      (0.20)                     (0.40)
SO2 (ppb)                                      1.64      38.20                     5.96         4.89                    6.73           8.07
                                              (9.84)     (16.56)                   (2.95)      (5.68)                   (3.19)        (6.22)
First-stage F Stat.              23.02         10.89        5.61        23.02       10.89        5.61       23.02       10.89        5.61
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val     3.33e-10      4.39e-10    4.36e-10     3.33e-10    4.39e-10    4.36e-10    3.33e-10    4.39e-10    4.36e-10
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val     4.62e-06      5.79e-06    5.75e-06     4.62e-06    5.79e-06    5.75e-06    4.62e-06    5.79e-06    5.75e-06
Observations                   1,782,259     1,748,298   1,748,291    1,782,259   1,748,298   1,748,291   1,782,259   1,748,298   1,748,291

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)                         -0.03        -0.02         0.10        0.01        0.02         0.02      -0.02        -0.02          -0.01
                                 (0.06)       (0.03)       (0.07)      (0.02)      (0.01)       (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.01)         (0.03)
NO2 (ppb)                        3.59                     -5.52         0.42                    -0.27       0.62                       -0.51
                                 (1.63)                    (2.95)      (0.61)                   (1.00)     (0.70)                      (1.33)
SO2 (ppb)                                     94.67      166.60                     9.19        12.72                    14.71         21.32
                                              (24.72)     (43.42)                  (9.57)      (15.59)                  (10.22)       (19.25)
First-stage F Stat.              15.70         11.38        5.43        15.70       11.38        5.43       15.70        11.38       5.43
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val         0             0           0            0           0           0           0            0          0
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val     0.000399      0.000321    0.000321     0.000399    0.000321    0.000321    0.000399     0.000321   0.000321
Observations                    877,506       871,732     871,730      877,506     871,732     871,730     877,506      871,732    871,730

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)                        0.08          0.06          0.09        0.02        0.02        0.01       0.002        0.002           0.01
                                (0.02)        (0.01)         (0.02)    (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.02)
NO2 (ppb)                       -0.92                       -1.62       0.09                    0.21        0.26                       -0.25
                                (0.48)                       (0.88)    (0.30)                  (0.65)      (0.33)                      (0.72)
SO2 (ppb)                                     -10.28          9.90                  2.59       -0.07                     6.92          10.04
                                              (7.32)        (13.12)                (4.64)      (9.66)                   (4.90)        (10.31)
First-stage F Stat.              26.28         11.11        4.42        26.28       11.11        4.42       26.28       11.11        4.42
Anderson-Rubin Stat. P-val     6.18e-10      7.22e-10    7.11e-10     6.18e-10    7.22e-10    7.11e-10    6.18e-10    7.22e-10    7.11e-10
Stock-Wright S Stat. P-val     7.31e-06      7.13e-06    7.06e-06     7.31e-06    7.13e-06    7.06e-06    7.31e-06    7.13e-06    7.06e-06
Observations                   1,657,232     1,623,441   1,623,435    1,657,232   1,623,441   1,623,435   1,657,232   1,623,441   1,623,435

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization rate within a 25-mile
 radius of CA ports, jointly estimated for multiple air pollutants. Each column in a panel presents an individual regression on a set
 of pollutants. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind speed, relative wind direction
 between a zip code-port pair, and interaction terms. All regressions include weather controls and their quadratic terms, such
 as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions
 also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-
 day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population.
 Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                                      70
Table A.28: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rates in California port areas ­ joint
estimation with zip codes within a 15-mile radius from ports

                                                 Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                             All Respiratory                             All Heart                          All Psychiatric

                     (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)           0.10          0.07          0.11           0.01         0.01        0.01       -0.004        0.002         -0.003
                   (0.03)        (0.02)         (0.03)       (0.01)       (0.005)     (0.01)      (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)          -1.33                       -1.88          0.10                    -0.10       0.46                         0.25
                   (0.62)                       (0.92)       (0.18)                   (0.35)      (0.20)                      (0.38)
SO2 (ppb)                       -12.89          10.60                      2.36        3.57                     7.34           4.22
                                (9.30)         (13.82)                    (2.59)      (4.97)                    (2.82)        (5.23)
Observations       869,585      861,925        861,918      869,585      861,925     861,918      869,585      861,925        861,918

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)             0.05         0.05            0.14        0.01         0.01        0.01        -0.04        -0.02          -0.02
                    (0.06)       (0.03)          (0.07)      (0.02)       (0.01)      (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.02)         (0.03)
NO2 (ppb)            1.96                        -4.36        0.38                     0.02         1.36                       -0.22
                    (1.68)                       (2.90)      (0.67)                   (1.06)       (0.70)                      (1.36)
SO2 (ppb)                       53.60          106.91                      6.57        6.30                     24.63          27.36
                                (22.92)         (38.16)                   (9.49)     (14.84)                    (9.81)        (18.90)
Observations       560,978      556,105        556,103      560,978      556,105     556,103      560,978      556,105        556,103

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)           0.11          0.07          0.12          0.03         0.02         0.02         0.01         0.01           0.01
                    (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.03)       (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.01)         (0.02)
NO2 (ppb)          -1.82                       -2.07         -0.43                     0.16         0.14                        0.33
                    (0.54)                      (0.90)       (0.33)                   (0.65)       (0.37)                      (0.71)
SO2 (ppb)                       -19.70           5.25                     -6.71       -8.62                      1.82          -2.20
                                 (7.93)        (13.55)                    (4.71)      (9.36)                    (5.26)        (10.03)
Observations       805,806      798,316        798,310      805,806      798,316     798,310      805,806      798,316        798,310

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization rate within a
 15-mile radius of CA ports, jointly estimated for multiple air pollutants. Each column in a panel presents an individual regression
 on a set of pollutants. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind speed, relative wind
 direction between a zip code-port pair, and interaction terms. All regressions include weather controls and their quadratic
 terms, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All
 regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a
 zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific
 population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                                    71
Table A.29: Effect of fitted vessel tonnage on highway congestion in California port areas

                                        Dependent variable: traffic delay with respect to threshold speed
                             35 mph           40 mph          45 mph        50 mph         55 mph           60 mph
                               (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)
Panel A: Vessel tonnage
Fitted Vessel Tonnage          0.17             0.22           0.24           0.15          -0.10            -0.47
                              (0.32)           (0.36)         (0.40)         (0.43)         (0.48)           (0.52)
Adjusted R2                    0.33             0.35           0.37           0.39           0.42              0.44
Observations                2,618,707        2,618,707      2,618,707      2,618,707      2,618,707         2,618,707

Panel B: Vessel counts
Fitted Vessel Counts          -0.04            -0.03          -0.02          -0.03          -0.07            -0.13
                              (0.09)           (0.10)         (0.11)         (0.12)         (0.13)           (0.13)
Adjusted R2                    0.33             0.35           0.37           0.39           0.42              0.44
Observations                2,618,707        2,618,707      2,618,707      2,618,707      2,618,707         2,618,707

  Notes: This table presents the OLS estimation for the effect of fitted vessel tonnage and counts on highway
 congestion in California's port areas. The fitted values are obtained from regressing log vessel tonnage or vessel
 counts on the instrumet of seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant cyclones from ports. The dependent variable is
 measured as average delays to a threshold speed. Each column presents a regression of threshold speed. All
 regressions include weather controls (i.e., the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew
 point temperature, precipitation, and wind direction) and fixed effects (i.e., county-by-year, month, day-of-week,
 holiday, freeway, and VDS-port). An observation is a VDS-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by VDS-port
 and day. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         72
Table A.30: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rates in California port areas, excluding
strong windy days

                                           Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                        Respiratory                           Heart                    Psychiatric

                                        Upper                 All              All                               All
                      Asthma          Respiratory         Respiratory         Heart          Anxiety          Psychiatric
                         (1)               (2)                  (3)             (4)            (5)                   (6)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)               0.01              0.01                0.04             0.01           0.003               0.01
                       (0.002)           (0.003)             (0.01)           (0.003)        (0.001)            (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)              0.30              0.30                1.07              0.37          0.09               0.22
                        (0.05)            (0.08)             (0.20)            (0.08)         (0.03)             (0.08)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )         0.34              0.36                1.26              0.39          0.10                0.23
                        (0.06)            (0.09)             (0.25)            (0.09)         (0.04)             (0.09)
SO2 (ppb)              7.84              7.19               27.48             10.20          2.86               6.72
                        (1.42)            (2.09)             (5.61)            (2.14)         (0.88)             (2.13)

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)                0.03              0.03               0.09             0.03            0.003             0.0002
                        (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.02)            (0.01)        (0.004)            (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)              0.87               0.85               2.64             0.83             0.15              0.12
                        (0.22)            (0.18)             (0.52)            (0.23)         (0.10)            (0.23)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )          1.03              0.98               3.20             0.79             0.07             -0.04
                        (0.24)            (0.21)             (0.59)            (0.26)         (0.11)            (0.25)
SO2 (ppb)              22.96             26.00              76.31             22.42           5.42               6.33
                        (5.53)            (4.87)            (13.50)            (6.06)         (2.71)            (5.99)

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)               0.01              0.01                0.04             0.02            0.002               0.01
                       (0.003)           (0.002)             (0.01)            (0.01)        (0.003)             (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)              0.28              0.15                0.94             0.46             0.05              0.30
                        (0.06)            (0.05)             (0.18)            (0.14)         (0.06)             (0.15)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )         0.34              0.19                1.13             0.55             0.07              0.37
                        (0.08)            (0.06)             (0.24)            (0.18)         (0.08)             (0.19)
SO2 (ppb)              6.51               3.11              20.45             11.16            2.21              9.18
                        (1.62)            (1.22)             (4.66)            (3.63)         (1.60)             (3.80)

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization rate,
 where the observations with wind speed greater than 3.3 meters per second are excluded. Each entry presents an
 individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted
 vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls,
 such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation.
 All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An
 observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are
 weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                           73
Table A.31: Effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates in California port areas, principal
diagnoses

                                                  Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                          All                              All                             All
                                      Respiratory                         Heart                         Psychiatric
                                           (1)                             (2)                              (3)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)                                0.02                             0.004                             0.002
                                         (0.01)                          (0.001)                          (0.001)
NO2 (ppb)                               0.65                              0.09                            0.06
                                         (0.15)                           (0.02)                           (0.02)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           0.92                             0.10                              0.04
                                         (0.18)                           (0.03)                           (0.03)
SO2 (ppb)                               17.18                             2.35                             1.61
                                         (4.78)                           (0.79)                           (0.70)

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)                                0.05                              0.005                           -0.002
                                         (0.01)                          (0.003)                          (0.004)
NO2 (ppb)                               1.56                               0.10                            -0.02
                                         (0.30)                           (0.08)                           (0.10)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           1.91                              0.17                            -0.08
                                         (0.37)                           (0.10)                           (0.12)
SO2 (ppb)                               49.29                              1.83                             0.88
                                         (8.62)                           (2.29)                           (2.57)

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)                                0.02                             0.004                             0.003
                                        (0.005)                          (0.002)                          (0.002)
NO2 (ppb)                               0.37                               0.09                            0.09
                                         (0.11)                           (0.05)                           (0.04)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                          0.45                              0.13                             0.12
                                         (0.15)                           (0.06)                           (0.05)
SO2 (ppb)                               7.85                               1.89                            2.30
                                         (2.79)                           (1.20)                           (0.99)

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
 rates for the overall population, Blacks, and whites, where hospitalization rates are calculated only using princi-
 pal diagnoses. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category. Pollution
 concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and their interac-
 tions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum
 temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month,
 day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard
 errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population.
 Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         74
Table A.32: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rates in California port areas, Patient
Discharge Data

                                                  Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                          All                              All                            All
                                      Respiratory                         Heart                        Psychiatric
                                          (1)                              (2)                              (3)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)                                0.01                             0.01                             0.004
                                        (0.002)                          (0.002)                          (0.002)
NO2 (ppb)                               0.23                             0.20                             0.12
                                         (0.05)                           (0.04)                           (0.04)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                          0.31                             0.22                             0.13
                                         (0.06)                           (0.05)                           (0.04)
SO2 (ppb)                               5.58                             5.66                             4.15
                                         (1.61)                           (1.36)                           (1.22)

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)                                 0.02                             0.01                             0.004
                                         (0.01)                           (0.01)                          (0.005)
NO2 (ppb)                                0.43                             0.37                              0.17
                                         (0.17)                           (0.14)                           (0.13)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           0.61                             0.40                              0.17
                                         (0.22)                           (0.18)                           (0.15)
SO2 (ppb)                               13.31                             8.48                              6.69
                                         (4.96)                           (3.95)                           (3.43)

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)                                0.01                             0.01                              0.01
                                        (0.004)                          (0.003)                          (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)                               0.26                             0.26                              0.19
                                         (0.08)                           (0.07)                           (0.08)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                          0.39                             0.37                              0.26
                                         (0.12)                           (0.11)                           (0.11)
SO2 (ppb)                                4.64                             4.97                             4.85
                                         (2.12)                           (2.02)                           (1.99)

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
 rates for the overall population, Blacks, and whites, where hospitalization rates are calculated only using the
 Patient Discharge Data. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category.
 Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and
 their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature,
 minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-
 year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day.
 Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific
 population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         75
Table A.33: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rates in California port areas, Emergency
Department Data

                                                  Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                          All                              All                            All
                                      Respiratory                         Heart                        Psychiatric
                                          (1)                              (2)                              (3)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)                                0.03                             0.01                             0.01
                                         (0.01)                          (0.001)                          (0.002)
NO2 (ppb)                                0.87                            0.16                             0.14
                                         (0.18)                           (0.03)                           (0.04)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           1.19                            0.15                              0.11
                                         (0.22)                           (0.03)                           (0.05)
SO2 (ppb)                               26.26                            5.15                             3.71
                                         (6.03)                           (0.91)                           (1.39)

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)                                0.08                              0.01                            -0.004
                                         (0.02)                          (0.005)                          (0.01)
NO2 (ppb)                               2.35                              0.29                            -0.11
                                         (0.42)                           (0.12)                          (0.16)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           2.91                              0.28                           -0.26
                                         (0.51)                           (0.15)                          (0.20)
SO2 (ppb)                               74.36                             8.43                            -2.21
                                        (11.84)                           (3.43)                          (4.63)

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)                                0.03                             0.01                               0.01
                                         (0.01)                          (0.002)                          (0.003)
NO2 (ppb)                                0.58                            0.16                               0.14
                                         (0.12)                           (0.05)                           (0.07)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           0.70                            0.19                               0.17
                                         (0.17)                           (0.07)                           (0.11)
SO2 (ppb)                               14.15                            5.00                              4.32
                                         (3.23)                           (1.32)                           (1.93)

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
 rates for the overall population, Blacks, and whites, where hospitalization rates are calculated only using the
 Emergency Department Data. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness
 category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind
 speed, and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum
 temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include
 county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip
 code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip
 code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         76
Table A.34: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rates in California port areas, Ambula-
tory Surgery Center Data

                                                  Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                         All                               All                            All
                                     Respiratory                          Heart                        Psychiatric
                                          (1)                              (2)                              (3)
Panel A: Overall population
CO (ppb)                                0.0004                            0.001                            0.001
                                        (0.001)                          (0.001)                          (0.001)
NO2 (ppb)                               -0.004                             0.03                             0.01
                                         (0.03)                           (0.03)                           (0.02)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           0.004                             0.03                             0.03
                                         (0.04)                           (0.03)                           (0.03)
SO2 (ppb)                                -0.71                             0.48                             0.24
                                         (1.05)                           (0.90)                           (0.72)

Panel B: Black
CO (ppb)                                -0.001                            0.002                           0.0001
                                        (0.003)                          (0.002)                          (0.002)
NO2 (ppb)                                -0.06                             0.04                             0.01
                                         (0.07)                           (0.05)                           (0.05)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           -0.07                             0.06                           -0.003
                                         (0.08)                           (0.06)                           (0.06)
SO2 (ppb)                                -1.93                             1.08                             0.06
                                         (1.80)                           (1.31)                           (1.31)

Panel C: White
CO (ppb)                                -0.001                           -0.0005                          -0.001
                                        (0.002)                          (0.002)                          (0.002)
NO2 (ppb)                                -0.04                           -0.003                            -0.04
                                         (0.05)                           (0.05)                           (0.04)
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )                           -0.05                            -0.02                            -0.06
                                         (0.07)                           (0.07)                           (0.06)
SO2 (ppb)                                -0.54                             0.04                            -1.05
                                         (1.22)                           (1.32)                           (1.03)

  Notes: This table presents the instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
 rates for the overall population, Blacks, and whites, where hospitalization rates are calculated only using the
 Ambulatory Surgery Center Data. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness
 category. Pollution concentrations are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind
 speed, and their interactions. All regressions include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum
 temperature, minimum temperature, dew point temperature, and precipitation. All regressions also include
 county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip
 code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip
 code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         77
Table A.35: LIML estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalizaton rates in California
port areas

                                            Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                       Respiratory                            Heart                     Psychiatric

                                        Upper                All               All                                 All
                      Asthma          Respiratory        Respiratory          Heart          Anxiety            Psychiatric
                         (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)                   (6)
Panel A: CO
CO (ppb)               0.01              0.01               0.04             0.01              0.003               0.01
                       (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.01)           (0.003)          (0.001)             (0.003)
Adjusted R2              0.33             0.29               0.42              0.31             0.17                0.36
Observations          1,782,266        1,782,266          1,782,266         1,782,266        1,782,266           1,782,266

Panel B: NO2
NO2 (ppb)              0.23              0.30               0.88              0.36            0.07                0.23
                       (0.04)            (0.06)             (0.18)            (0.07)          (0.03)              (0.08)
Adjusted R2              0.33             0.28               0.42              0.31             0.17                0.36
Observations          1,812,210        1,812,210          1,812,210         1,812,210        1,812,210           1,812,210

Panel C: PM2.5
PM2.5 ( g/m3 )         0.28              0.38               1.06              0.42             0.08               0.26
                       (0.06)            (0.09)             (0.25)            (0.10)          (0.04)              (0.11)
Adjusted R2              0.33             0.29               0.42              0.31             0.18                0.36
Observations          1,720,810        1,720,810          1,720,810         1,720,810        1,720,810           1,720,810

Panel D: SO2
SO2 (ppb)              5.52              8.20              22.39              9.28            2.28                6.55
                       (1.30)            (1.85)             (4.99)            (2.05)          (0.91)              (2.18)
Adjusted R2              0.33             0.28               0.42              0.31             0.17                0.36
Observations          1,749,073        1,749,073          1,749,073         1,749,073        1,749,073           1,749,073

  Notes: This table presents the LIML instrumental variable estimation of the effect of air pollution on hospitalization
 rates. Each entry presents an individual regression of an air pollutant on an illness category. Pollution concentrations
 are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and their interactions. All regressions
 include weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point tempera-
 ture, and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port
 pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day.
 Estimates are unweighted. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                           78
Table A.36: Placebo tests for the effect of California Ocean-Going Vessel At-Berth Regulation
on air pollution

                                               Dependent variable: residual of log pollution concentration
                                         CO                     NO2                    PM2.5                   SO2
                                         (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Panel A: One year before the policy
CA Regulation                            0.06                    0.05                   0.04                   0.04
                                        (0.08)                  (0.08)                 (0.11)                 (0.13)
Date                                   -0.001                  -0.002                  0.001                 -0.002
                                       (0.001)                 (0.002)                (0.002)                (0.002)
CA Regulation × Date                    0.003                   0.003                 -0.01                    0.01
                                       (0.002)                 (0.002)                (0.003)                (0.003)
Pre-policy Mean                        630.35                  18.70                   14.84                  1.89
Observations                            4,809                  5,303                   2,076                  3,290

Panel B: One year after the policy
CA Regulation                            0.13                   0.08                    0.07                   0.07
                                        (0.10)                 (0.08)                  (0.10)                 (0.25)
Date                                   -0.002                 -0.0003                  0.002                  0.003
                                       (0.001)                (0.001)                 (0.002)                (0.004)
CA Regulation × Date                    0.001                  0.0004                 -0.01                  -0.003
                                       (0.002)                (0.003)                 (0.002)                 (0.01)
Pre-policy Mean                        586.64                  17.96                   13.89                  1.74
Observations                            4,861                  5,368                   2,890                  3,550

Panel C: Neighboring areas
CA Regulation                           0.43                    0.13                  -0.18                  -0.01
                                       (0.26)                  (0.07)                  (0.10)                (0.20)
Date                                  -0.0002                 -0.001                   0.003                  0.01
                                      (0.004)                 (0.001)                 (0.002)                (0.01)
CA Regulation × Date                   -0.01                  -0.0001                 -0.01                  -0.003
                                       (0.01)                 (0.002)                 (0.004)                (0.02)
Pre-policy Mean                        394.78                  10.81                   12.43                  1.17
Observations                            1,190                  2,500                   1,074                  538

  Notes: This table presents the placebo tests for RDD estimation of the effect of the California at-berth regulation
 on local air pollution. The second-stage RDD dependent variable is taken from the residuals by regressing
 log pollution concentrations on weather controls (i.e., the quadratics of maximum temperature, minimum
 temperature, dew point temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a monitor-
 port pair), fixed effects (i.e., county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and port-monitor pair), and log
 vessel tonnage (instrumented by seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant cyclones from ports). The local linear
 bandwidth is specified as 65 days on both sides of the policy threshold. Panel A shows the results of specifying
 placebo policy dates one year before the actual policy date. Panel B shows the results of specifying placebo
 policy dates one year after the actual policy date. Panel C shows the results by assigning the policy date to
 neighboring areas located 75 to 100 miles from ports. An observation is a monitor-port-day. Standard errors are
 clustered by monitor-port pair and normalized day. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                         79
    Table A.37: Projected energy consumption by marine vessels in the United States

                               Fossil Fuel                                       Electricity

                  Reference                  Shore Power            Reference                  Shore Power
2017                 0.78                       0.78                   0.00                       0.00
2020                 0.77                       0.72                   0.01                       0.05
2025                 0.81                       0.64                   0.01                       0.18
2030                 0.85                       0.66                   0.01                       0.19
2035                 0.90                       0.70                   0.01                       0.22
2040                 0.93                       0.72                   0.01                       0.22
2045                 0.97                       0.74                   0.01                       0.24
2050                 1.01                       0.77                   0.01                       0.25
 Notes: This table presents projected marine vessel energy consumption simulated in Yale-NEMS. The
 unit is quadrillion Btu. The data include electricity and fossil fuel consumption for the reference case
 and the shore power scenario.




                                                       80
B     Supplementary Figures (For Online Publication)




                                          0.2
                           County Share




                                          0.1




                                          0.0

                                                2010   2012   2014     2016   2018
                                                                Year


Figure B.1: Share of nonattainment counties adjacent to the major ports in the United
States.

Notes: The figure plots the share of nonattainment counties that fail to meet the National Ambient Air
Quality Standards and locate within a 50-mile radius of the major ports in the United States. The standards
include Carbon Monoxide (1971), Nitrogen Dioxide (1971), 8-Hour Ozone (2008, 2015), PM10 (1987), PM2.5
(1997, 2006, 2012), Sulfur Dioxide (1971, 2010). The data are obtained from U.S. EPA NAAQS Greenbook.




                                                              81
              Figure B.2: Locations of zip codes near the major California ports.

Notes: This figure plots the locations of zip codes that are within 25 miles of the major ports in California,
shown in blue areas. According to the U.S. 2010 Decennial Census, around 47 percent of the population in
California resides in the blue areas.

                  (a)                                                           (b)

                                    0.15                                        0.20
                 Population Share




                                                                                0.15
                                    0.10


                                                                                0.10

                                    0.05
                                                                                0.05



                                    0.00                                        0.00

                                           5       10      15       20    25           1   2   3   4    5   6    7    8   9   10
                                               Distance to Port (Miles)                            Pollution Decile


Figure B.3: (a) Distribution of Hispanic population by distance to major California ports.
(b) Distribution of the Hispanic population in California port areas by decile of PM2.5
concentration.

Notes: Panel (a) plots population distribution in the California port areas by the distance between census
tract and port for the Hispanic population. We obtain the population data at the census tract level and
assign a distance between a census tract to its nearest mapped port to the population within the census tract.
Panel (b) plots population distribution in the California port areas by decile of PM2.5 concentration. Larger
pollution deciles represent higher pollution exposures. The data are obtained from the U.S. 2010 Decennial
Census and U.S. EPA Air Quality System.




                                                                               82
                                                                                 16

                                                                                                            Black
                                  420
                                                                                                            White




                                                                     NO2 (ppb)
                                                                                 15
                   CO (ppb)




                                  410



                                                                                 14

                                  400




                                                                                 0.8



                                  10.5
                                                                                 0.7
                  PM2.5 (µg m3)




                                                                     SO2 (ppb)




                                                                                 0.6
                                  10.0


                                                                                 0.5


                                         2010   2012   2014   2016                     2010   2012   2014      2016
                                                                        Year


   Figure B.4: Annual air pollution exposure for individuals visiting hospitals by race.

Notes: This figure plots the annual averages of baseline pollution exposure separately for non-Hispanic Black
and white patients in the areas within 25 miles from ports in California. The patients visit hospitals due to
psychiatric, respiratory, and heart-related illnesses during 2010­2016. The pollution data are obtained from
the U.S. EPA Air Quality System, and the hospital visit data are obtained Office of Statewide Health Planning
and Development of California.




                                                              83
                                                                                                         0-12.5 Miles to Ports                                    12.5-25 Miles to Ports




                 Annual Hospitalization Rate (Visits/1,000 Residents)
                                                                        900




                                                                        600




                                                                        300




                                                                          0
                                                                                              Black                         White                           Black                     White
                                                                                                                                           Race


       Figure B.5: Boxplots of annual hospitalizations rates in California port areas.

Notes: This figure presents the boxplots of annual hospitalization rates, separately for non-Hispanic Black
and white population in the areas within 0­12.5 miles from ports and 12.5­25 miles from ports in California.
The hospitalization rate is calculated as the annual total hospital visits related to psychiatric, respiratory,
and heart-related illnesses in each zip code for 2010­2016. The grey dots represent outliers. The dashed
lines represent sample means. The gap between the dashed lines in the left panel is 87, while the gap in the
right panel is 81. The data are obtained from the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development of
California. We exclude the zip codes having less than 1,000 race-specific populations in our analysis. We also
do not plot the observations with annual hospitalization rates greater than 1,000.


                                                                                                                                                                 Seven-day
                                                                                                                                                                 lagged cyclones
                                                                                                                                                                      No
                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                      Yes
                                                                               Average Percentage




                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                                                                                o



                                                                                                                           er




                                                                                                                                       g




                                                                                                                                                                  e



                                                                                                                                                                                er
                                                                                                                g




                                                                                                                                    Tu




                                                                                                                                                                 rg
                                                                                                                                                   co
                                                                                                                         nk




                                                                                                                                                                            th
                                                                                                             ar




                                                                                                                                                             Ba




                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                /S
                                                                                                                       Ta
                                                                                                            C




                                                                                                                                               e



                                                                                                                                                            nk
                                                                                                                                            rg



                                                                                                                                                         Ta
                                                                                                                                           Ba




                                                                                                                                      Vessel Type


                                                                          Figure B.6: Average daily share of vessel type in ports.

Notes: This figure presents the average daily share of vessel types in major 27 U.S. ports, separately for the
days when there exist seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant tropical cyclones in the ocean and the days
when there are no such cyclones. The error bars indicate standard deviations. The data are obtained from
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.


                                                                                                                                       84
                      Figure B.7: Boxplots of local weather in port areas.

Notes: This figure presents the boxplots of weather variables in the U.S. port areas, separately for the
month-days when there exist seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant tropical cyclones in the ocean and the
same month-days when there are no such cyclones. The grey dots represent outliers. The data are obtained
from the NOAA Integrated Surface Database.




                                                  85
        Figure B.8: Empirical quantile-quantile plots of local weather in port areas.

Notes: This figure presents the QQ plots of weather variables in the U.S. port areas. The panels compare
two data samples: one for the month-days when there exist seven-day lagged and 500-mile distant tropical
cyclones in the ocean and the other for the same month-days when there are no such cyclones. The data are
obtained from the NOAA Integrated Surface Database.




                                                   86
                                                       All Respiratory                    All Heart                   All Psychiatric
                                          1.00

                                          0.75

                                          0.50




                                                                                                                                             CO
                                          0.25

                                          0.00


                                           20

                                           15




                                                                                                                                             NO2
                                           10
                 Estimated Coefficients




                                            5

                                            0



                                           20




                                                                                                                                             PM2.5
                                           10


                                            0



                                          600




                                                                                                                                             SO2
                                          400


                                          200


                                            0
                                                 135    9   14      21     28   135   9     14        21   28   135   9    14      21   28
                                                                         Time Window Following Exposure (day)


Figure B.9: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rate for the overall population with
different time windows following pollution exposure in California port areas.

Notes: This figure plots IV estimates of equation (3) with different time windows following pollution
exposure. Estimates are shown for time windows of one day, three days, five days, nine days, 14 days, 21
days, and 28 days. The dependent variable is the sum of hospital visits over the number of time windows per
million residents, indicated on the x-axis. The one-day window estimates are also reported in columns (3),
(4), and (7) in Panel A of Table 2. The pollution measures are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports,
wind direction, wind speed, and interactions. All regressions include a set of weather controls, such as the
quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures, precipitation, and their leads up to the
time window. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port
pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair
and day. Estimates are weighted by zip code-specific population. The error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.




                                                                                          87
                                                       All Respiratory                    All Heart                   All Psychiatric

                                           1.5

                                           1.0




                                                                                                                                             CO
                                           0.5

                                           0.0

                                          -0.5


                                            40




                                                                                                                                             NO2
                                            20
                 Estimated Coefficients




                                            0




                                            50




                                                                                                                                             PM2.5
                                            25


                                            0




                                          1500

                                          1000



                                                                                                                                             SO2
                                          500

                                            0

                                                 135    9   14      21     28   135   9     14        21   28   135   9    14      21   28
                                                                         Time Window Following Exposure (day)


Figure B.10: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rate for Blacks with different time
windows following pollution exposure in California port areas.

Notes: This figure plots IV estimates of equation (3) with different time windows following pollution
exposure. Estimates are shown for time windows of one day, three days, five days, nine days, 14 days, 21
days, and 28 days. The dependent variable is the sum of hospital visits over the number of time windows per
million residents, indicated on the x-axis. The one-day window estimates are also reported in columns (3),
(4), and (7) in Panel B of Table 2. The pollution measures are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports,
wind direction, wind speed, and interactions. All regressions include a set of weather controls, such as the
quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures, precipitation, and their leads up to the
time window. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port
pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair
and day. Estimates are weighted by zip code-specific population. The error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.




                                                                                          88
                                                       All Respiratory                    All Heart                   All Psychiatric


                                          0.75


                                          0.50




                                                                                                                                             CO
                                          0.25


                                          0.00

                                           15


                                           10




                                                                                                                                             NO2
                 Estimated Coefficients




                                            5


                                            0

                                           20

                                           15




                                                                                                                                             PM2.5
                                           10

                                            5

                                            0

                                          400

                                          300




                                                                                                                                             SO2
                                          200

                                          100

                                            0
                                                 135    9   14      21     28   135   9     14        21   28   135   9    14      21   28
                                                                         Time Window Following Exposure (day)


Figure B.11: Effect of air pollution on hospitalization rate for whites with different time
windows following pollution exposure in California port areas.

Notes: This figure plots IV estimates of equation (3) with different time windows following pollution
exposure. Estimates are shown for time windows of one day, three days, five days, nine days, 14 days, 21
days, and 28 days. The dependent variable is the sum of hospital visits over the number of time windows per
million residents, indicated on the x-axis. The one-day window estimates are also reported in columns (3),
(4), and (7) in Panel C of Table 2. The pollution measures are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports,
wind direction, wind speed, and interactions. All regressions include a set of weather controls, such as the
quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures, precipitation, and their leads up to the
time window. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port
pair fixed effects. An observation is a zip code-port-day. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair
and day. Estimates are weighted by zip code-specific population. The error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.




                                                                                          89
                                    20




                Number of Vessels   15




                                    10




                                     5




                                     0

                                                                                                          -50                         0                  50
                                                                                                                              Normalized Days
                                                                                                           Long Beach, CA          Los Angeles, CA   Oakland, CA
                                                                                                   Port
                                                                                                           Port Hueneme, CA        San Diego, CA     San Francisco, CA


 Figure B.12: Vessel counts in ports before and after the Californian at-berth regulation.

Notes: This figure plots the number of vessels in ports before and after the first phase of the Californian
at-berth regulation (i.e., January 1, 2010).
                                         Effect of CA Regulation on Pollutant Concentrations (%)




                                                                                                                Baseline

                                                                                                    25          Bootstrap




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                   -25




                                                                                                   -50




                                                                                                            CO              NO2           PM2.5        SO2
                                                                                                                                  Pollutant


Figure B.13: Cluster bootstrap inference for the effect of California Ocean-Going Vessel
At-Berth Regulation on air pollutant concentrations.

Notes: The figure plots the the local linear RDD point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from the
baseline regression (shown in Table 5) and a wild cluster bootstrap algorithm.



                                                                                                                                 90
                                                             CO                           NO2



                                           0.25


                                           0.00


                                          -0.25
                 Estimated Coefficients




                                          -0.50




                                                            PM2.5                         SO2



                                           0.25


                                           0.00


                                          -0.25


                                          -0.50



                                                  55   60    65     70    75   55    60   65    70   75
                                                                         Bandwidth


Figure B.14: Robustness check for the effect of California Ocean-Going Vessel At-Berth
Regulation on air pollutant concentrations with varying RDD bandwidths.

Notes: The figure plots the local linear RDD point estimates and 95% confidence intervals with varying
bandwidths (i.e., 55­75 days on both sides of the policy threshold). The baseline bandwidth is 65 days, as
indicated by the red dots.




                                                                         91
                                                           CO                            NO2



                                           0.25


                                           0.00


                                          -0.25
                 Estimated Coefficients




                                          -0.50



                                                          PM2.5                          SO2



                                           0.25


                                           0.00


                                          -0.25


                                          -0.50


                                                  0   2         4   6         0      2         4   6
                                                                        Donut Days


Figure B.15: Robustness check for the effect of California Ocean-Going Vessel At-Berth
Regulation on air pollutant concentrations with varying RDD "donut" periods.

Notes: The figure plots the local linear RDD point estimates and 95% confidence intervals with varying
"donut" periods (i.e., removing 0­7 days of observations on both sides of the policy threshold). The baseline
"donut" period is 0 day, as indicated by the red dots.




                                                                        92
                                                                   CO                                          NOx

                                                   0.6
                                                                                          1.75


                                                   0.4                                    1.50


                                                                                          1.25
                Emissions (million metric ton)




                                                   0.2
                                                                                          1.00

                                                         2020   2030      2040     2050          2020      2030       2040   2050

                                                                  PM2.5                                        SO2



                                                 0.150                                     1.2


                                                                                           1.0
                                                 0.125

                                                                                           0.8
                                                 0.100
                                                                                           0.6
                                                         2020   2030      2040     2050          2020      2030       2040   2050
                                                                                          Year
                                                                       Scenario      Reference      Shore Power


                                                                Source        Marine Vessels      Electricity Generation


Figure B.16: Projected emissions of local air pollutants from marine vessels and electricity
generation in the United States.

Notes: This figure plots local air pollutant emissions from marine vessels and power plants in the United
States under the reference and shore power scenarios, projected in Yale-NEMS. The projection starts from
2017 indicated by the gray dotted lines.




                                                                                    93
C     Supplementary Analysis (For Online Publication)
C.1     Results Comparison
This appendix presents supplementary analyses for the main text. We first present compar-
isons of our baseline estimates to the existing evidence in the literature. We then show the
estimates of the reduced-form relationship between vessels in ports and human health.

Effect of vessels in ports on air pollution. We first compare our estimates in Table 1
to the existing evidence on the contributions of seaports to local air pollution. We are
not aware of any other study that explores this question in the literature; however, some
government reports and online articles address the relationship between port and local
air pollution. For example, U.S. EPA estimates that ocean-going vessels contribute to
7% of NOx emissions in Ports of Baton Rouge/New Orleans and up to 61% in the Santa
Barbara areas (EPA, 2003). In addition, another evidence states that marine shipping
in ports accounts for as much as half SOx emissions in major port cities, such as Los Angeles.
     Our estimates in Table 1 show that one percent increase in vessel tonnage in a port per
day leads to 0.3­0.4% increases in pollution concentrations for NO2 and SO2 . This suggests
that marine shipping in ports contributes to 40% of local air pollution in port areas in the
United States, within the range of previously cited sources.
     We also compare our estimates to the NAAQS to examine whether pollution from ports
is likely to lead to nonattainment status. The current one-hour standard for CO is that the
pollution concentration cannot exceed 35,000 ppb more than once per year. Our results
show that one average-sized vessel in a port (a 7.6% increase of vessel tonnage in the U.S.)
results in a 13.7 ppb increase in CO pollution. Combining this increase with the average
daily maximum of CO, the estimated resulting concentration is 822 ppb (13.7 + 808.2),
which is far below the EPA standard. Similarly, the resulting pollution concentrations
for NO2 and SO2 due to average gross vessel tonnage in ports are also below the EPA's
one-hour standards.
     EPA has established a 24-hour standard for PM2.5 at 35 micrograms per cubic meter
( g/m3 ). Adding the increase in PM2.5 concentrations 0.35 g/m3 (7.6×0.43/100×10.67)
(owing to an average-sized vessel in a port) to the daily 24-hour average (10.67 g/m3 )
    See https://www.ft.com/content/31d0e224-dde8-11e8-9f04-38d397e6661c.
    The details of the standards for pollutants considered harmful to public health and the environment are
available at https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants/naaqs-table.
    The 13.7 ppb increase is calculated from 7.6×0.37/100×485.97 based on the estimates in Table 1 and
summary statistics reported in Table A.3.
    The one-hour standards for NO2 and SO2 are 100 parts per billion (ppb) and 75 ppb, respectively.



                                                    94
results in a concentration of 11 g/m3 , which is around 31% of the EPA standard. Note
that the calculations presented above are based on the summary averages across all ports.
Some areas on certain days may still exceed the EPA standards due to increased vessel
counts in ports.

Effect of air pollution on health. Since there is a large body of economics and epidemio-
logical literature examining the effect of air pollution on health, it is natural to compare our
estimates in Panel A of Table 2 to the literature. Compared to Schlenker and Walker (2016),
our estimates associated with the effect of CO on respiratory and heart hospital visits are
relatively larger. For example, we find that a one ppb increase in CO concentration leads to
a 0.02% increase in all respiratory hospital visits, while Schlenker and Walker (2016) find a
0.037% increase. The discrepancy in results may be driven by different studied locations.
Other epidemiological studies show the effect of a one ppb increase in CO pollution on
respiratory hospital visits in a range of 0.001­0.008% (e.g., Hwang and Chan, 2002; Peel
et al., 2005; Stieb et al., 2009), which are smaller than our estimates.
    For heart-related illness, we find that a one g/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration
leads to a 0.31% increase of hospital visits, which is higher than the estimates 0.13­0.15%
in the epidemiology literature (e.g., Dominici et al., 2006; Bell et al., 2008). Two recent
epidemiology studies find evidence that a 0.11% increase in psychiatric hospital visits is
attributed to a one g/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration, which is also smaller than our
estimate. We find consistent larger estimates for the effect of air pollution on hospital visits
because we focus on highly polluted areas, or our quasi-experimental framework corrects
the attenuation bias.


C.2    RIF-Quantile Effect of Air Pollution on Health
We provide additional evidence on how pollution affects different unconditional quantiles
of the hospitalization distributions for Blacks and whites using the unconditional quantile
regression method introduced by Firpo et al. (2009). This method involves calculating
the re-centered influence function (RIF) for the outcome variable (e.g., hospitalization
rates) at a certain quantile and replace the dependent variable in equation (3) with
the calculated RIF. The RIF for hospitalization at the th quantile              is calculated as
                     -1{  }
RIF( , ) =       +      ( )
                             , where ( ) is the density function of at quantile . In
practice, we calculate 19 RIF statistics, starting from the 5th quantile to the 95th quantile of
the hospitalization rate distribution for each subsample of Blacks and whites. In total, we
fit 38 RIF-quantile regressions for each of the four studied air pollutants. Because pollution
is endogenous, we adopt a control-function approach, where we include the residuals

                                              95
from the first-stage regression equation (4) into the regression equation of interest (3).
One caveat of this RIF-quantile analysis using the control-function approach is that we
should interpret the standard errors carefully because there may exist sampling error in
the first-stage residuals.
   The regression estimates illustrate how the effect of pollution on hospitalization rates
directly transforms to the unconditional distribution of hospitalization rates. Figure C.1
presents the RIF-quantile regression estimates by race and pollutant, suggesting that at the
upper quantiles of the hospitalization rate distribution, air pollution has larger impacts on
Blacks compared to whites.

                                                                    CO                                       NO2


                                                 0.3
                                                           Black

                                                           White                           10
                                                 0.2



                                                 0.1
                                                                                            5
                 Marginal RIF/Quantile Effect




                                                 0.0

                                                                                            0

                                                -0.1
                                                       0     25     50     75       100         0       25   50    75   100

                                                                   PM2.5                                     SO2

                                                 15                                       500


                                                                                          400

                                                 10
                                                                                          300


                                                                                          200
                                                  5

                                                                                          100


                                                  0                                         0


                                                       0     25     50     75       100         0       25   50    75   100
                                                                           Hospitalization Rate Percentile


        Figure C.1: RIF-quantile effects of pollution on hospitalization rates by race.

Notes: This figure plots the estimates from 38 individual regressions of equation (3) for each air pollutant,
with 19 regressions for each race. The dependent variable is the RIF statistics of total hospitalization rate
associated with respiratory, heart, and psychiatric ailments for a given quantile. The pollution measures
are instrumented by fitted vessel tonnage in ports, wind direction, wind speed, and interactions. All
regressions include a set of weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point
temperatures and precipitation. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday,
and zip code-port pair fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates
are weighted by zip code-specific population. The error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                    96
C.3    Reduced-form Relationship between Vessels in Ports and Health
This section examines the reduced-form relationship between the number of vessels in
ports and human health. We estimate the regression model in equations (1) and (2) by
specifying the dependent variable as hospitalization rate across illness categories. We use
the ten-day lagged cyclones that are 500 miles distant from ports as the IV in our baseline
specification. Since the IV specification is similar to the one used in the main text, we do
not present the results for IV validity checks.
    Table C.1 presents the first-stage relationship between the cyclone IV and vessel tonnage
in ports. The point estimate is statistically significant, suggesting the cyclone IV leads to a
5% reduction in vessel tonnage in ports.


      Table C.1: First-stage results of the effect of tropical cyclones on vessel tonnage

                                                     Dependent variable: log of vessel tonnage
             Tropical Cyclone                                           -0.05
                                                                         (0.02)
             First-stage F Stat.                                         10.80
             Adjusted R2                                                  0.70
             Observations                                              1,812,225

              Notes: This table presents the first-stage results of the IV estimation in Table C.2.
              The instrument is a dummy of ten-day lagged and 500-mile distant cyclones from
              ports. All regressions include a set of weather controls, such as the quadratics of
              maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures, precipitation, wind speed,
              and relative wind direction between a zip code-port pair. All regressions also in-
              clude county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed
              effects. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates
              are weighted by zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated
              by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.



    Table C.2 presents the IV estimation for the effect of vessel tonnage on hospitalizations
across seven illness categories. The t-statistics on the excluded instrument are 11.39 across
the columns above the thresholds suggested in the literature. Most estimates associated
with respiratory illnesses shown in columns (4)­(6) are statistically significant. They show
that a one percent increase in gross vessel tonnage in a port results in an additional 1.07
hospital visits per million residents related to all respiratory illnesses. However, the
estimates associated with psychiatric and heart illnesses have surprising signs, and they
are either statistically significant at the 10% level or insignificant. We do not see strong
    We use the ten-day lagged cyclones here instead of the seven-day lagged ones in the main text because
the ten-day lagged cyclones show a stronger correlation in the first stage.


                                                      97
results related to psychiatric and heart illnesses, probably because the composition of air
pollutants co-emitted from vessels together may not cause mental and heart illnesses.


Table C.2: Effect of vessel tonnage on contemporaneous hospitalizaton rate in California
port areas, IV estimation

                                         Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                         Respiratory                      Heart                Psychiatric

                                          Upper             All            All                          All
                           Asthma       Respiratory     Respiratory       Heart       Anxiety        Psychiatric
                              (1)           (2)                (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)
Log of Vessel Tonnage       13.11         38.17             108.03        -1.93        -7.74           -20.99
                            (6.50)        (12.59)            (35.15)      (9.96)       (4.54)          (11.98)
Adjusted R2                  0.36          -0.06               0.08        0.35          0.19            0.36
Observations              1,812,225      1,812,225          1,812,225   1,812,225     1,812,225       1,812,225

  Notes: This table presents the IV estimation of the effect of vessel tonnage on the contemporaneous hospital-
 ization rate for the overall population. Each column presents an individual regression on an illness category.
 The endogenous variable, log of vessel tonnage, is instrumented by the dummy of ten-day lagged and 500-
 mile distant cyclones from ports. All regressions include a set of weather controls, such as the quadratics of
 maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction
 between a zip code-port pair. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and
 zip code-port pair fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are
 weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.



   Tables C.3 shows the OLS estimates for the effect of vessel tonnage on hospitalizations.
The estimates for respiratory illnesses become insignificant or significant at the 10% level.
They are also much smaller than the corresponding IV estimates, suggesting potential bias.
The OLS estimates associated with psychiatric and heart illnesses are positive, but they are
with small magnitudes.

    Table C.4 contains the IV estimates for the effect of vessel tonnage on hospitalizations
by non-Hispanic Black and white populations. Similar to Table C.2, only the estimates
associated with respiratory illnesses are statistically significant and have expected signs.
They provide additional evidence that port congestion can contribute to racial disparities
in respiratory-related health outcomes.




                                                       98
Table C.3: Effect of vessel tonnage on contemporaneous hospitalizaton rate in California
port areas, OLS estimation

                                        Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents
                                        Respiratory                     Heart               Psychiatric

                                        Upper              All           All                         All
                          Asthma      Respiratory      Respiratory      Heart      Anxiety        Psychiatric
                             (1)           (2)                (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)
Log of Vessel Tonnage       0.04          0.02               0.41        0.23       0.18             0.41
                           (0.07)        (0.08)             (0.24)      (0.12)       (0.05)          (0.13)
Adjusted R2                 0.39           0.34               0.47        0.35        0.22            0.40
Observations             1,812,225      1,812,225          1,812,225   1,812,225   1,812,225       1,812,225

  Notes: This table presents the OLS estimation of the effect of vessel tonnage on the contemporaneous hos-
 pitalization rate. Each column presents an individual regression on an illness category. All regressions
 include a set of weather controls, such as the quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures,
 precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind direction between a zip code-port pair. All regressions also
 include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holiday, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. Standard errors
 are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates are weighted by the zip code-specific population.
 Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                      99
Table C.4: Effect of vessel tonnage on contemporaneous hospitalizaton rate by race in port
areas of California, IV estimation

                                Dependent variable: hospital visits/million residents in each race group
                                          Respiratory                       Heart                Psychiatric

                                           Upper             All             All                          All
                            Asthma       Respiratory     Respiratory        Heart       Anxiety        Psychiatric
                              (1)             (2)               (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)
Panel A: Black
Log of Vessel Tonnage        53.81         72.63              267.78        -5.42        -16.22          -71.20
                            (28.29)        (25.36)             (93.30)     (25.55)       (10.94)         (33.35)
Adjusted R2                   0.14          -0.01               0.04         0.13         0.04             0.16
Observations                888,237        888,237            888,237      888,237       888,237         888,237

Panel B: White
Log of Vessel Tonnage         7.41          13.79             61.45         -3.39         -8.35          -24.83
                             (7.18)         (6.42)            (28.23)      (16.74)        (7.55)         (19.68)
Adjusted R2                   0.17           0.05             0.26           0.28          0.14            0.31
Observations               1,687,172      1,687,172        1,687,172      1,687,172     1,687,172       1,687,172

  Notes: This table presents the IV estimation of the effect of vessel tonnage on the contemporaneous hos-
 pitalization rate for the Black and white populations. Each entry presents an individual regression on an
 illness category. The endogenous variable, log of vessel tonnage, is instrumented by the dummy of ten-day
 lagged and 500-mile distant cyclones from ports. All regressions include a set of weather controls, such as the
 quadratics of maximum, minimum, and dew point temperatures, precipitation, wind speed, and relative wind
 direction between a zip code-port pair. All regressions also include county-by-year, month, day-of-week, holi-
 day, and zip code-port pair fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by zip code-port pair and day. Estimates
 are weighted by the zip code-specific population. Significance levels are indicated by *** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.




                                                        100
D     National Energy Modeling System (For Online Publica-
      tion)
The National Energy Modeling System (NEMS) is an integrated energy-economy modeling
system developed by EIA. A 2017 version of NEMS is currently hosted on a server at Yale
University, and we call it Yale-NEMS at EIA's request. Yale-NEMS comprises 13 modules
comprehensively modeling major energy supply sectors, conversion sectors, demand
markets, macroeconomics, and international energy markets. The model simulates energy
markets out to 2050 subject to a comprehensive set of constraints, such as economics, tech-
nological advancement, demographics, resource availability, and behavior assumptions.
The model also includes current energy and environmental policies at the state and federal
levels, while it does not consider any proposed rule-makings. Model projections include
energy consumption, production, trade, prices, and emissions.
    Since we are particularly interested in the effects of shore-side energy consumption
and its interaction with the power sector, this appendix discusses how Yale-NEMS models
marine fuel consumption and electricity generation. The description of other modules is
available at EIA (2009). We first introduce the reference case of Yale-NEMS, which we use
as the baseline for our analysis.


D.1    Annual Energy Outlook
We take Annual Energy Outlook (AEO) 2017 as the reference case. AEO 2017 is a regu-
lar update of the U.S. energy market outlook, released in early 2017 by EIA. The series
of AEOs have been widely referenced for decision makings by government agencies,
academia, and private sectors for decades. AEO 2017 projects a time path of key U.S.
energy market indicators from present to 2050 EIA (2017a). Comparing to previous annual
outlooks, AEO 2017 includes two reference projections, one including the Clean Power
Plan (CPP) and the other excluding it. Because the CPP is much less stringent than its origi-
nal form, in this study, we use AEO 2017 without the Clean Power Plan as the reference case.
    While AEO 2017 is a few years old, electricity generation in the United States has only
become cleaner since 2017. Thus, if our simulation results are biased in any direction, they
would be biased towards overestimating the air pollution from electricity consumption. This
suggests that using AEO 2021 would only strengthen our results that the California port
electrification regulation reduced air pollution emissions on net.




                                            101
D.2    Marine Energy Consumption
In Yale-NEMS, the transportation demand module projects transit and auxiliary fuel
consumption by marine vessels, within the U.S. Emission Control Area--the areas within
200 nautical miles of the U.S. coast and outside ECA EIA (2016).
    Yale-NEMS models the marine fuel consumption by vessel type (tanker, container,
gas (LPG/LNG), roll-on/roll-off, bulk, and general cargo) within the ECA in three steps,
as is discussed in great detail in EIA (2016). First, the model estimates the total energy
consumption in a base year (2013) based on historical data. From the base year, the model
then determines the projections of energy demand in future years by several factors: fleet
turnover rate--representing the rate of new vessels entering a fleet moving through ECA,
marine fuel efficiency improvement, and industrial output--accounting for economic
growth. Third, the model splits total energy consumption into four fuel types, including
distillate oil, residual oil, CNG, and LNG, based on fuel price changes using a logit model
specification.
    EIA's NEMS does not explicitly model port-side electricity consumption and we add
this feature to Yale-NEMS. First, we obtain historical data on vessel visits connected to
onshore electricity and compare them to the total number of visits, which provides us
the approximate percentage of energy consumption from electricity by year and region.
For future years, we assume the same proportion of using electricity from 2016. We also
incorporate the California Ocean-Going Vessel At-Berth Regulation (see Section 6.1 for
details). Second, since we know the total fossil fuel consumption in ECA, we calculate
the total electricity consumption based on the calculated percentages, constituting the
reference shore-side electricity consumption in the model. Third, we subtract the newly
added marine electricity demand from the total commercial electricity demand. Thus the
total electricity demand across sectors is still comparable to the AEO 2017 base projections.
Fourth, we calculate the reference emissions from vessels by applying the emission factors
by engine type (transit and auxiliary) and fuel type to total fuel consumption.


D.3    Electricity Generation
The Electricity Market Module (EMM) in Yale-NEMS explicitly models the U.S. electricity
market and its interaction with other energy markets EIA (2017b). The module is at the
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) region level. In each modeling
year, other interrelated modules pass critical parameters to the EMM, including electricity
demand from the four end-use demand modules (commercial, industrial, residential, and
transportation demand), input fuel prices from the fuel supply modules (coal, natural gas,


                                            102
and fuel oils), and macroeconomic expectations from the macroeconomic module. The
EMM then makes production decisions by choosing a fuel mix to generate electricity to
meet demand cost-efficiently with perfect foresight.
    The outputs from the EMM include electricity quantities and prices, input fuel consump-
tion, emissions, and capital investment for additional capacity, which are then all returned
to the related modules. Several factors determine the total emissions from generating
electricity, including emission factors across energy types and mitigation technologies. The
model iterates until market equilibrium achieves. The electricity consumption from ports is
linked to EMM. When there is electricity incurred by vessels, the demand is received by the
EMM, and then the EMM generates electricity to meet such demand most economically.
    Yale-NEMS only reports emissions of SO2 and NOx from the power sector. To evaluate
PM2.5 , we use an approximation approach similar to Gillingham and Huang (2019, 2020).
First, we calculate the base year (2014) PM2.5 emissions from power plants based on the
EPA 2014 National Emissions Inventory (NEI) data and obtain the energy consumption
from Yale-NEMS in the same year. Second, we extrapolate the emissions after 2014 as a
constant proportion of energy consumption.


D.4     Shore Power Scenario
We construct a shore power scenario, in which all U.S. ports implement shore power for
auxiliary engines of vessels. Specifically, we allow auxiliary fuels (e.g., distillate oil, residual
oil, and natural gas) consumed by vessels to be gradually replaced by electricity generated
by power plants from 2020 to 2025, and after 2025 all auxiliary engines are powered by
electricity. The fuel switch follows the following linear adjustment:

                                                  - 2019
                                    ,   = 1-                  0
                                                                ,
                                                                  ,
                                              2025 - 2019
                                             - 2019
                                    ,   =                 0
                                                            ,
                                                              ,
                                          2025 - 2019

where 0 , represents the consumption of auxiliary fuel by vessels in ports in year
( < 2025) in the reference case and , is the adjusted fuel consumption in the Shore
Power scenario. , is electricity consumption by vessels in ports switched from fossil
fuels. From the year 2025 onwards, fossil fuels consumed by auxiliary engines are entirely
replaced with electricity, as represented in the following:




                                                 103
                                         ,   = 0,
                                         ,   =      0
                                                        ,
                                                            .


   We run the reference case and the Shore Power scenario individually in Yale-NEMS.
We then compare the emissions results between the two cases, and the differences indicate
the effect of implementing shore power in ports.



References for Appendices
Bell, M. L., Ebisu, K., Peng, R. D., Walker, J., Samet, J. M., Zeger, S. L., and Dominici, F.
  (2008). Seasonal and regional short-term effects of fine particles on hospital admissions
  in 202 US counties, 1999-2005. American Journal of Epidemiology, 168(11):1301­10.

Dominici, F., Peng, R. D., Bell, M. L., Pham, L., McDermott, A., Zeger, S. L., and Samet,
 J. M. (2006). Fine particulate air pollution and hospital admission for cardiovascular and
 respiratory diseases. JAMA, 295(10):1127­34.

EIA (2009). The National Energy Modeling System: An Overview 2009. Technical report,
  United State Energy Information Administration, Washington, DC.

EIA (2016). Transportation Sector Demand Module of the National Energy Modeling
  System: Model Documentation. Technical report, United States Energy Information
  Administration, Washington, DC.

EIA (2017a). Annual Energy Outlook 2017. Technical report, U.S. Energy Information
  Administration, Washington, DC.

EIA (2017b). Electricity Market Module of the National Energy Modeling System: Model
  Documentation. Technical report, United States Energy Information Administration,
  Washington, DC.

EPA (2003). Control of Emissions From New Marine Compression-Ignition Engines at or
  Above 30 Liters Per Cylinder. Technical report, United States Environmental Protection
  Agency, Washington, DC.

Firpo, S., Fortin, N. M., and Lemieux, T. (2009). Unconditional Quantile Regressions.
  Econometrica, 77(3):953­973.

                                              104
Gillingham, K. and Huang, P. (2019). Is abundant natural gas a bridge to a low-carbon
  future or a dead-end? Energy Journal, 40(2):1­26.

Gillingham, K. and Huang, P. (2020). Long-Run Environmental and Economic Impacts of
  Electrifying Waterborne Shipping in the United States. Environmental Science & Technology,
  54(16):9824­9833.

Hwang, J. S. and Chan, G. C. (2002). Effects of air pollution on daily clinic visits for lower
 respiratory tract illness. American Journal of Epidemiology, 155(1):1­10.

Peel, J. L., Tolbert, P. E., Klein, M., Metzger, K. B., Flanders, W. D., Todd, K., Mulholland, J. A.,
  Ryan, P. B., and Frumkin, H. (2005). Ambient air pollution and respiratory emergency
  department visits. Epidemiology, 16(2):164­174.

Schlenker, W. and Walker, W. R. (2016). Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous
  health. Review of Economic Studies, 83(2):768­809.

Stieb, D. M., Szyszkowicz, M., Rowe, B. H., and Leech, J. A. (2009). Air pollution and
  emergency department visits for cardiac and respiratory conditions: a multi-city time-
  series analysis. Environmental Health, 8:25.




                                                105
