                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE HETEROGENEOUS VALUE OF A STATISTICAL LIFE:
                EVIDENCE FROM U.S. ARMY REENLISTMENT DECISIONS

                                        Kyle Greenberg
                                       Michael Greenstone
                                        Stephen P. Ryan
                                       Michael Yankovich

                                       Working Paper 29104
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29104


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Josh Angrist, Orley Ashenfelter, David Autor, Eli Berman, Joseph
Doyle, Jim Heckman, Christopher Knittel, Nicolai Kuminoff, Derek Neal, Heidi Williams, Tyler
Williams, and participants in MIT's Labor Lunch, the NBER's Economics of National Security
Working Group, and West Point's Economics Seminar Series for their helpful comments and
suggestions. We thank Jinglin Yang, Claire Fan, Michael Galperin, Ananya Kotia, Jonathan
Petkun, Dan Stuart, and Evelyn Yankovich for their exceptional research assistance. We also
acknowledge generous and exceptional support from Luke Gallagher of the Army's Office of
Economic and Manpower Analysis at West Point, New York. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Department of the
Army, the Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kyle Greenberg, Michael Greenstone, Stephen P. Ryan, and Michael Yankovich. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Heterogeneous Value of a Statistical Life: Evidence from U.S. Army Reenlistment Decisions
Kyle Greenberg, Michael Greenstone, Stephen P. Ryan, and Michael Yankovich
NBER Working Paper No. 29104
July 2021
JEL No. J17,J31,J45

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the value of a statistical life (VSL), or the willingness to trade-off wealth and
mortality risk, among 430,000 U.S. Army soldiers choosing whether to reenlist between 2002 and
2010. Using a discrete choice random utility approach and significant variation in retention
bonuses and mortality risk, we recover average VSL estimates that range between $500,000 and
$900,000, an order of magnitude smaller than U.S. civilian labor market estimates. Additionally,
we fulfill Rosen's (1974) vision to recover indifference curves between wealth and non-market
goods (e.g., mortality risk) and document substantial heterogeneity in preferences across types.
We find that the VSL increases rapidly with mortality risk within type, and that soldiers in combat
occupations have much lower VSLs than those in noncombat occupations. We estimate that the
quadrupling of mortality risk from the Afghanistan and Iraq wars reduced annual welfare by
$2,355 per soldier, roughly 8 percent of pay.

Kyle Greenberg                                             Stephen P. Ryan
United States Military Academy at West Point               Olin Business School
Department of Social Sciences                              Washington University in St. Louis
606 Thayer Road                                            Campus Box 1133
West Point, NY 10996                                       One Brookings Drive
kyle.greenberg@westpoint.edu                               St. Louis, MO 63130
                                                           and NBER
Michael Greenstone                                         stephen.p.ryan@wustl.edu
University of Chicago
Department of Economics                                    Michael Yankovich
1126 E. 59th Street                                        United States Military Academy
Chicago, IL 60637                                          606 Thayer Rd
and NBER                                                   West Point, NY 10996
mgreenst@uchicago.edu                                      Michael.Yankovich@westpoint.edu
1       Introduction

A topic of extraordinary interest to researchers and policymakers is how to estimate indi-
viduals' willingness to pay for goods and services for which there isn't an explicit market
(Greenstone, 2017). Rosen's (1974) seminal "hedonics" paper has provided the foundation
for thousands of studies estimating the value of a wide range of "implicit" goods and services,
including clean air (e.g., Chay and Greenstone (2005)), government policies (e.g., Gruber
(1994)), school quality (e.g., Bayer et al. (2007)), alternative work arrangements (e.g., Mas
and Pallais (2017)), and other job characteristics (e.g., Stern (2004); Lamadon et al. (2019);
Folke and Rickne (2020)). The value of a statistical life (VSL), which is an individual's
willingness to trade-off changes in wealth for changes in the probability of death, is a canon-
ical example due to the first-order importance of mortality risk; it also features centrally in
Thaler and Rosen (1976), who provide a framework for inferring preferences from the equi-
librium relationship between wages and mortality risk. Further, the VSL is of tremendous
practical value because it provides a measure of the benefits accruing from a wide range
of policies that improve safety, such as public health mandates, environmental regulation,
occupational safety standards, speed limits, and product safety requirements.
The resulting empirical VSL literature (see, for example, Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004);
Viscusi (2004, 2010); Evans and Taylor (2020)) has had enormous policy influence, but the
interpretation and credibility of the estimates have been criticized by Black and Kniesner
(2003), Ashenfelter (2006), and others for at least three reasons. First, it has failed to
match the ambition of the Rosen (1974) and Thaler and Rosen (1976) framework by almost
universally treating the VSL as a constant and thereby side-stepping the need to recover the
bid functions that reflect heterogeneity in preferences across individuals and heterogeneity in
the VSL within individuals at different mortality rates. This simplification, which is common
in the broader hedonics literature, rules out the standard assumption that there is declining
marginal utility in the consumption of a good; in practice, this assumption means that the
demand curve for safety is not downward sloping. Additionally, it invalidates the strong
casual observation that some people (e.g., Army enlistees) are more comfortable with safety
risks than others, which in turn helps explain the sorting of individuals into occupations.
Second, fatality risks are often correlated with other unobserved features of jobs and it has
proven quite challenging to identify settings where it is possible to credibly disentangle the
effect of mortality risk from these other factors.1 Third, the mortality risk may be known
    1
    Lee and Taylor (2019) aim to solve this problem by instrumenting for mortality risk with randomly
assigned federal safety inspections and estimate VSLs between $8.5 and $10.6 million. Rohlfs et al. (2015)
use quasi-experimental evidence from changes to air-bag regulations to derive median VSL estimates between
$10.6 and $13.0 million. All dollar values in this paper are converted to 2019 U.S. Dollars (USD).

                                                    1

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
imperfectly to agents choosing jobs, complicating the interpretation of the empirical results.
This paper proposes and implements a novel approach to estimating the VSL that makes
progress on all three of these challenges. Using detailed administrative data, we model the
reenlistment decisions of the universe of 430,000 U.S. Army soldiers who completed their first
term of service between 2002 and 2010. The military is a particularly salient setting for the
application of the VSL, where decisions about personal and vehicular armor, the development
of drones, the selection of operating procedures, soldier and veteran compensation, and a
variety of other process and investment policies often come down to a choice between higher
costs and lower fatality risks. The urgency of getting these choices right is especially great
in the post-Vietnam era of an all-volunteer military that relies on reenlistments to fill senior
ranks. Moreover, the U.S. military remains a meaningful segment of public policy. Annual
spending on national security and veterans benefits is roughly one trillion USD.2 Relatedly,
U.S. service members and veterans account for a significant portion of the young working-age
population: 7.5 percent of men and 1.7 percent of women between 25 and 44 years of age
are veterans or are currently serving in the military (2019 American Community Survey).
Our sample period offers a compelling setting to observe individuals' choices when faced with
widely varying levels of compensation and risk. Regarding wealth, the Army uses lump-sum
reenlistment bonuses to balance manpower needs with staffing levels. These bonuses vary
widely by occupation and over time, are established through a centralized Army personnel
process, change discontinuously, and are constant within an occupation at any point in time
(i.e., not subject to negotiation). For example during the 2002-2010 period, the reenlistment
bonus ranged between $0 and $18,600 (mean of $4,100) for a 4-year reenlistment as a combat
engineer, while it varied between $0 and $37,900 (mean of $11,000) for human intelligence
collectors. On the risk dimension, mortality rates varied tremendously both across and within
specialties during the time period, because the sample begins in peacetime and extends
through the height of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, when the overall Army mortality rate
more than quadrupled. There was also substantial variation in the change in mortality rates
across occupations; for example, the four-year mortality rate for infantrymen increased by
600 percent between 2002 and 2007 (from 3.5 deaths per 1000 soldiers to 24.6 deaths per
1000 soldiers), while it increased by 145 percent (from 2.0 deaths per 1000 to 4.9 deaths per
1000) for wheeled vehicle mechanics over the same time period.
The foundation of our analysis is an empirical model of the decision to reenlist. Specifically,
we use random utility discrete choice models where the bonus and fatality risk are the
  2
    See the Fiscal Year 2021 (FY21) Department of Defense Budget Submission and the FY21 Department
of Veterans Affairs Budget Submission.



                                                 2

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
key covariates and a rich set of occupation- and soldier-specific controls are available. The
(negative) ratio of the marginal utilities on the mortality rate and the reenlistment bonus
is the VSL; this is the amount of money required to hold reenlistment rates constant for a
marginal increase in mortality.
There are three primary findings. First, higher bonuses increase the reenlistment rate and
higher mortality rates reduce it. In the preferred specification, an $1,000 increase in the
bonus for a 4-year term raises the probability of reenlistment by 0.46 percentage points.
To put this in context, the overall reenlistment rate in this period was 45.3 percent, these
soldiers earned about $30,000 annually, and average bonuses increased by $11,000 between
2003 and 2006. In the other direction an increase in the expected 4-year mortality rate of
1 per 1000 decreases the reenlistment rate by roughly 0.26 percentage points. As a basis
of comparison, we estimate that the overall expected 4-year mortality rate increased by 7.2
soldiers per 1000 from the low in 2002 to the peak in 2007. Overall, we interpret these
results as evidence that reenlistment decisions are highly elastic to bonuses but less elastic
to mortality rates.
Second, the average VSL estimated across the population of soldiers and observed range of
mortality rates is generally between $500,000 and $900,000 across a wide set of specifications.
These estimates are precise and at least at an order of magnitude smaller than the typical
VSL estimate from overall U.S. labor market studies (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003; Kniesner et
al., 2012).3 It is striking that the estimates are little affected by the inclusion of the rich set
of controls available in these data, which is generally not the case in the hedonic studies of
the civilian labor market (Black and Kniesner, 2003). Further, the results are qualitatively
similar whether the reenlistment decision is modeled with a binary logit model with no
unobserved heterogeneity, a moment forest binary logit model that uses a novel machine
learning algorithm of Nekipelov et al. (2021) to relax parametric assumptions about the
covariates, a binary random coefficients model that allows for unobserved heterogeneity in
the bonus and mortality risk coefficients, or multinomial logit models that provide a richer
characterization of the range of reenlistment possibilities.
Third, we fulfill Rosen's (1974) vision to recover indifference (or bid) curves between wealth
and non-market goods (mortality risk in this setting) and find substantial heterogeneity in
the marginal willingness to pay for safety within and across types of soldiers. Specifically,
we estimate B-splines that allow the marginal response of those variables to depend on their
levels and then determine indifference curves, based on the pairs of bonuses and mortality
   3
    Among draft-age men from the Vietnam Era, Rohlfs (2012) estimates marginal responses to the Vietnam
Draft on the decision to attend college and the decision to voluntarily enlist to produce upper bound VSL
estimates of $8-14 million.

                                                   3

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
rates that return equal utility; the VSL is the slope along an indifference curve. Among
men in combat occupations, the VSL varies by more than an order of magnitude within the
observed range of mortality risk: the VSL is $180,000 at a 4-year expected mortality rate of 1
per 1000 (1st percentile of their distribution of mortality rates), $370,000 at 8 per 1000 (45th
percentile) and $2.02 million at 24 per 1000 (98th percentile). Further, we find evidence of
substantial taste-based sorting, even within the Army, such that individuals with higher risk
tolerance sort into the riskiest occupations: the VSL is more than 7 times greater for men
in noncombat occupations versus men in combat occupations (i.e., $2.808 million compared
to $374,000) at an expected 4-year mortality rate of 8 per 1000.
The recovery of indifference curves is of great practical value because the welfare consequences
of non-marginal changes and policy counterfactuals are not possible without them. For
example, the loss in soldiers' surplus from the increase in the mortality rate due to the
Afghanistan/Iraq wars would be understated by 40 percent if we used the average VSL
derived from the entire Army sample rather than the separate indifference curves for men in
combat occupations, men in noncombat occupations, and women.
This setting has several institutional features that help address the literature's challenges.
First, we model reenlistment decisions with an individual-level discrete choice random util-
ity model, allowing us to recover a rich and flexible distribution of VSLs. Specifically, we
estimate specifications where the marginal utilities of wealth and risk vary with their lev-
els, so we can reconstruct the theoretical indifference curves trading off risk and financial
compensation as originally envisioned by Rosen (1974) and Thaler and Rosen (1976). This
is a marked departure from the empirical VSL literature which to date has mostly (per-
haps entirely) focused on estimating the market locus between wages and mortality risk; the
market locus's limitation is that its economic interpretation is unclear for all but marginal
and uniform changes in mortality rates across the population. In contrast, the recovery of
indifference curves is the great promise of the hedonics literature because it allows for the
complete welfare analyses that the empirical VSL and other hedonic literatures have been
unable to conduct.4
Second, we believe that the potential for omitted variables bias due to unobserved job char-
acteristics is less of a concern in our setting than it is in most empirical VSL settings, even
though experimental or quasi-experimental variation is unavailable. This is because the
richness of the data allow us to estimate models that include the interaction of fixed effects
for the year of initial enlistment, 145 occupations, and the initial entry term length (e.g., 4
   4
    To our knowledge, we are unaware of any other papers that recover indifference curves within a hedonic
context.



                                                    4

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
years). Thus, the coefficients on the bonus and mortality rate comes from comparing the
reenlistment decisions of soldiers in 2006 who signed up in 2002 for four-year terms as com-
bat infantryman (i.e., occupational specialty 11B). Within this cell, the identifying variation
in mortality risk comes from the rolling 12 preceding month's average occupation-specific
mortality hazard and in bonuses from the irregular changes in SRBs. Additionally, we adjust
for a rich set of covariates, including the probability of deployment to a combat zone, age,
gender, race, education, state of legal residence, Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT)
score, and the local unemployment rate in the soldier's home county.5
Third, with respect to concerns that fatality rates are unknown, there is a single employer
making it easier to share information, mortality is a part of daily life in the Army, and
fatal casualties are published regularly online and in newspapers. Additionally, our informal
discussions with soldiers confirm that they are aware of fatality rates and how they vary across
occupations and within occupations over time. Finally, our results help to confirm this last
point: even though noncombat occupations experience less variation in fatality rates than
combat occupations, the reenlistment decisions among soldiers in the former group appear
more responsive to changes in expected mortality rates than reenlistment decisions among
soldiers in in the latter group.
We proceed as follows: Section 2 draws on the theory of Thaler and Rosen (1976) to empha-
size how recovering indifference curves for wealth and risk reveals important heterogeneity
in the VSL; Section 3 details the setting for our empirical analysis; Section 4 provides de-
tails about the data and presents summary statistics; Section 5 describes our estimating
framework; Section 6 presents and discusses results from standard logit approaches and our
moment forest analysis framework; Section 7 reports on our recovery of the indifference curves
envisioned by Thaler and Rosen and how they can be used to infer the welfare consequences
of non-marginal changes in mortality risk; and Section 8 concludes.



2       The Economics of the VSL

Thaler and Rosen's (1976) canonical paper provides the economic underpinnings of the ob-
served relationship between wages and mortality risk that has been noted since Adam Smith's
observation that people must be induced to take risky jobs through a set of compensating
differences in wage rates. Drawing from Rosen (1974), they derive a model of worker and firm
    5
    The AFQT score represents the percentile-rank (1-99) of a soldier's arithmetic and verbal reasoning skills
relative to a nationally representative sample of 18-23-year-olds (Department of Defense, 2004). Borgschulte
and Martorell (2018) find that service member reenlistment decisions are responsive to home-state unem-
ployment rates and reenlistment bonuses.

                                                      5

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
optimizing behavior that results in an equilibrium relationship between wages and mortality
risk. This section briefly reviews their contribution and uses it to interpret the extensive
empirical VSL literature.
In their model, a job is comprised of a vector of characteristics, C = (c1 , c2 , . . . , cn ), which
might include vacation days, strenuousness, exposure to extreme heat or cold, and mortality
risk. The wage rate of job i can be written as: Pi = P (ci1 , ci2 , . . . , cin ). The partial derivative
of P (·) with respect to the j -th characteristic, P/cj , is referred to as the marginal implicit
price. On the worker side, Thaler and Rosen derive indifference, or bid, curves for workers
that reveal the wage rate necessary to hold utility constant at different levels of job charac-
teristics.6 Heterogeneity in tastes for job characteristics and non-labor market income cause
these indifference curves to vary across individuals. The other side of the market is comprised
of employers that are heterogeneous due to differences in their costs of providing alternative
job characteristics. In equilibrium, workers and employers assortively match, generating a
market locus between wages and a given characteristic. For example, workers with a high
tolerance for risk sort into firms that find it expensive to provide safe work environments.
Our setting differs from the canonical hedonic framework in that there is only a single
employer. However, within the Army there are many occupations with different job char-
acteristics. We assume that the Army's ability to provide alternative job characteristics
requires investments that occur over a longer time horizon, and thus we treat them as fixed
and restrict our attention to workers.
Since our interest is in estimating the VSL, we focus specifically on mortality risk and wealth.
Figure 1 illustrates the endogenous sorting that occurs across occupations by workers with
different tastes for risk. The heavy line in Figure 1 plots the market locus between wages and
mortality risk or the market equalizing-difference wage function. It also plots indifference
curves for three types of workers, denoted as types #1, #2, and #3. For worker type #2,
two different indifference curves are depicted; it is apparent that utility level b is greater
than a because the wage rate is higher at a given mortality risk. Each indifference curve
reveals the standard declining marginal rate of substitution between mortality risk and the
wage rate.
The three types choose jobs where their marginal willingness to pay for safety is equal to
the market determined marginal implicit price, which occur at the pairs c1        2        3
                                                                             j , cj , and cj ,
respectively. Given market prices, the utility of these workers would be lower at jobs with
higher or lower levels of mortality risk. Further, a comparison of the indifference curves
across types reveals that workers in risky jobs have a comparative advantage in bearing
   6
       We use the terms "indifference curve" and "bid curve" interchangeably throughout the paper.

                                                      6

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
mortality risk due to their relatively low distaste for mortality risk.

                      Figure 1: Hedonic Wage-Safety Theoretical Framework


  Wage
  Rate
                                          Worker #1                             Worker #3


                                                        Worker #2
                                                         b>a
                                                                                     Market Locus Between Wage Rate
                                                                                     and Mortality Risk




                            Utility = b

                                                                    Worker #2

                                          Utility = a

                                                                                             Mortality Risk

Notes: This figure depicts a theoretical example of the Hedonic Wage-Safety framework described in Section
2. The figure plots families of indifference curves for three types of workers, denoted as types #1, #2,
and #3. For worker type #2, two different indifference curves are depicted. The heavy line in black plots
the equilibrium market locus between wages and mortality risk or the market equalizing-difference wage
function. The three types choose jobs where their marginal willingness to pay for safety is equal to the
market determined marginal implicit price, which occur at mortality risk levels c1      2        3
                                                                                   j , cj , and cj , respectively.
The figure includes a red tangency line for each type. The slope of each tangent line is the VSL for a worker
type when the mortality risk equals c2j.




Along the market locus, there are a set of tangencies with worker indifference curves, so
the marginal price of mortality risk is equal to an individual's marginal willingness to pay
for safety (i.e., the negative of mortality risk). Therefore, the gradient of the market locus
with respect to mortality risk gives the equilibrium differential that compensates workers for
accepting greater mortality risk. Put another way, jobs with high levels of mortality risk
must have higher wages to attract workers, and the locus reveals the price that allocates
workers across jobs.
This figure illustrates several important issues, all of which have at their core that there is
not a single VSL. First, the slope of the market locus reveals the average of the VSLs (i.e.,
the marginal willingness to pay for safety) across an unknown number of worker types facing

                                                          7

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
different levels of mortality risk. This is because the market locus is comprised of a collection
of single points from an unknown number of worker types on each worker type's respective
indifference curve at different risk levels. It is noteworthy that the enormous empirical
VSL literature has almost exclusively focused on estimating the market locus, although its
economic interpretation is much more limited than the estimation of the demand primitives
or indifference curves that Thaler and Rosen originally envisioned.
Second, the market locus is not informative about an individual's or type's willingness to
pay for a non-marginal change in mortality risk. For example, the market locus suggests
that worker #1 would be willing to accept an increase in mortality risk from c1       2
                                                                                j to cj for an
increase in wages equal to w2 - w1 . However, their indifference curve reveals that the true
required increase in compensation is w4 - w1 . The broader point is that the locus cannot
reveal willingness to pay for non-marginal changes in mortality risk for any class of workers,
except in the extreme case where there is no heterogeneity in tastes for mortality risk. This
limits its value, because it means that the locus cannot be used to make inferences on the
welfare consequences of alternative or counterfactual policies.
Third, the focus on estimating the market locus can lead to the false impression that there
is limited heterogeneity in the population. For example, Figure 1 depicts the market locus
as a straight line, suggesting that each of the worker types has the same VSL. However, a
much more meaningful measure of heterogeneity in risk preferences comes from comparing
the VSL across worker types at a fixed level of mortality risk. The figure depicts the slope of
all three worker types' indifference curves at mortality risk level c2j . At this (or any other risk
level), it is apparent that there is great heterogeneity in risk preferences with worker type #1
having the highest VSL and worker type #3 having the lowest. It is therefore not surprising
that worker type #1 has sorted to the safest job and worker type #3 to the riskiest one.
The full hedonic method includes a two-step approach to recover the demand primitives
and resulting indifference curves that allow for a complete welfare analysis (Rosen, 1974).7
However, Brown and Rosen (1982), Bartik (1987), and Epple (1987) describe the strong
assumptions necessary to identify these structural parameters. From a practical perspective,
there is a consensus that researchers have been unable to identify a single wage or other
hedonic setting where these assumptions hold (Deacon et al., 1998; Chay and Greenstone,
2005).8
   7
      In the context of the VSL, the first step of this method is to regress wages on all job characteristics,
allowing for non-linear effects. To uncover the bid function, the second step is to regress the estimated
relationship between wages and mortality risk on different values of risk while controlling for all covariates
that might influence demand for safety.
    8
      Ekeland et al. (2004) outline the assumptions necessary to identify the demand (and supply) functions



                                                      8

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
The remainder of this paper describes and implements our approach to developing new
estimates of the VSL derived from a discrete choice random utility model of soldiers' reen-
listment decisions that exploits substantial variation in both wealth (through reenlistment
bonuses) and mortality risk. This is an alternative approach from the typical hedonic one
where wages are regressed against mortality rates (see Mrozek and Taylor 2002; Viscusi and
Aldy 2003; Cropper et al. 2011; O'Brien 2018 for reviews).9 An important appeal of this
approach is that we are able to recover the demand primitives, resulting indifference curves,
and marginal willingness to pay for mortality risk functions that were the goals of Thaler
and Rosen's original model for, as far as we are aware, the first time in the VSL literature
and possibly the broader hedonics literature. As we have noted, this is so important because
it allows for assessing the welfare consequences of non-marginal changes in mortality risk.



3      Institutional Setting

3.1     Background on the Army's Use of Labor

The setting for our analysis is the U.S. Army between 2002 and 2010 when the number
of people serving on active duty in the U.S. Army averaged between 475,000 and 550,000
soldiers. Each year, approximately 65,000 non-prior service young people volunteer to serve
in the Army for a period of between two and six years. When an individual enlists in the
U.S. Army, s/he chooses his/her term of service and selects an occupation. Once enlisted and
subsequently trained, the Army chooses a soldier's unit of assignment based on the needs of
the Army (Lyle, 2006; Lleras-Muney, 2010).10
The organization of work is generally structured to encompass hierarchical job ladders in
which soldiers serving at higher levels of responsibility and skill must come from lower levels
of the internal labor market. There is no lateral entry. Thus, the Army relies on a substantial
proportion of each new cohort to reenlist for additional periods of obligated service in order
in an additive version of the hedonic model with data from a single market. Heckman et al. (2010) examine
identification and estimation of nonadditive hedonic models. Heckman et al. (2003) examine the performance
of estimation techniques for both types of models.
    9
      Le´
        on and Miguel (2017) and O'Brien (2018) also use discrete choice methods to infer the VSL, but they
do not infer indifference curves. There is also an extensive literature that uses individuals' stated preferences
to infer the VSL (Cropper et al., 2011).
   10
      Though some first term enlisted soldiers may have some scope over their choice of duty location condi-
tional on occupation, they arguably have no scope over the choice of unit of assignment or of deployment
timing. Once a soldier completes the initial entry training associated with his occupation of choice, the needs
of the Army dictate which unit the soldier serves with and when the soldier deploys. As such, variation of
within-occupation risk exposure is generally orthogonal to the soldier's preferences for deployment or risk,
conditional on the soldier's choice of occupation.

                                                       9

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
to meet its requirements for higher-ranked, experienced workers. The Army has relatively
fixed demand for soldiers in the short run, and such demand is defined by requirements at
the level of occupation and rank.
With no lateral entry and the need for higher-ranked individuals, the Army must balance
enlistment and reenlistment rates with attrition. In the long run, the Army can modify tables
of organization and equipment so as to substitute equipment for people. The military can
also change strategy or doctrine, essentially altering the way that it conducts operations,
so as to require different amounts of labor. However, these types of changes extend over
the course of several months and in many cases years. Adjustments to compensation are
a natural tool to obtain the necessary number of soldiers in each occupation. However,
Congress controls annual salaries and they institute changes slowly and at the cohort level,
not the occupation level, so these changes generally do not help fill relative shortages. Thus,
the Army's only compensation tool to address short-run, and even medium-run, staffing
needs are enlistment and reenlistment bonuses. The next section discusses the reenlistment
process and the central role bonuses play in them.


3.2    The Reenlistment Process

As a matter of level-setting, roughly 50,000 soldiers annually were eligible to reenlist between
2002 and 2010. The annual reenlistment rate during these years varied between 36 and 55
percent. About a year before the end of a soldier's initial contractually obligated term of
service, she enters the reenlistment eligibility window that is depicted in Figure A1. During
this window, soldiers confront the choice of reenlisting in the active force or finishing their
term of service and exiting active duty. All soldiers participate in a mandatory career
counseling program during which they are exposed to options for reenlisting for a follow-
on term in the active military as well as to information about outside options including
civilian employment and educational opportunities. This counseling takes place quarterly
starting two years prior to the end of the soldier's initial contract, as prescribed in The Army
Retention Program, Army Regulation 601-280.
The reenlistment options are characterized by a triplet of occupation, home post location
(i.e., their permanent military base) and term-length, as seen in the bottom part of Figure
A1. With respect to the first, soldiers can choose to remain in their current occupation (i.e.,
military occupation specialty or MOS) or retrain and switch to another occupation if their
current one is over-strength and their preferred one is under-strength. Roughly 90 percent
of soldiers who reenlist choose to remain in their current occupation. Additionally, soldiers


                                                 10

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
can allow the Army to choose their military base, they can elect to stay at their current post
location, or they can choose to serve at a post that is either overseas or inside the continental
United States if the Army has a requirement for soldiers in the post where they wish to serve.
About one-third of reenlistees choose to remain at their current home post location. None of
the reenlistment options restrict a soldier's potential for selection to deploy to a combat zone
as units from all locations deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan during the time period of our
analysis, and the needs of the Army, which are not known to reenlisting soldiers, dictate the
precise timing and location of unit combat deployments (Lyle, 2006). The third dimension
of choice is on the term-length, which can vary between 2 and 6 years, with 4 years being
the most common (see Table A1) and 2 years not being available to soldiers who select a
new occupation or who choose a new post.
Through the Army's Selective Reenlistment Bonus (SRB) program, the Army's Human
Resources Command (HRC) can offer bonuses to increase reenlistment in occupations "that
do not have adequate retention levels to staff the force" (Army Regulation 601-280). Whether
a soldier receives a bonus offer and the size of the bonus offer depends on, the occupation
they would choose, how much time the soldier has served, their rank, and how many years
the soldier is willing to extend his service on active duty. During the period of our study,
nearly all soldiers who reenlisted into occupations eligible for bonuses received a lump-sum
bonus payment at the time they signed their contract.11 Bonus offers do not depend on any
of the soldiers' personal characteristics or record within a category, so there is no discretion
available to Commanders or others to alter a bonus for a particular soldier. Bonuses are
subject to federal income tax except when the soldier reenlists in a combat zone.
The Army's HRC uses a computer program to determine reenlistment bonuses for each oc-
cupation according to the Army's demand for experienced soldiers and the Army's expected
supply of experienced soldiers. Demand for soldiers is a function of the Army's authorized
strength in each occupation and available funding. The Army calculates the expected sup-
ply of experienced soldiers as a function of the number of first-term soldiers currently in
each occupation, historical attrition and reenlistment rates, and anticipated soldier training
requirements. Occupations with higher expected shortages typically receive higher bonus
offers than occupations with smaller expected shortages.
Finally, the Army announces changes to bonus offers through Military Personnel (MILPER)
  11
     The Army began paying reenlistment bonuses as a single lump-sum in 2004. Prior to 2004, the Army
paid some bonuses as a single lump-sum but paid others through the following schedule: a lump-sum payment
worth 50 percent of the bonus at the time of reenlistment, then the remainder of the bonus paid over equal,
annual installments through the duration of the reenlistment contract. We cannot observe which bonuses
were not paid as a single lump-sum, but our results are not sensitive to assuming pre-2004 bonus offers have
a slightly lower present value than bonus offers in 2004 or later.

                                                    11

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
messages at frequent but unexpected intervals that do not follow an established schedule.
For example, between 2002 and 2010, the Army released over 90 MILPER messages related
to changes in bonuses, with some years experiencing substantially more announcements than
others (e.g., 16 in 2004 vs. 5 in 2010).



4      Data and Descriptive Statistics

Our sample consists of 429,375 non-prior service, first-term Army enlisted soldiers who be-
came eligible for reenlistment between 2002 and 2010.12 We conduct our analysis with a
database of military administrative data that links the complete menu of choices available
to an Army soldier at their reenlistment decision with their demographic characteristics,
variables that describe their experiences during service, their choice-specific reenlistment
bonus and mortality rate, and their actual reenlistment choice. The remainder of this sec-
tion describes how we map soldiers to bonus offers and measures of mortality risk for each
reenlistment option before concluding with sample summary statistics.


4.1     Construction of Bonus Offers

We used publicly-available MILPER messages to construct a database of time, location,
rank, and occupation-specific reenlistment bonus offers that provides the menu of bonuses
soldiers faced at any point in time. After constructing an exhaustive database of bonus offers
for each occupation from 2002 through 2010, we matched the individuals in our sample to the
bonus offer database using a crosswalk based on the soldier's occupation, years-of-service,
rank, and years of (potential) reenlistment.
To avoid concerns that soldiers strategically game the reenlistment process by holding out
for a higher bonus offer, we assign soldiers to the bonus they would have received if they
selected to reenlist 12 months prior to their initial Expiration of Term of Service (ETS) date
since this corresponds to the month that most soldiers enter their reenlistment window and
is the modal month of reenlistment (see Figure A2). Going forward, we refer to 12 months
prior to the initial ETS date as the month a soldier enters her reenlistment window, but
we acknowledge that sometimes the Army permits soldiers to reenlist more than 12 months
prior to their initial ETS date--such decisions can apply to all soldiers or to soldiers in
particular occupations or locations. Other times the Army will extend soldiers' ETS dates,
  12
    We exclude soldiers who served for less than one year and soldiers who did not reach the rank of Private
First Class (PFC) by the last year of their initial enlistment. Neither group is eligible for reenlistment.


                                                    12

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
which results in some soldiers reenlisting after their initial ETS date. In the analysis that
follows, we find that VSL estimates exhibit little sensitivity with regard to different rules for
the date that a soldier decides whether to reenlist (e.g., 9 months prior to the initial ETS
date, 12 months prior, 15 months prior, etc; see Table A2).
For reasons of parsimony and computational speed, we reduce the soldiers' choice set in
a couple of ways. First, we treat the choice of new occupation as the average across all
potential occupations that a soldier could choose. Second, we treat the choice of a new
overseas home post location as a single post, again averaging bonus offers across all possible
overseas locations. Third, we treat the choice of a new home post location inside the United
States as the average bonus offer across domestic stations. Section 2.2 of the data appendix
provides more details on how we develop the database of bonus offers, including how we
handle bonuses pertaining to soldiers in specific locations or to soldiers with specific skills.13
Three institutional features of bonuses are particularly important in our setting. First,
the Army establishes bonuses through a centralized personnel system that prevents any
negotiation of bonus offers for specific soldiers. Second, both bonus levels and changes in
bonus amounts were much larger for some occupations than others, as seen in Figure A3.
For example, bonuses for infantry rose from around $10,000 in 2002 to $16,000 in 2006 and
then declined to $5,000 in 2010, whereas bonuses for combat medics rose from close to $0 in
2002 to $13,000 in 2006 before declining to $3,000 in 2010. Third, soldiers are well informed
about changes to bonuses as every Army unit has a Retention Non-Commissioned Officer
who is responsible for informing soldiers of the latest bonus-related MILPER messages.


4.2     Construction of Fatality Rates

The other determinant of reenlistment decisions that we focus on is the expected mortality
rate, or hazard, that soldiers associate with their various reenlistment choices. This requires
us to develop reliable measures of their expectations about future mortality risk for each of
their potential choices. We assume the ex-ante expected hazard is a function of a soldier's
occupation and reenlistment timing. Consider a soldier facing a decision to reenlist into
occupation k who is exactly 12 months prior to her initial ETS date in month t, where
12 months corresponds to the set of bonus offers we map to each soldier as described in
  13
      The Army will occasionally offer bonuses to soldiers with particular skills (e.g., parachutist) and to
soldiers who are stationed at a particular base or unit. Further, some bonus offers are specific to soldiers
who are deployed to a combat zone. Any bonuses based on skills, current location, or deployment status are
still governed by the Army's HRC. See Asch et al. (2010) and the data appendix to this paper for additional
details on the SRB Program.



                                                    13

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
Section 4.1. Our preferred approach is to estimate this soldier's expectations of mortality
risk for that reenlistment alternative as the average annual mortality rate, per 1000 soldier,
of soldiers in occupation k over month t and the previous 11 months:
                                             t
                                             n=t-11   f atalitieskn
                                pkt =       t                            · 1000,                            (1)
                                            n=t-11   strengthkn /12

where strengthkn is the number of soldiers assigned to Army occupation k in month n.14
A practical challenge is that reenlistments range from 2 to 6 years, so the expected mortality
risk associated with a reenlistment option depends on the contractual length of service. In
contrast, the bonus is paid all at once for the entire term of service. For ease of interpretation
it is important that the reenlistment estimation equations include variables for the total
bonus and the total expected mortality risk. We therefore developed a measure of the
present value of the full expected mortality risk that reflects greater risk for longer periods
of service and also discounts future risk relative to current risk. The discounting is motivated
by the fact that across a wide range of contexts individuals exhibit behavior consistent with
valuing the future less than the present.
The literature has little to say on how soldiers or others value current versus future expected
mortality risk; sufficient treatment of this topic is beyond the scope of this paper. However,
Simon et al. (2015) estimate that enlisted soldiers who served after 2000 have discount rates of
7.2 percent while they are in the service. Guided by this finding, we develop an accumulated
expected mortality risk that discounts future risk at a rate of 7.2 percent per year:

                                                         l-1
                                                               (pktj )
                                            (pktjl ) =                                                      (2)
                                                         s=0
                                                               1.072s

where pktjl is the accumulated expected mortality risk for occupation k , in month t, for
choice alternative (i.e., reenlistment option) j , and reenlistment term-length l, and pktj is
the single-year measure of expected mortality risk for choice alternative j as estimated from
equation (1).15 We use this measure of accumulated mortality risk in the summary statistics
and results that follow.
Section 2.3 of the data appendix offers more details on how we construct this preferred
  14
      We constructed death rates from Army loss files. Each time a soldier departs active service, an entry is
created in the loss file which records a full set of administrative characteristics about the type of discharge,
including whether the soldier died. To validate the accuracy of mortality through the loss file, we compared
it to a separate database containing all combat-related deaths that have occurred since September 2001.
   15
      We calculate the expected mortality risk for the choice of a new occupation as the average mortality risk
across all potential occupations that a soldier could choose.


                                                         14

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
measure of accumulated mortality risk to represent soldiers' expectations of future mortality.
This includes a discussion on how we use the Army's broader occupational classification,
the career management field (CMF), to construct mortality rates for Military Occupational
Specialties (MOSs) with few soldiers. We also considered several alternative measures of a
soldier's expected mortality hazard to account for different methods of inferring risk, with
all measures producing qualitatively similar results.16
There are several appealing aspects of this setting for assessing how mortality risk affects
individuals' employment choices. First, Figure A3 shows that, like bonus offers, there is
substantial variation in mortality hazards both across and within military occupations over
time. For example, the overall Army mortality rate rose from 2.06 per 1000 in 2002 to 9.26
per 1000 in 2007 and then declined to 5.36 per 1000 in 2010; and these movements were much
larger for some occupations like infantry, than for others like supply specialists.17 Second,
in contrast to much of the previous VSL literature, this is a setting where it is plausible to
assume that people have reliable information on the mortality risk associated with different
employment choices. This is because there was widespread publication of military deaths
by both internal military information dissemination networks and external public news me-
dia. Additionally, our informal discussions with soldiers (two of us are active duty soldiers)
confirm that they are aware of fatality rates and how they vary across occupations and over
time. As such, the scope for measurement error is relatively small in the military setting,
unlike hedonic wage approaches which rely on aggregated occupation and industry classi-
fication data from civilian labor markets. Third, it seems appropriate to assign expected
mortality rates at the occupational level in our setting because a soldier's personal exposure
to risk is less a function of her individual actions and more a function of her unit's mission,
and both the unit she is assigned to and that unit's mission is determined by the "needs of
the Army" conditional on her occupational choice. We think it is reasonable to assume that
Army needs are orthogonal to any soldier's individual decision to reenlist.


4.3     Summary Statistics

Table 1 summarizes key explanatory variables and observable characteristics of soldiers in
our sample. Column (1) displays summary statistics for the whole sample. Panel A reports
  16
     Among the measures we considered, our preferred measure of accumulated mortality risk is most strongly
correlated with MOS-level mortality rates in the 12 months following a soldier's reenlistment decision (see
Table A3). Nevertheless, we also report estimates of the VSL using alternative measures of the expected
mortality hazard in Table A4 and find qualitatively similar results.
  17
     Average annual mortality rates for infantry soldiers rose from 3 per 1000 soldiers in 2002 to nearly 25
per 1000 in 2007, then declined to 11 per 1000 in 2010, while average annual mortality rates for supply
specialists remained between 1 and 3.5 per 1000 soldiers from 2002 through 2010.

                                                    15

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
on a series of renlistment statistics. Overall, 45.3 percent of eligible soldiers chose to reenlist.
The average bonus associated with a four-year reenlistment in the same MOS was $7,200.
The average four-year, discounted mortality rate associated with a four-year reenlistment was
5.43 per 1000 soldiers, implying an annual (non-discounted) mortality rate of 1.50 per 1000
soldiers. The average annual probability of deployment, which we define as the percentage
of soldiers in an individual's MOS who were deployed for at least one month in the year
before the individual enters her reenlistment window, was close to 21 percent.
Panel B reports demographic characteristics of the sample. Roughly 17 percent of soldiers in
the full sample are women, 17 percent are Black, 13 percent are Hispanic, and the majority
are high-school graduates who did not attend college. The average AFQT score is 60, or
10 percentiles higher than the national AFQT median of 50. Further, the average age upon
entering the reenlistment window is 24 years. Finally, the average unemployment rate in
their home county in the year of their reenlistment window was 6.5 percent.
We also examine subsamples by grouping individuals into one of three gender-by-occupation
classifications: men in noncombat occupations, men in combat occupations, and women
in all occupations (mostly noncombat).18 Column (2) reports summary statistics for men
in noncombat occupations while columns (3) and (4) report statistics for men in combat
occupations and women in all occupations, respectively. On average, women reenlist at
lower rates than men, and men in combat occupations at lower rates than men in noncombat
occupations. Of interest, mortality rates among men in combat occupations are nearly three
times as high as mortality rates among men in noncombat occupations and women. Men in
combat occupations also have slightly higher bonus offers and deployment probabilities than
other soldiers in our sample.
Table 2 reports key compensation and reenlistment variables on an annual basis. Even
though Army soldiers faced increased mortality risk from 2002 through 2007 in the aftermath
of the invasion of Iraq in 2003, with the average mortality rate increasing from 2.06 per 1000
in 2002 to 9.26 per 1000 in 2007, reenlistment rates grew by more than 30 percent during the
same period. Reenlistment bonuses appear to have played an important role in achieving
the required manning goals as the average value of bonus offers across all soldiers (i.e., those
who did and did not receive a bonus) rose from $1,772 in 2003 to $12,952 in 2006 and
total expenditures on bonuses also increased sharply. It is noteworthy that regular military
  18
    Noncombat occupations include MOSs related to administrative, intelligence, logistical, medical, and
communication functions. Combat occupations include air defense artillery, armor, aviation, combat engi-
neer, field artillery, infantry, and special forces. Roughly 93 percent of women in our sample are in noncombat
occupations. Seven percent of women served in air defense artillery and aviation occupations that were ex-
empt from the female combat exclusion policies in effect during the time of our analysis.



                                                      16

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
compensation during this period did not noticeably increase until 2009, after the mortality
rate began to decline (see column (3)). This suggests the Army relied on bonuses to manage
manpower as the political system, which plays a more direct role in determining regular
military compensation, did not respond in real time to the increase in risk.




5     Estimating Framework: Discrete Choice

5.1    Empirical Approach

We use a random utility model of discrete choice to model a soldier's decision whether to
select among a range of reenlistment options or to exit active military service. At the time
of the reenlistment decision, each soldier makes a single utility-maximizing choice from a set
of J mutually-exclusive reenlistment alternatives plus the option of leaving the Army. The
utility of soldier i choosing reenlistment alternative j is given by:

                              uij = U (bij , hij , xij ; i , i , i ) +   ij ,                 (3)

where bij is the choice-specific bonus, hij is the choice-specific expected mortality hazard
rate, xij is a vector of individual- and choice-specific observables (such as the deployment
probability, state of residence fixed effects, local area unemployment rates, and soldier-
specific demographics such as their AFQT scores, age, race, gender, and education level),
and ij is an idiosyncratic shock which is assumed to be distributed Type I Extreme Value.
The function is parameterized by (individual-specific)  ,  , and  . The value of leaving the
Army is normalized to have a utility of zero. The resulting probability of soldier i selecting
reenlistment choice j is given by the familiar logit form:

                                                  U (bij , hij , xij ; i , i , i )
                  P r (i chooses j ) =                                                    .   (4)
                                         1+      k exp (U (bik , hik , xik ; i , i , i ))


The VSL is defined as the amount of money that a soldier is willing to accept for a marginal
increase in the expected mortality rate such that utility remains constant. In our discrete
choice setting, this naturally translates into the (negative) ratio of the marginal utility of




                                                  17

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                    Full          Men,     Men,
                                                   Sample      Non-Combat Combat             Women
                                                     (1)           (2)      (3)               (4)
 Panel A: Reenlistment Statistics
   Proportion Reenlisted                            0.453          0.488          0.431       0.409
    Bonus Offer ($ 2019)                            7,198          6,890          8,164       5,727
    Mortality Hazard (per 1000 soldiers)             5.43           3.25           8.92        2.96
    Deployment Probability (per soldier)            0.209          0.193          0.242       0.175

 Panel B: Demographic Characteristics
   Female                                           0.166             0              0           1
    Black                                           0.172          0.201          0.080       0.317
    Hispanic                                        0.126          0.126          0.118       0.143
    High School GED / Dropout                       0.138          0.128          0.178       0.071
    High School Graduate                            0.733          0.733          0.721       0.762
    Some College                                    0.081          0.085          0.067       0.104
    College Graduate                                0.042          0.048          0.029       0.058
    AFQT Score                                      59.50          60.37          60.04       55.87
    Age at reenlistment decision                    24.05          24.33          23.66       24.22
    Unemployment Rate                                6.51           6.57           6.47        6.48

 Observations                                      429,375        189,270        168,943      71,162
 Notes: This table reports group means for first-term, non-prior service enlisted soldiers with reen-
listment decisions between 2002 and 2010. Bonus offers, measured in 2019 USD, are the maximum
bonus associated with a four year reenlistment in the same military occupational speciality (MOS). A
soldier's mortality hazard is a multiple of the annual mortality rate (per 1000 individuals) of soldiers
in the same MOS averaged over the month she enters her reenlistment window and the 11 previous
months. Since the modal reenlistment term length is four years, we convert the annual mortality rate
into a four-year sum where mortality in future years is discounted at 7.2 percent. Soldiers in MOSs
with an average strength of less than 5000 individuals are assigned to their CMF's (broader occupa-
tion) mortality hazard. The deployment probability is the percentage of soldiers in the same MOS who
were deployed for at least one month in the year immediately before a soldier enters her reenlistment
window. The unemployment rate is the annual unemployment rate in a soldier's home county in the
year that she must decide to reenlist. 0.5 percent of the sample is missing education data.




                                                  18

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                                                                                                                  Table 2: Bonus and Reenlistment Trends

                                                                                  Total Bonus                Number of Proportion Average      5th - 95th           5th - 95th   Average
                                                                                  Dollars, All   Regular      Soldiers    of Sample Mortality Percentile of         Percentile Bonus Value
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                        Decision Reenlistments   Annual      Eligible for    Who      Hazard   Mortality Mean Bonus of Bonus    for Bonus
                                                                         Year        ($ M)     Military Pay Reenlistment Reenlisted (per 1000)  Hazard      Offer     Offers    Recipients
                                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)            (8)          (9)         (10)
                                                                          2002          181          28,582         43,374         0.388        2.06     0.70 - 3.50      6,464      0 - 21,437      6,968
                                                                          2003          142          29,081         51,178         0.364        2.92     1.05 - 6.10      1,772      0 - 10,071      9,793
                                                                          2004          193          29,412         48,956         0.370        5.04     1.13 - 11.40     8,784      0 - 13,511     13,135
                                                                          2005          653          29,080         46,298         0.396        5.53     1.66 - 11.47     9,870      0 - 19,359     15,326
                                                                          2006          932          29,376         49,691         0.474        6.31     1.82 - 13.70     12,952     0 - 28,452     17,175
                                                                  19




                                                                          2007          697          29,217         47,567         0.506        9.26     1.67 - 24.15     9,992      0 - 16,033     13,998
                                                                          2008          862          28,818         48,658         0.543        7.29     1.87 - 21.62     8,084      0 - 14,073     11,973
                                                                          2009          629          30,331         45,488         0.545        4.92     1.95 - 9.41      4,290      0 - 11,880      8,952
                                                                          2010          258          31,007         48,165         0.491        5.36     1.72 - 10.83     2,602       0 - 8,339      6,134

                                                                       All Years        506          29,376         429,375        0.453        5.43     1.23 - 14.36     7,198      0 - 19,359     12,192
                                                                       Notes: This table reports reenlistment, pay, mortality, and bonus trends for first-term soldiers with reenlistment decisions in the year
                                                                       indicated in the first column. All dollar values are 2019 USD. Column (2) reports the sum of reenlistment bonuses the Army paid to
                                                                       all soldiers (not just first-term soldiers); these numbers are from Army Financial Management: Assistant Secretary of the Army for
                                                                       Financial Management and Comptroller, accessed April 2021. Annual pay, column (3), is the military base pay for a Specialist (E4)
                                                                       with four years of service. The bonus offer and mortality hazard variables are constructed as described in Section 4.2 and the notes
                                                                       for Table 1. The All Years row displays the sum across years in column (3), the average weighted by number of soldiers eligible for
                                                                       reenlistment in columns (2), (4), (5), (6), (8), and (10), and the 5th and 95th percentile of the total distribution across all years in
                                                                       columns (7) and (9).
the mortality rate over the marginal utility of the bonus in Equation (4):

                                                  U (bij , hij , xij ; i , i , i )
                                                             hij
                     V SL(hij , bij ; i , i ) = -                                  .           (5)
                                                  U (bij , hij , xij ; i , i , i )
                                                              bij


In general, the VSL is a function and depends on the level of the both the hazard and the
bonus. The dependence of the utility parameters allows for heterogeneity at the individual
level (which may or may not be observable to the econometrician).
We estimate a variety of specifications of the discrete choice model. The simplest specifica-
tions are binary choice (stay in the Army or leave) with additively separable linear utility
functions, implying that the VSL in Equation 5 is a constant. In many respects, the assump-
tion of a homogeneous VSL is consonant with the previous empirical literature, however it
is quite inconsistent with Rosen and Thaler's original conception of the VSL that was de-
fined by heterogeneity in preferences for safety across workers. For example, there could be
important differences in risk preference between individuals who initially enlist to serve in
the infantry and those who initial enlist to serve as a line cook. One way that we will allow
for this heterogeneity is to estimate separate models for the full sample, men in noncom-
bat occupations, men in combat occupations, and women in all occupations and calculate a
separate VSL for each of these groups.
To account for other sources of observable heterogeneity, we include a rich set of occupation
and soldier characteristics as fixed effects. Among the potential sets of fixed effects, the
analysis focuses attention on two. The first includes cohort (i.e., year of entry), occupation
(i.e., 145 different MOS categories) and initial-entry term-length (e.g., 4 years). The specifi-
cations that control for these fixed effects adjust for all unobserved level differences in utility
associated with cohort (e.g., changes in the sense of patriotism) that are common across
enlistees in a year (i.e., entry year), occupation (e.g., any social rewards for volunteering for
particular jobs), and the chosen initial term (e.g., perhaps those choosing 2 years may have
different expectations about their future or qualify for different benefits post-service). Thus,
the identifying variation from these specifications come from comparisons within an occu-
pation over time, after accounting for time-varying factors common to those signing up for
an initial term in the same year and factors common to people who initially sign up for the
same number of years. Therefore, these models utilize differences in the within occupation
variation in the expected mortality hazard rate and bonuses over time.
The second includes fully interacted occupation-by-cohort-by-term fixed effects. These speci-

                                                   20

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
fications are very demanding of the data because the coefficients of interest are only identified
from differences in the initial enlistment dates within an entry year, and the entry year is
several years (generally 3) prior to the reenlistment decision, within these narrow cells. Thus,
for example, the identification comes from comparing the reenlistment decisions of soldiers
in 2006 who signed up in 2002 for four-year terms as combat infantryman (i.e., occupational
specialty 11B). Within this cell, the identifying variation in mortality risk comes from the
rolling 12 preceding month's average occupation-specific mortality hazard and in bonuses
from the irregular changes in SRBs.
We explore heterogeneity in the VSL in a few other ways. First, we use the moment forest
machine learning method described in Nekipelov et al. (2021) to estimate a simple binary
logit specification with three parameters (a constant, the bonus, and the expected mortality),
but permitting the moment forest to vary estimates of these parameters across all other
observable characteristics. Moreover, the moment forest approach serves as a robustness
check on our logit estimates because it estimates parameters for subsets of the population that
are determined by a machine learning process and not researcher intervention. Second, we
explore specifications with normally-distributed random coefficients on the retention bonus
and fatality rate to control for unobserved heterogeneity in the marginal utilities across
soldiers. The models with unobserved heterogeneity generate a distribution of VSLs which
are calculated by integrating over the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity and the joint
empirical distribution of bonuses and mortality rates, respectively.
Finally, it seems plausible and indeed likely that there is declining marginal utility in income
and safety. For this reason, we consider models where we replace the value of those variables
with cubic B-spline basis functions. B-splines allow the marginal utilities to vary smoothly
with the level of the variable, are easy to implement, and can be constrained to impose
monotonicity or convexity. Relative to regular polynomials, B-Splines have the advantage of
being numerically stable and locally adaptive.
We use the results from the B-spline approach to develop indifference curves that are com-
prised of bundles of bonuses and mortality risk that return the same level of utility. The
VSL is the slope along these indifference curves. Because the B-spline approach allows for
varying marginal utilities, we can assess whether the VSL varies with the level of risk (i.e.,
whether the MWTP function is constant). This connects the empirical literature to the
original intent of the Thaler and Rosen model and allows for counterfactual analysis with
more realistic assumptions about the shape of indifference curves. We recover these indiffer-
ence curves and MWTP functions for the full sample, as well as the subsamples of men in
noncombat occupations, men in combat occupations, and women in all occupations.


                                                 21

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
5.2       Potential Threats to Identification

The cleanest method for estimating the effect of bonus offers on reenlistment is to isolate
the demand-side factors that influence bonus offers, a point discussed in Borgschulte and
Martorell (2018). Unfortunately, the Army's demand for soldiers is governed by personnel
structure documents that often take several months or even years to change. As a result,
short-term fluctuations in the supply of enlisted soldiers drive much of the variation in reen-
listment bonuses. This raises the possibility that unobserved determinants of reenlistment
may be correlated with bonus offers. There are a couple of reasons to believe why this po-
tential bias is not large. Most importantly, commanders do not have the ability to adjust
bonuses for specific soldiers, thus negating the possibility of targeting soldiers who are on
the margin of reenlistment, who are strong performers, or who possess unique skills. Even
though commanders cannot influence bonuses for specific soldiers, the Army might target
bonuses to occupations that have experienced recent drops in reenlistment rates. Such a
scenario would imply higher bonus offers to soldiers who are less likely to reenlist, which
would bias our estimates of the reenlistment bonus downwards, implying an upward bias
in our VSL estimates. However, the frequent and often dramatic changes in bonus levels
(see Figure A3) suggest that the Army's Selective Reenlistment Bonus program is effective
because bonuses can change rapidly at unannounced intervals, not because a single bonus
offer is particularly good at producing a precise reenlistment rate.
Another limitation is that just like with the bonuses, experimental variation in fatality
risk is unavailable. This raises the possibility that the resulting estimate of the effect of
mortality risk on reenlistment confounds mortality risk with other factors. Perhaps, the
most likely confounder is unobserved expectations about the amount of combat a soldier will
face upon reenlistment. Whether more unobserved expected combat increases reenlistment
is ambiguous because it involves higher non-fatal casualty rates which is a negative but also
the possibility of seeing more action or excitement in combat which is a positive for at least
some soldiers.
We experimented with including a variable for the expected injury rate, as measured by the
percentage of soldiers in an MOS who are wounded in action over the past year, but found
that it is not possible to separately identify the effects of the expected mortality and injury
rates (nor are we confident that soldiers can distinguish between them).19 The inability
to statistically distinguish between the effects of on the job injury and mortality risk is a
common problem in the VSL literature and indeed our read of the literature is that it is un-
common to include both variables in the same estimating equation. Our preferred solution
 19
      The expected mortality and injury rates are highly correlated, having a correlation coefficient of 0.93.

                                                       22

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
to avoid confounding mortality risk with the role that expectations for action play in reen-
listment decisions is to control for occupational deployment rates. Our results below include
specifications that do and do not adjust for this variable, but our preferred specification
includes it.
Ultimately the paper's claims for causality rest on conditioning on the rich set of covari-
ates described above. Our data permits us to estimate very rich models, including some
specifications with fully interacted occupation-by-cohort-by-term fixed effects, which means
we are relying on within-year variation in bonus offers and mortality rates among soldiers
who enlisted into the same occupation at similar times. Our specifications also condition
on occupation-specific mortality rates, which help control for risk, and include additional
controls for occupation-specific deployment rates, several individual characteristics such as
AFQT score, education level, race, sex, and home state of record, and home-county unem-
ployment rates. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that unobserved determi-
nants of reenlistment covary with offered bonuses or mortality rates.



6     Empirical Estimates of the VSL

Our analysis begins with a relatively parsimonious set of models to recover the VSL before
progressing to richer specifications. Section 6.1 starts with the simplest binary choice model,
where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the soldier chose to reenlist. We
consider several different specifications that vary the number of fixed effects that enter the
model, as well as a series of other controls. Section 6.2 then considers several specifications
which allow the parameters to vary by sub-population, exploits the recent moment forest
technique of Nekipelov et al. (2021) to estimate arbitrary group-level heterogeneity in the
VSL, and reports results from a random coefficients binary logit approach. Since the binary
choice framework aggregates all reenlistment possibilities into a single choice, Section 6.3
turns to a series of multinomial choice models that allow for a richer choice set along both
reenlistment options and reenlistment term-lengths.


6.1    Full Sample Evidence on the VSL: Evidence from Binary Choice
       Logit Models

Panel A of Table 3 summarizes results from the estimation of the binary choice model on
the full sample of 429,375 soldiers considering reenlistment. The table reports results from
five different specifications for reenlistment, all of which include the maximum bonus offer

                                                 23

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                                                                                                           Table 3: Binary Logit Estimates, Full Sample and Subsamples

                                                                                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                                        Panel A: Full Sample (N=429,375)
                                                                          Bonus Offer Logit Coefficient                 0.0193***       0.0192***        0.0205***        0.0208***         0.0210***        0.0185***
                                                                                                                         (0.0026)        (0.0025)         (0.0025)         (0.0031)          (0.0031)         (0.0007)
                                                                          Effect of $1000 Bonus Increase                0.0046***       0.0046***        0.0048***        0.0048***         0.0048***
                                                                                                                         (0.0006)        (0.0006)         (0.0006)         (0.0007)          (0.0007)
                                                                          Mortality Hazard Logit Coefficient           -0.0100***       -0.0111***       -0.0121***       -0.0125***       -0.0113***        -0.0161***
                                                                                                                        (0.0023)         (0.0024)         (0.0024)         (0.0028)         (0.0028)          (0.0014)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                          Effect of Mortality Increase (1 per 1000)    -0.0024***       -0.0026***       -0.0028***       -0.0029***       -0.0026***
                                                                                                                        (0.0005)         (0.0006)         (0.0006)         (0.0006)         (0.0006)
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                              0.520            0.575            0.592            0.602            0.540            0.874
                                                                          VSL CI                                      [0.302, 0.738]   [0.332, 0.819]   [0.349, 0.836]   [0.416, 0.787]   [0.349, 0.730]    [0.697, 1.051]
                                                                          Log Likelihood                                 -287,673         -287,668         -282,794         -276,952         -276,921
                                                                        Panel B: Men in Non-Combat Occupations (N=189,270)
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                       0.853                  1.012            0.738            0.738             0.670            0.685
                                                                          VSL CI                                [0.162, 1.545]         [0.179, 1.845]   [0.008, 1.468]   [0.059, 1.416]   [-0.002, 1.342]   [0.525, 0.844]
                                                                        Panel C: Men in Combat Occupations (N=168,943)
                                                                  24




                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                       0.530                  0.438            0.451            0.544            0.449             0.789
                                                                          VSL CI                                [0.210, 0.849]         [0.146, 0.731]   [0.168, 0.734]   [0.305, 0.784]   [0.211, 0.686]    [0.634, 0.944]
                                                                        Panel D: Women (N=71,162)
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                             1.261            1.274            1.104            1.435            1.415             1.503
                                                                          VSL CI                                      [0.461, 2.060]   [0.440, 2.109]   [0.260, 1.948]   [0.689, 2.182]   [0.677, 2.154]    [1.047, 1.959]
                                                                        Cohort FE, MOS FE, Term-length FE                   X                X                X
                                                                        Deployment Probability                                               X                X                X                X
                                                                        Individual Controls                                                                   X                X                X
                                                                        MOS x Cohort x Term FE                                                                                 X                X
                                                                        County Unemployment Rate                                                                                                X
                                                                        Moment Forest Estimates                                                                                                                   X
                                                                        Notes: This table reports implied VSL estimates in millions of 2019 USD derived from binary logit estimates of equation 4. Panel A also reports
                                                                       logit coefficients and average marginal effects for the full sample. The outcome is an indicator for whether a soldier reenlisted. Section 4 and
                                                                       the notes for Table 1 describe the construction of the bonus offer, mortality hazard, deployment probability, and unemployment rate variables.
                                                                       Individual controls include gender, race indicators (White, Black, Hispanic, Other), education indicators (dropout, high school graduate, some
                                                                       college, college, missing education (0.5 percent of sample)), state fixed effects, and linear terms for AFQT score and age. Column (6) reports
                                                                       average bonus and average mortality hazard estimates across the distribution of individual-specific bonus and mortality estimates from the
                                                                       moment forest analysis described in Section 6.2. For columns (1) - (5), standard errors clustered on MOS are reported in parentheses and VSL
                                                                       95 percent confidence intervals, reported in brackets, are derived via the delta method. We construct standard errors in column (6) by executing
                                                                       50 bootstraps of the moment forest analysis, then calculating the standard deviation of the average bonus (or mortality) estimates derived from
                                                                       each of the 50 bootstraps; we apply the delta method to the bonus and mortality standard deviations to obtain a 95 percent confident interval
                                                                       for the implied VSL. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.
associated with a four-year reenlistment (the most common reenlistment term-length) in
the same occupation and the expected mortality hazard rate associated with a four-year
reenlistment in the same occupation. The table reports their logit coefficients and their
marginal effects evaluated at the mean of the covariates. Importantly, the table also includes
the estimated VSL (i.e., the negative of the ratio of the mortality and bonus logit coefficients)
reported in millions of 2019 dollars and its 95 percent confidence interval.
The specifications differ with regard to the set of included covariates and are arranged so that
as one moves from left to right the specifications become increasingly rich, which is reflected
in the log likelihood statistic reported at the bottom of panel A. Column (1) includes fixed
effects for military occupational specialty (MOS), entry year (cohort), and initial-entry term-
length. Column (2) adds the deployment probability control described above. Column (3)
adds controls for individual demographic characteristics, including gender, race, education,
the home state of the soldier at the time of their initial enlistment, age, and AFQT score.
Column (4) replaces the fixed effects from columns (1) - (3) with fully interacted occupation-
by-entry year-by-term fixed effects, while also including the deployment probability control
and individual controls. Column (5) adds to column (4) by including the county level
unemployment rate in a soldier's home of record in the month that the soldier enters the
reenlistment window to account for the influence of local unemployment rates on reenlistment
decisions, as revealed in Borgschulte and Martorell (2018). Column (6) reports estimates
from the moment forest framework, which we discuss below.
The first row of Panel A reports logit coefficient estimates and standard errors (in paren-
theses) for the bonus offer, and the second row reports the average marginal effect and its
standard error. Across all specifications in the full sample, the coefficient on the bonus offer
has the expected sign, would easily be judged statistically significant by conventional crite-
ria, and is remarkably stable across the various specifications that use very different sources
of variation for identification and adjust for different controls. The estimates suggest that
increasing the bonus offer for a four-year reenlistment by $1000 increases the probability of
reenlistment by about 0.48 percentage points.20 Thus, holding all else constant, the esti-
mates suggest that the increase in the average bonus offer from $1,800 in 2003 to its peak of
  20
     This estimate is in the range of several other studies that find that reenlistment bonuses increase reen-
listment among U.S. service members. Borgschulte and Martorell (2018) and Patterson et al. (2020) estimate
marginal responses to bonuses that are slightly smaller than our estimates while Hosek and Miller (2011) es-
timate slightly larger marginal responses. Our point estimate is closest to Borgschulte and Martorell (2018)
who find that a 10 percent increase in earnings through reenlistment bonuses (roughly a $12,000 bonus)
increases reenlistments by 3.7 to 5.0 percentage points. Modest differences in point estimates across studies
are likely due to differences in cohorts analyzed and other sample differences. For example, Borgschulte
and Martorell (2018) exclude women and Patterson et al. (2020) include soldiers on their second and third
enlistment terms.


                                                     25

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
$13,000 in 2006 increased reenlistment rates by 5.2 to 5.4 percentage points. An alternative
way to put this in context is to note that the annual salary for a first-term soldier in this
period was roughly $30,000, so a 1-time payment of roughly 35 percent of annual salary
increases four-year reenlistment rates by about 5 percentage points. This response is more
than 10 percent of the overall reenlistment rate of 45 percent in our sample. Overall, it is
apparent that reenlistment decisions are highly responsive to cash bonuses.
The next set of rows in Panel A report logit coefficient estimates and average marginal
effects on the mortality hazard rate, as well as their standard errors. This coefficient also
has the expected sign across all specifications: increasing the four-year mortality rate by
1 death per 1000 soldiers decreases the probability of reenlistment by roughly 0.24 to 0.29
percentage points. The stability of the coefficient is striking, especially to the inclusion
of the deployment probability variable and the different sets of fixed effects. There is no
absolute standard here, but this appears to be a relatively small effect. To see this, consider
the increase in mortality rates from 2.06 per 1000 soldiers (over a four-year reenlistment)
in 2002 to 9.26 per 1000 soldiers at its peak in 2007. Holding all else constant, including
bonus offers, the estimates suggest that the full wartime increase in mortality risk reduced
reenlistment rates by only 1.7 to 2.1 percentage points.
The estimate of the implied VSL reported in Panel A of Table 3 is the (negative) ratio of
the logit coefficient on the expected mortality hazard divided by the coefficient on the bonus
offer. Its corresponding 95 percent confidence interval is presented below (in brackets) and is
calculated using the delta method. Point estimates of the VSL range between about $520,000
and $600,000. The large sample size is evident in the 95 percent confidence intervals, which
are tight especially in the context of the VSL literature (see, for example, Black and Kniesner
(2003) and Kniesner et al. (2012)). Our richest specification in column (5) indicates the VSL
for the population of young people who volunteer for active service in the U.S. Army has a 95
percent confidence interval covering $349,000 to $730,000.21 Finally, we note that the column
(2) specification will be our preferred one and the one we carry along throughout the analysis
because Army computing limitations prevented us from including additional covariates in
the estimation of some of the more flexible models (i.e., the multinomial logit and nested
logit models as well as the B-spline analysis) that we discuss below. The similarity between
the estimates in columns (2) and (5) support this choice.
Further exploration suggests that the binary logit estimates and resulting estimates of the
VSL are robust to alternative modeling decisions. Table A2 reports estimates when we con-
  21
     Although not reported in Table 3, we find that higher local unemployment rates induce more soldiers to
reenlist, consistent with the findings of Borgschulte and Martorell (2018). Table A5 reports average marginal
effects on all of the controls, except fixed effects, for the regressions reported in Panel A, Table 3.

                                                     26

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
sider bonus offers and expected mortality hazards faced by soldiers at different time-frames
prior to their original ETS date, while Table A4 reports results when using several differ-
ent measures for the expected mortality hazard. Additionally, Table A6 reports estimates
from specifications with individual control variables determined after soldiers enlist but prior
to the final 360 days of their initial enlistment, coinciding with our preferred choice for a
soldier's decision date. Controlling for a soldier's rank, individual combat deployment his-
tory, deployment status at the soldier's decision date, and individual exposure to casualties
produces VSL estimates similar to those reported in Table 3.
Two aspects of our findings thus far deserve emphasis. First, our estimates of the VSL among
early in their career Army soldiers are generally far lower than those typically reported in
the related literature for the full US labor market. For example, the median VSL implied by
hedonic labor market studies based on US data was about $10 million in 2019 dollars (Viscusi
and Aldy, 2003). Second, our findings produce tightly-estimated results that change little
across specifications, which gives some reassurance that the combination of our institutional
setting and econometric model provides a reliable approach to estimating the behavioral
tradeoffs that soldiers make when reenlisting. The stability of these estimates and their
relatively tight confidence intervals stand in contrast to the instability of the estimates in
response to changes in specification in much of the hedonic labor market literature.22


6.2     Binary Choice Models with Heterogeneity

Heterogeneity Based on Occupation. It is natural to assume that individuals who
choose to enlist in the Army have different, and presumably lower, VSLs then those who
don't, because they find fatality risk less distasteful. Here, we assess whether there is het-
erogeneity in the VSL among soldiers based on their occupation. Specifically, we estimate
separate binary logit models of the probability of reenlistment using subsamples based on
broad occupation-by-gender groupings, where the measured occupation is their occupation
when they first entered the Army.23 We explore three subsamples: men in noncombat oc-
cupations (N = 189,270), men in combat occupations (N = 168,943), and women in all
occupations (N = 71,162).
Panels B, C, and D of Table 3 summarize the estimated VSLs and documents some hetero-
geneity across these broad aggregates of occupation-types.24 Most notably, men in combat
  22
     For example, Black and Kniesner (2003) show that measures of job risk exhibit non-classical measurement
error, posing a challenge for the proper specification and biasing results of cross-sectional hedonic equations.
  23
     It is highly unusual for a soldier to change her occupation during her initial enlistment before reenlisting.
  24
     Table A7 reports bonus and mortality hazard average marginal effects by subsample and p-values from
tests of the null hypothesis of equal VSLs across subsamples.

                                                       27

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
occupations have the smallest estimated VSLs across all of the specifications. In the rich-
est specification (i.e., column (5)), the point estimates (95 percent confidence intervals) are
$670,000 ($-2,000, $1.34 million) for men in noncombat occupations (Panel B); $449,000
($211,000, $686,000) for men in combat occupations (Panel C), and $1.4 million ($677,000,
$2.15 million) for women (Panel D). It is possible to reject the null of equal VSLs for men
in noncombat occupations and women at the 15 percent level and between men in combat
occupations and women at the 4 percent level (see Table A7). The null of equal VSLs among
the two male categories would not be rejected at conventional significance levels. Table A7
suggests that differences in the VSL are driven by a lack of responsiveness to mortality risk
among men in combat occupations. For the richest specification (i.e., column 5), increas-
ing the four-year mortality rate by 1 death per 1000 soldiers only decreases reenlistment
by 0.13 percentage points among men in combat occupations, whereas the same increase in
mortality reduces reenlistment by 0.36 percentage points for men in noncombat occupations
and 1.15 percentage points for women. However, men in combat occupations are also sig-
nificantly less responsive to bonuses than men in noncombat occupations and women, thus
attenuating differences in the implied VSL.
Although the difference in implied VSLs between the two male categories lacks statistical
significance, the results are directionally consistent with the idea that less risk-averse indi-
viduals sort into riskier occupations. However, this is not an apples to apples comparison
because the mortality rates differ so dramatically between soldiers in noncombat occupa-
tions and soldiers in combat occupations: across the full sample covering 2002-2010, the
mean four-year mortality rate for women is 2.96 per 1000 with a range from 0 - 12.7, for men
in noncombat occupations, the mean is 3.25 and the range is 0 - 12.7, and for men in combat
occupations the mean is 8.92 with a range from 0.8 - 27.4. In Section 7, we directly explore
how the VSL varies with the level of the expected mortality hazard for the full sample and
these three subsamples.
Observable Heterogeneity Based on Moment Forest Analysis. The results from
Table 3 suggest there could be meaningful heterogeneity in the VSL. At one extreme, the
various full-sample binary logit models allow for a large amount of observable heterogeneity in
the intercept, based on soldiers' cohort, MOS, and initial term-length, which determines the
baseline propensity to reenlist. They do not, however, allow for differences in the marginal
utility of the hazard and the bonus along those same observables. On the other end of
the spectrum, running the logit models separately on subsamples allows for full interaction
between the sub-population and the parameters, but also raises two problems. First, the
partitioning of soldiers into subgroups faces a variance-bias tradeoff, as one needs to estimate
an increasingly large number of parameters on a shrinking subset of observations. Second,

                                                 28

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
the researcher must also decide which subgroups should be chosen for the subset estimation.
As an alternative, we turn to the moment forest method of Nekipelov et al. (2021), which
uses a variation of a classification tree, a technique from the machine learning literature, to
estimate and assign parameters to subsets of the population without requiring researcher
intervention. They prove their method is guaranteed to recover the true assignment of
parameters to sub-populations at a faster than parametric rate. This allows us to generalize
the three subgroup models we considered in the previous section to consider all possible
subsets of the population. Further, it allows us to calculate and report on individual-specific
implied VSLs which we describe here.25
Specifically, we estimate a moment forest using a simple binary logit with three parameters
(constant, bonus, and hazard) as the moment. In the analysis that follows, we permit the
moment forest to split on all controls used in the column (5) specification of Table 3, except
for the bonus, hazard, and constant. Thus, we allow these three parameters to vary with all
observable variables, providing a more flexible approach to capture heterogeneity.26
We report the moment forest results in several ways. The building blocks for all of these
estimates are the distributions of the bonus and mortality hazard parameters that are re-
ported in Figures A4 and A5 for the full sample and the three occupation subgroups. The
estimated implied individual-specific VSLs are then calculated by taking the negative of the
ratio of each individual's mortality hazard estimate over her bonus estimate.
Figure 2 displays the distributions of the estimated individual-specific VSLs and makes
apparent that there is meaningful heterogeneity. In the full sample, we estimate a median
VSL of $980,000 with an inter-quartile range of ($450,000, $1,410,000). Further, 10.1 percent
of the population has an implied VSL above $2 million, while 11.1 percent have a negative
implied VSL, due to 0.6 percent of the sample having negative responses to bonuses and
10.5 percent having positive responses to expected mortality. Perhaps the most striking
feature of the three occupation-based distributions is that all women have positive implied
VSLs, because they all have the expected sign for the responses to the bonus (i.e., positive)
and mortality hazard (i.e., negative) which is not true for all men. Women also have a
much stronger response to the mortality hazard then the two groups of men, with a median
response of -0.30, compared to median responses of -0.16 and -0.15 for men in noncombat and
combat occupations, respectively. It is therefore not surprising that women have a higher
  25
    For a more detailed explanation of how the moment forest works, see Section 1 in the Online Appendix.
  26
    The moment forest produces a random sequence of moment trees, each of which groups soldiers into
subsets sharing the same parameter vector. Since each tree in the forest is built on re-sampled data, the
moment forest may produce a different estimate of the VSL for each each unique set of soldier characteristics
(the smallest possible grouping of soldiers) in the data.


                                                     29

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
median VSL.
To further analyze the results from the moment tree analysis, Figure A6 reports the median
of the individual-specific VSL estimates and their inter-quartile ranges with box plots for
different demographic, education, and AFQT groups. The distributions for each group are
just subsets of the implied individual-specific VSLs reported in Figure 2a. It is evident that
the median VSL for Black and Hispanic soldiers is larger than White soldiers' median, while
the median VSL of high-school dropouts is more than $300,000 lower than the median VSL
of soldiers with high school diplomas. Interestingly, the median implied VSL for soldiers in
the lowest AFQT tercile is roughly $300,000 larger than the median VSL among soldiers
in the highest AFQT tercile. VSLs do not appear to vary substantially with the age at
initial entry or the unemployment rate in soldiers' county of residence. As a reminder, these
estimated differences in median VSLs do not account for differences in these subgroups'
expected mortality hazard.
To conclude our moment forest analysis, we assess whether the appealing flexibility of the
moment forest framework affects the conclusions from the more traditional binary logit
approach reported in Table 3. Specifically, column (6) of that table reports the average
estimated VSL across the full distribution of responses for the full sample in Panel A and then
for the three occupation subsamples in Panels B - D. The average implied VSL is calculated
as the negative of the ratio of the average hazard estimate to the average bonus estimate
(rather than the average of the individual-specific ratios, to match what is reported in the
preceding columns). Its 95 percent confidence interval is obtained by executing 50 bootstraps
of the moment forest analysis, then using the 50 bootstraps to construct standard errors for
the average bonus estimate and the average mortality estimate.27 We then apply the delta
method to the bonus and mortality standard errors to calculate a 95 percent confidence
interval for the implied VSL. Over the full sample, the estimated VSL is $874,000, which is
roughly $300,000 larger than the VSL estimate from the standard binary logit framework
in column (5), although the 95 percent confidence intervals overlap. For each of the three
subsamples, the average estimated VSL derived from the moment forest analysis is similar to
the VSL derived from the standard binary logit approach reported in column (5), again with
overlapping 95 percent confidence intervals (although only marginally so for men in combat
occupations). Women continue to have the highest estimated VSL. Overall, the moment tree
approach does not appear to appreciably alter conclusions about the average VSL from the
standard binary logit analyses, lending some additional credibility to the choice of controls
  27
    Each bootstrap produces a bonus and a mortality estimate for each individual. We calculate the mean
bonus estimate for each bootstrap, then calculate the standard error of the bonus estimate as the standard
deviation of the 50 bonus means. We calculate the standard error of the morality rate in the same manner.


                                                   30

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
       Figure 2: Moment Forest VSL Estimate Distributions, Full Sample and by Subsample
                                                                                  (a) Full Sample
                                                                           Q1 =        Q2 =       Q3 =
                                                                           0.45        0.98       1.41




                                             .1
                                             .08
                                             .06
                                             .04
                                             .02
                                             0




                                                   -1                  0                 1                2       3                  4

                                                                                      VSL Estimates ($1M)


                                                                             (b) By Subsample
                    Men, Non-Combat                                                      Men, Combat                                                 Women
            Q1 =    Q2 = Q3 =                                                 Q1 =      Q2 =      Q3 =                                         Q1 = Q2 = Q3 =
            0.34    0.87 1.13                                                 0.23      0.91      1.48                                         1.16 1.48 1.86
 .1




                                                            .1




                                                                                                                          .1
 .08




                                                            .08




                                                                                                                          .08
 .06




                                                            .06




                                                                                                                          .06
 .04




                                                            .04




                                                                                                                          .04
 .02




                                                            .02




                                                                                                                          .02
 0




                                                            0




                                                                                                                          0




       -1   0          1        2        3              4         -1              0          1        2       3       4         -1       0       1           2     3   4

                   VSL Estimates ($1M)                                                VSL Estimates ($1M)                                    VSL Estimates ($1M)

Notes: The histograms display the distribution of implied VSL estimates derived from our moment forest
analysis for the full sample and subsamples. This analysis permits potential splitting on MOS, initial
term-length, entry-cohort, deployment probability, gender, race, education, AFQT, age, state, and local
unemployment rates. Q1, Q2, and Q3 are the 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile of estimates.
To reduce computing time, we convert continuous variables into discrete variables by grouping soldiers
with similar covariate values. Specifically, we group soldiers into deployment probability categories with
bandwidths of 5 percentage points (i.e., one group with deployment probabilities less than 5 percent, another
group with deployment probabilities between 5 and 10 percent, and so on), we group soldiers into AFQT
categories with bandwidths of 5 percentiles, we group soldiers into entry-age categories with bandwidths
of 2 years, and we group soldiers into unemployment rate categories with bandwidths of one percentage
point. VSL estimates below -$1 Million (0.6 percent of the full sample and 1.5 percent of the Men, Combat
subsample) or above $4 Million (1.9 percent of the full sample and 4.9 percent of the Men, Combat subsample)
are not depicted.


                                                                                                 31

                                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
in our preferred logit specifications.
Unobservable Heterogeneity. Finally, as an alternative to allowing for heterogeneity
based on occupation and other observables while remaining within the binary logit approach,
column (1) of Table 4 reports estimates from a random coefficients model that allows for
unobservable heterogeneity in soldiers' responses to the bonus and expected military rate
by assuming these parameters are distributed normally (see Table A8 for the full results
from the random coefficients model). The implied VSLs are reported separately for the full
sample and the three subsamples using the preferred column (2) specification from Table 3,
which includes fixed effects for MOS, cohort, and initial term-length, and the deployment
probability control. For the full sample, the estimated VSL from the random coefficients
model is roughly $200,000 larger than the corresponding estimate from the standard binary
logit specification, but the 95 percent confidence interval from the random coefficient esti-
mate overlaps with the standard binary logit estimate. Furthermore, the random coefficient
estimates for each subsample are similar in magnitude, and not statistically different from,
the standard binary logit estimates reported in column (2) of Table 3.



6.3    Multinomial Logit Models

Estimates from the binary choice framework are potentially biased through the aggregation
of the full slate of reenlistment alternatives into a stay or go decision. In order to estimate the
model in the binary choice framework, we assumed that the choice of reenlisting in the same
occupation (MOS) for a four-year term was a sufficient representation of all the reenlistment
alternatives. However, there are more dimensions to the decision to reenlist for an additional
term of service, including the possibilities of selecting a new MOS, picking the home-base
location of one's duty assignment, and choosing the term-length.
Columns (2) - (5) of Table 4 explore alternative characterizations of the choice set. In
columns (2) and (3), we extend our model to a multinomial choice framework where the
decision space includes the outside option (exiting the Army) and five inside options: 1)
reenlist for the same MOS to be stationed at a location of the Army's choice; 2) reenlist for
the same MOS to stay at one's current duty location; 3) reenlist to train for a new MOS;
4) reenlist for the same MOS to be stationed at an overseas location of choice; or 5) reenlist
for the same MOS to be stationed at a location of choice within the continental U.S. This
expanded choice set allows us to examine whether soldiers are willing to trade-off wealth
and risk at different rates across alternatives with varying degrees of non-pecuniary benefits.
We standardize each of these choices by applying the bonus and expected mortality rate

                                                 32

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
     Table 4: Random Coefficient, Multinomial Logit, and Nested Logit Results

                               All MOSs                                High Density MOSs

                     Random             MNL               MNL            Nested Logit         MNL
                    Coefficients        J=5               J=5                J=5              J=22
                       (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)
 Panel A: Full Sample
   VSL ($ M)          0.769            0.702              0.717              0.653            0.605
   VSL CI         [0.571, 0.967] [0.404, 0.999]       [0.365, 1.069]     [0.314, 0.992]   [0.413, 0.798]
   Observations                429,375                                       277,877
 Panel B: Men in Non-Combat Occupations
   VSL ($ M)         0.758            0.858               1.023              1.012            0.703
   VSL CI        [0.394, 1.122] [0.114, 1.601]        [0.275, 1.771]     [0.255, 1.768]   [0.053, 1.352]
   Observations               189,270                                        104,051
 Panel C: Men in Combat Occupations
   VSL ($ M)         0.599            0.595               0.559              0.458            0.301
   VSL CI        [0.379, 0.818] [0.250, 0.940]        [0.168, 0.950]     [0.107, 0.809]   [0.132, 0.471]
   Observations               168,943                                        131,022
 Panel D: Women
   VSL ($ M)        1.530           1.149                 1.318              1.266            1.140
   VSL CI       [1.102, 1.958] [0.274, 2.025]         [0.181, 2.455]     [0.217, 2.316]   [0.123, 2.157]
   Observations              71,162                                          42,802

 Notes: Column (1) of this table reports implied VSL estimates in millions of 2019 USD derived from
binary logit random coefficient estimates of equation 4 that allows for unobservable heterogeneity
in soldiers' responses to the bonus and mortality rate by assuming these parameters are distributed
normally. Columns (2) - (5) report implied VSLs derived from multinomial and nested logit re-
gression estimates of equation 4. The choice alternatives for the J=5 specifications correspond to
options 1-5 in Figure A1. The nested logit regression in column 4 permits errors to be correlated
between reenlistment options 1, 2, 4, and 5, options where the soldier remains in the same MOS.
The alternatives for the J=22 specification include each possible combination of reenlistment option
and reenlistment term length (two through six years for options 1-2, three through six years for
options 3-5). All estimates include the deployment probability control, entry cohort fixed effects,
initial term-length fixed effects, and MOS fixed effects, corresponding to the column (2) specifica-
tion from Table 3. All multinomial and nested logit specifications also include interactions between
each reenlistment alternative and each control that does not vary with the reenlistment alternatives.
VSL 95 percent confidence intervals, reported in brackets, are derived by applying the delta method
to bonus and mortality standard error estimates. We estimate bootstrapped standard errors, esti-
mated from 600 draws with replacement, for random coefficient models. We cluster standard errors
on MOS for multinomial and nested logit estimates.




                                                 33

                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
associated with a four-year reenlistment. The full sample is used for estimation in column
(2), while in column (3) it is restricted to high density MOSs (defined as having an average
strength of at least 5,000 soldiers during the sample period) that reduces the sample from
429,375 to 277,877. The sample restriction is necessary due to the computational burden
associated with the estimation.
The implied VSL estimate reported in in column (2), Panel A, of Table 4 is about $700,000,
which is roughly $125,000 higher than the estimated VSL from the standard binary logit
framework in the full sample, but this difference is not statistically significant.28 VSL esti-
mates derived from multinomial logit estimates for the three subsamples, reported in Panels
B through D, are also qualitatively unchanged from the corresponding binary logit estimates.
A shortcoming of the J=5 multinomial choice framework is that it assumes there is no corre-
lation between different alternatives or that there is independence of irrelevant alternatives
(IIA). This assumption is unlikely to be valid in this setting where reenlistment options 1,
2, 4, and 5 involve staying in the same occupation, whereas reenlistment option 3 involves
the choice of training for a new occupation. Indeed, it seems natural to expect alternatives
related to staying in the same MOS to be highly correlated with one another, particularly if
choice of home-base duty location is orthogonal to the probability of deployment. Column
(4) of Table 4 therefore reports estimates from nested logit regressions where we permit
errors to be correlated between reenlistment options that allow soldiers to remain in their
original occupation. The similarity in VSL estimates between the multinomial and nested
logit specifications suggest that any violations of the independence of irrelevant alternatives
(IIA) assumption have minimal impact on our estimates.
Finally, column (5) reports on the estimation of multinomial logit models where the choice
set is enriched to account for the 22 observed combinations of reenlistment options and reen-
listment lengths. The consequence is that each option is defined by a triplet of occupation,
home post location, and term-length.29 The VSL estimate of $605,000, as reported in column
(4) of Table 4, is qualitatively unchanged from the estimated VSL in column (2) derived from
the J=5 choice set. The confidence intervals of the VSL estimates in the three occupation
subsamples also overlap the column (2) ones. In summary, the multinomial and nested logit
  28
      All specifications in Table 4 include interactions between each reenlistment option and all control vari-
ables that do not vary with reenlistment alternatives (i.e., all right-hand-side variables except bonus offers,
mortality hazards, and deployment probabilities). We also produced estimates with reenlistment option fixed
effects that are not interacted with all right-hand side variables and found similar results. These results are
available from the authors upon request.
   29
      Recall that reenlistment term-lengths are in annual increments of 2 through 6 years, but 2 year reenlist-
ments are only available for soldiers who remain in the same occupation and who either allow the Army to
choose their post or who elect to remain at their current post (see Figure A1).



                                                      34

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
results from Table 4 suggest that aggregating reenlistment alternatives into a single decision
to reenlist does not appear to appreciably alter our estimates of the VSL.



7      Empirical Estimates of Indifference Curves

7.1     Recovering Indifference Curves Through B-Splines

The ultimate aim of hedonic theory is to to recover individuals' demand primitives and
indifference (or bid) curves that are necessary for welfare analysis. However, the empirical
VSL literature has settled for estimating the average VSL over heterogeneous populations
that have limited value for welfare analysis. Indeed, the standard approach that effectively
assumes a "constant" VSL is at odds with economic theory that assumes there is declining
marginal utility from income and safety. As we have pointed out about this paper's setting,
there were substantial differences in mortality rates across groups. This raises the possibility
that efforts to infer differences in risk preferences across groups confound the risk preferences
with differences in the levels of risk.
This section seeks to recover these more fundamental measures of preferences by using a
variation of the logit model that uses B-splines to allow for nonlinearities in the responses to
the bonus and mortality rate. The estimation of these models produces the parameters of the
utility functions and, with those in hand, it is straightforward to develop indifference curves
defined as the set of all bundles of bonuses and mortality hazard rates that give the same
utility level. Because we allow these two variables to influence utility nonlinearly, the slope
along the indifference curve reveals the marginal rate of substitution between the money and
mortality risk (i.e., the VSL) and how it varies with the mortality rate.
We begin by using the column (2) specification from Table 3 and estimating B-splines using
a stochastic Laplace Type Estimator (LTE) optimization process from Chernozhukov and
Hong (2003). The estimation results are used to construct the blue curve in Figure 3 (left
plot) that is an indifference curve calculated as the level of the bonus at each mortality rate
that produces the same level of utility as found at the average bonus and hazard.30 The
light blue shaded area indicates the 95 percent confidence interval along the support of the
mortality hazard and is estimated using the method described in Chernozhukov and Hong
(2003).31 Finally, the empirical distributions of the expected mortality hazard and bonus
  30
    Details available from the authors upon request.
  31
    We constructed the indifference curve's 95 percent confidence interval from the quasi-posterior distri-
bution of moments from 500 LTE draws, where each draw produced a separate indifference curve. The


                                                    35

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
offers are in the smaller figures and are aligned with the horizontal and vertical axes to
indicate the areas where there is support in the data, versus those that rely more heavily on
extrapolation based on functional form. As a point of reference, 77 percent of the sample
has a mortality rate below 8 and 84 percent has one below 9.5.
The raw data broadly conform to standard economic theory with some exceptions. Specif-
ically, the required bonus is generally increasing in the mortality hazard over the range of
observed mortality rates. The estimated VSLs at several mortality rates are reported in
Table A9 and up to a mortality rate of 8 per 1000 it generally ranges between $500,000 and
$1,500,000. The departures from monotonicity are concentrated in regions where there is
little support in the data and in those regions the confidence intervals indicate that the data
are consistent with a very wide range of VSLs.32
We turn to economic theory to make further progress. Specifically, the dashed brown curve
in Figure 3 (left plot) plots a version of the indifference curve after imposing monotonicity
on the estimated B-splines such that higher bonuses are associated with higher utility and
higher mortality rates are associated with lower utility. It is apparent that these restrictions
fix many of the "irregular" parts of the indifference curve; they also greatly reduce the
confidence intervals for the curve and the VSLs (Table A9). Nevertheless, a few regions
on the indifference curve violate standard assumptions about diminishing marginal utility
for income and reductions in mortality risk, especially where the data is sparse. For this
reason, the remainder of this section will additionally impose convexity in the B-splines such
that higher bonuses increase utility at a weakly decreasing rate and higher mortality rates
reduce utility at a weakly increasing rate. These restrictions are both intuitive and produce
indifference curves that are nicely behaved, even in regions with relatively little data.
The black line in Figure 3 (right plot) is the estimated indifference curve for the full sample
after imposing both monotonicity and convexity. The red lines are tangent to the indifference
curve at the indicated hazard rates and we interpret their slope (reported in the figure) as the
implied VSL. The most striking finding is the shape of the bid curve and its similarity to the
bid curves from Thaler and Rosen's original theoretical framework (reproduced in Figure 1)
that predicted that the VSL increases with expected mortality. Specifically, Figure 3 and the
third row of Table A9 reveal that soldiers with a relatively low mortality risk of 1 death per
1000 soldiers (between the 2nd and 3rd-percentile of the distribution of the mortality rate
confidence interval reflects the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of solved bonus amounts at each expected mor-
tality rate. The indifference curve from every LTE moment includes a point at the average bonus and average
mortality rate of the sample, so the confidence interval shrinks to zero at this point. However, the slope of
each indifference at this point will still differ across LTE moments, producing a range of implied VSLs.
  32
     This highlights a drawback of using locally-adaptive estimators like B-splines, where sparse data can
result in locally non-monotone curves that result in poorly-behaved indifference curves.

                                                     36

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                                                                       Figure 3: Bid Curve from B-Spline Estimates of Reenlistment Response to Bonus Offers and Mortality Hazards, Full Sample
                                                                                                  40                                    40                                                                                    40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $4.685M
                                                                                 Bonus ($1,000)

                                                                                                  30                                    30                                                                                    30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                                                  20                                    20                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $1.44M




                                                                                                  10                                    10                                                                                    10                     $0.792M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               $0.672M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $0.594M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $0.482M

                                                                                                  0                         0                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                       0     50 100 150                          1   3   5       8                    16           24                                   1   3    5       8                    16             24
                                                                                                           Count (1,000s) 12                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                       Count (1,000s)




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Count (1,000s)
                                                                  37




                                                                                                                                        9                                                                                     9

                                                                                                                                        6                                                                                     6

                                                                                                                                        3                                                                                     3

                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                             0           5           10          15          20         25                         0             5           10          15          20           25
                                                                                                                                                             Mortality Rate (per 1,000 soldiers)                                                     Mortality Rate (per 1,000 soldiers)
                                                                       Notes: This figure depicts the indifference, or bid, curves derived from B-spline estimates of the column (2) specification from Table 3. The blue
                                                                       curve (left plot) is derived from B-spline estimates with no restrictions. The brown curve (left plot) imposes monotonicity. The black curve (right
                                                                       plot) imposes both monotonicity and convexity. The text labels on the right plot denote the implied VSL at each point, which is equal to the slope
                                                                       of the red tangent line at each point. Table A9 reports implied VSL estimates and confidence intervals at different mortality rates for all curves in
                                                                       this figure. We use estimation results from the stochastic Laplace Type Estimator (LTE) optimization process described in Chernozhukov and Hong
                                                                       (2003) to calculate the level of the bonus at each mortality rate, or hazard, that produces the same level of utility as found at the average bonus and
                                                                       hazard. The shaded area around each curve is a 95 percent confidence interval constructed from the quasi-posterior distribution of moments from 500
                                                                       LTE draws, where each draw produced a separate curve. The confidence interval reflects the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of solved bonus amounts at
                                                                       each mortality rate. The bid curve from every LTE moment includes a point at the average bonus ($7,200) and average hazard (5.4 deaths per 1000)
                                                                       of the sample, so the bid curve confidence interval shrinks to zero at this point. However, the slope of each curve at this point will still differ across
                                                                       LTE draws, producing a range of implied VSLs.
among the full sample) have estimated VSLs near $482,000, while soldiers with a mortality
risk of 5 deaths per 1000 soldiers (65th-percentile of the mortality rate) have an estimated
VSL near $672,000, and soldiers with a mortality risk of 16 deaths per 1000 (96th-percentile
of the mortality rate) have an estimated VSL of $1.44M. We believe this is the first-of-a-kind
empirical construction of bid curves depicting the wealth versus risk of death trade-off.
A potentially even more informative set of results is reported in Figure 4, which displays
the bid-curves and their confidence intervals for the three subgroups on the same axes and
is summarized in Table 5. The substantial heterogeneity across subsamples is apparent
from the shape and steepness of the estimated bid curves. Reassuringly, the pattern of
this heterogeneity has broad parallels to the heterogeneity in the subsample-specific VSL
estimates reported in Table 3. For example, the estimated bid curves for women and for
men in noncombat occupations are substantially steeper than the bid curves for men in
combat occupations, revealing these occupation subgroups' relative dislike of mortality risk.
It is noteworthy that men in noncombat occupations facing an expected mortality rate of 1
death per 1000 soldiers have an estimated VSL of $717,000, and that this more than doubles
to $1.667M when they face a mortality rate of 5 deaths per 1000. Among men in combat
occupations, the estimated VSL does not reach $1.667M until the mortality rate exceeds 23
deaths per 1000 soldiers, which is the 97th percentile of their mortality distribution.
Importantly, Figure 4 and Table 5 reveal how comparing average estimated VSLs between
subsamples confounds differences in preferences for safety and wealth with differences in
expected mortality rates. Although our estimates up to this point suggest that men in
combat occupations have lower average VSLs then women and, to a lesser extent, men in
noncombat occupations, these differences are significantly larger and statistically meaningful
when we compare soldiers across groups while holding the expected mortality rate constant.
For example, when the four-year mortality rate is 8 per 1000 soldiers, the implied VSL for
men in noncombat occupations is 7 times larger than the implied VSL for men in combat
occupations ($2.808 million for noncombat men compared to $374,000 for combat men).
The confidence intervals reported in Table 5 confirm that when the occupation subsamples'
implied VSLs are compared at the same expected mortality rates, the VSL estimates for men
in combat occupations are statistically distinguishable from the VSLs for men in noncombat
occupations and women at all but the smallest levels of mortality, making clear that the
difference in risk preferences across these groups is economically and statistically significant.




                                                 38

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                        Figure 4: Bid Curves Derived from B-spline Estimates by Subsample
                             40                                                           40


            Bonus ($1,000)




                                                                         Bonus ($1,000)
                             30                                                           30




                             20                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                 $2.808M
                                                                                                                                               $1.218M
                                                                                                            $2.808M
                                                                                                                          $2.135M
                             10                                                           10
                                                                                                  $1.218M
                                                                                                                          $0.374M
                                                                                                       $0.361M


                              0                                                            0
                                  0   25 50 0    25 50 0     25 50                                     3              8                                24
                                            Count (1,000s)                                                      Mortality Rate (per 1,000 soldiers)

                                                                                          6
                                                                                          3
                                                                         Count (1,000s)




                                                                                          0
                                                                                          6
                                      Men, Noncombat (N=189,270)
                                                                                          3
                                      Men, Combat (N=168,943)
                                                                                          0
                                      Women (N=71,162)
                                                                                          6
                                                                                          3
                                                                                          0
                                                                                              0             5               10       15        20          25
                                                                                                                Mortality Rate (per 1,000 soldiers)
Notes: This figure depicts bid-curves, by subsample, derived from B-splines estimated using the column (2)
specification from Table 3 when imposing monotonicity and convexity conditions. Shaded bands around
each curve indicate the 95 percent confidence intervals, constructed from the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles
of solved bonus amounts at each expected mortality. The notes for Figure 3 describe how we construct the
bid-curves and their confidence intervals. Text labels denote the implied VSL at each point.


    Table 5: Implied VSLs from Bid Curves at Different Mortality Levels by Subsample

                                                                               Mortality Hazard Rate (per 1000 soldiers)
                                                1                    3                     5              8              16                                          24
 Men, Noncombat                             0.717              1.218                                    1.667                    2.808
                                        [0.425, 0.921]     [0.781, 1.397]                           [1.214, 1.865]           [2.144, 3.281]
 Men, Combat                                0.177              0.361                                    0.387                    0.374            0.506             2.022
                                        [0.042, 0.512]     [0.246, 0.438]                           [0.274, 0.395]           [0.290, 0.374]   [0.414, 0.918]    [0.983, 3.901]
 Women                                      0.789              0.940                                    1.423                    2.135
                                        [0.429, 0.980]     [0.833, 1.094]                           [1.138, 1.592]           [1.551, 2.462]
Notes: This table reports implied VSL estimates in millions of 2019 USD for each subsample at six mortality hazard rates.
VSL estimates are the slopes of the B-spline-derived bid curves in Figure 4. The range of mortality rates for noncombat
men and women do not extend to 16 and 24 deaths per 1000 soldiers. 95 percent confidence intervals, constructed from
the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of solved bonus amounts at each expected mortality rate, as described in the notes for
Figure 3, are displayed in brackets.


                                                                                                      39

                                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
7.2     Welfare Analysis of Non-Marginal Changes in Fatality Risk

A primary benefit of estimating dis-aggregated bid curves is the ability to compute welfare
implications of non-marginal changes in mortality risk that also vary across subgroups. We
illustrate these benefits in two ways. First, we calculate the welfare implications of mortality
increases of the order experienced by U.S. Army soldiers in recent conflicts. We then evaluate
the efficiency of a safety investment that the U.S. Army started in 2005.
In the first example, we estimate the money required to keep reenlistment rates constant
as mortality risk increases from occupational mortality rates in 2002 to the highest annual
occupational mortality rates we observe in our data.33 We interpret mortality risk in 2002 as
a baseline period that most closely resembles peacetime eras. At the other end, we interpret
maximum annual mortality rates at the occupation level as a measure of risk during the
most lethal periods of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Although this gives an upper
bound on the welfare losses associated with increased risk during Iraq and Afghanistan, it
could underestimate the welfare losses from other recent conflicts that were more lethal, such
as the wars in Korea and Vietnam (Defense Industry Daily Staff, 2005).
We then map each occupation's 2002 mortality rate and peak mortality rate to the esti-
mated bid-curves in Figure 4 to identify the bonuses required for each occupation to keep
reenlistments constant. For example, mortality rates for infantry soldiers increased from 3.5
deaths per 1000 in 2002 to 24.6 deaths per 1000 in 2007. The indifference curve for men in
combat occupations suggests that the average infantry soldier requires a lump-sum bonus of
$12,900 to remain equally well-off when mortality increases from 3.5 to 24.6. In other words,
the typical infantry soldier suffered a welfare loss of $12,900. Applying this framework to all
occupations, we estimate that the increase in mortality risk due to the Iraq and Afghanistan
wars reduced welfare by $8,500 for the average soldier. Since our mortality measure is a
four-year sum with future years discounted at 7.2 percent, $8,500 is equivalent to a $2,355
annual reduction in welfare, or 8 percent of annual military pay (see column (3) of Table 2).
This example also helps illustrate the importance of estimating indifference curves to assess
the welfare consequences of non-marginal changes in mortality risk or other implicit goods
and services. If we used our average full sample, linear binary logit VSL estimate of $575,000
(panel A, column (2), Table 3), we would estimate that the increased risk from the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan only reduced welfare for the average soldier by $5,100. This is 40
  33
    Recall that our measure of risk is a 12 month rolling average, but summed over four years with future
years discounted at 7.2 percent to keep our risk measure consistent with our bonus measure (see Section 4.2).
Roughly 48 percent of soldiers in our sample are in occupations where the highest mortality rate occurs in
2007, consistent with column (6) of Table 2.


                                                     40

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
percent less than the welfare loss calculated from our estimates of separate indifference
curves for men in noncombat occupations, men in combat occupations, and women.34
We now turn to a second example to further emphasize the policy implications of under-
standing how the VSL varies by both occupation and the level of risk within occupations.
In response to a Department of Defense study citing shortcomings in standard body armor
issued at the start of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the U.S. Army began issuing en-
hanced body armor to soldiers in all occupations in 2005. The enhanced body armor cost
$760 per unit, came with a total projected system cost of $200M, and was estimated to
reduce mortality by roughly 15 percent.35 Ignoring heterogeneity, our full sample binary
logit VSL estimate of $575,000 would imply that the $200M enhanced body armor program
was welfare-improving if it saved 350 lives.36 This is a reasonable possibility considering that
nearly 4,000 service-members died in Iraq between 2003 and 2007.37
However, this standard cost-benefit analysis derived from a single VSL could miss crucial
welfare implications when comparing changes in mortality risk across occupations and within
occupations but at different mortality rates. For example, the mortality rate for truck drivers
in 2005 was 7.8 per 1000, implying a VSL for male truck drivers of roughly $2.73M when
interpolating between estimated VSLs for men in noncombat occupations, as reported in
columns (3) and (4) of Table 5. Meanwhile, average mortality rates for infantry soldiers were
11.3 per 1000 in the same year, implying a VSL of $428,000 (see columns (4) and (5) of Table
5). If the enhanced body armor reduced mortality by 15 percent across all occupations, then
the program would clearly be welfare improving for male truck drivers, who would be willing
                                                           7.8
to pay roughly $3,194 for the enhanced body armor (( 1000      )(0.15)(2, 730, 000) = 3, 194). On
the other hand, infantry soldiers would only be willing to pay roughly $725 for the enhanced
               11.3
body armor (( 1000  )(0.15)(428, 000) = 725), just under the system's unit cost. In other words,
the welfare maximizing policy in 2005 would have been to issue enhanced body armor to
truck drivers and maintain infantry staffing levels through higher bonuses.38
  34
      Of course, we acknowledge that exact welfare calculations would require us to estimate separate indif-
ference curves for every occupation. Unfortunately, power limitations make this infeasible.
   35
      Defense Industry Daily Staff (2005) provides total and per units costs, in 2006 USD, of $160M and $600,
respectively. Moss (2006) explains the marginal effectiveness of the enhanced body armor.
   36
      If we assume the occupations of soldiers receiving body armor mirrored the share of occupations in our
sample, then the subsample binary logit estimates from Table 3 would permit us to estimate that the $200M
body armor program would be welfare improving if they saved 87 men in noncombat occupations, 180 men
in combat occupations, and 26 women.
   37
      See Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) Casualty Summary By Month and Service (accessed April 2021).
   38
      It is noteworthy, however, that the infantry mortality rate in 2007, at 24.6 per 1000, was high enough
to justify a $760 enhanced body armor system as welfare improving at that particular time period.




                                                     41

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
8    Conclusion

Nearly a half century ago, Rosen (1974) laid out an approach to recover indifference curves
between wealth and non-market goods; Thaler and Rosen (1976) extended this approach
to infer the VSL. In the subsequent decades, the empirical compensating differentials and
VSL literatures have almost exclusively assumed a constant marginal willingness to pay for
non-market goods and in so doing assumed away the need to estimate the demand primitives
necessary for welfare analysis in the presence of heterogeneity (Greenstone, 2017). The result
has been to turn a rich model of the world into a mechanical empirical summary that fails to
accommodate the widespread casual observation that people's willingness to pay for safety
and other non-market goods vary tremendously across types and contexts.
This paper returns the empirical literature to its theoretical origins in the case of the VSL by
using a random utility discrete choice model coupled with rich data on the first-time reen-
listment decisions of U.S. Army soldiers. This combination allows us to recover indifference,
or bid, functions. Our study's setting also offers potential to make important progress on
two other problems common to the VSL literature: that mortality risk is correlated with
unobserved job features and might not be well known (Ashenfelter, 2006).
There are two principal empirical findings. First, we estimate that the average VSL estimated
across the population of soldiers and observed range of mortality rates is generally between
$500,000 and $900,000 across a wide set of specifications. These estimates are precise and
are at least at an order of magnitude smaller than the typical VSL estimate from overall U.S.
labor market studies (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003; Kniesner et al., 2012). Second, we find that
the assumption of a single and universal VSL is rejected in this setting. For example, the
estimated VSL varies substantially within the observed range of mortality risk among men in
combat occupations. Additionally, there is clear evidence of sorting across occupations based
on risk preferences such that there is a seven-fold difference in the VSL across occupation
categories when we compare those categories at the same level of risk.
The broader message is that accounting for heterogeneity in the marginal willingness to
pay for non-market goods is critical. In the case of the VSL, there is not a single VSL
among soldiers, which also raises the possibility of similar heterogeneity in the broader
population. Beyond the VSL literature, a greater focus on capturing heterogeneity with
discrete choice random utility models or other approaches will improve understanding of
how consumers value a wide range of non-market goods and services, including clean air,
public transportation, school quality, and other job characteristics to name a few. Such
understanding could be the basis for policy reforms that improve social welfare.


                                                 42

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
References
Asch, Beth J, Paul Heaton, James Hosek, Francisco Martorell, Curtis Simon,
 and John T Warner, "Cash Incentives and Military Enlistment, Attrition, and Reen-
 listment," Technical Report, RAND National Defense Research Institute 2010.
Ashenfelter, Orley, "Measuring the Value of a statistical Life: Problems and Prospects.,"
 The Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (510), C10.
   and Michael Greenstone, "Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure the Value of a
  Statistical Life.," Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (1), S226 ­ S267.
Bartik, Timothy J., "The Estimation of Demand Parameters in Hedonic Price Models,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 1987, 95 (1), 81­88.
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan, "A unified framework for
 measuring preferences for schools and neighborhoods," Journal of political economy, 2007,
 115 (4), 588­638.
Black, Dan A. and Thomas J. Kniesner, "On the Measurement of Job Risk in Hedonic
  Wage Models.," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2003, 27 (3), 205 ­ 220.
Borgschulte, Mark and Paco Martorell, "Paying to Avoid Recession: Using Reen-
 listment to Estimate the Cost of Unemployment," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 2018, 10 (3), 101­127.
Brown, James N. and Harvey S. Rosen, "On the Estimation of Structural Hedonic
 Price Models," Econometrica, 1982, 50 (3), 765­768.
Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone, "Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from
 the Housing Market," Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (2), 376­424.
Chernozhukov, Victor and Han Hong, "An MCMC approach to classical estimation,"
 Journal of Econometrics, 2003, 115 (2), 293­346.
Cropper, Maureen, James K. Hammitt, and Lisa A. Robinson, "Valuing Mortality
 Risk Reductions: Progress and Challenges.," Annual Review of Resource Economics, 2011,
 3 (1), 313 ­ 336.
Deacon, Robert T., David S. Brookshire, Anthony C. Fisher, Allen V. Kneese,
 Charles D. Kolstad, David Scrogin, V. Kerry Smith, Michael Ward, and James
 Wilen, "Research Trends and Opportunities in Environmental and Natural Resource
 Economics," Environmental and Resource Economics, 1998, 11 (3-4), 383­97.
Defense Industry Daily Staff, "Up to $160M for Enhanced Interceptor Vest Protection,"
 Defense Industry Daily, 2005.
Department of Defense, "Population Representation in the Military Services: Fiscal Year
 2002," 2004.
Ekeland, Ivar, James J Heckman, and Lars Nesheim, "Identification and Estimation


                                                43

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
  of Hedonic Models," Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (1 pt 2).
Epple, Dennis, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and Supply
 Functions for Differentiated Products," Journal of Political Economy, 1987, 95 (1), 59­80.
Evans, Mary F and Laura O Taylor, "Using revealed preference methods to estimate
 the value of reduced mortality risk: Best practice recommendations for the hedonic wage
 model," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2020, 14 (2), 282­301.
Folke, Olle and Johanna Karin Rickne, "Sexual Harassment and Gender Inequality in
  the Labor Market," 2020.
Greenstone, Michael, "The continuing impact of Sherwin Rosen's "Hedonic prices and
 implicit markets: product differentiation in pure competition"," Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 2017, 125 (6), 1891­1902.
Gruber, Jonathan, "The incidence of mandated maternity benefits," The American eco-
 nomic review, 1994, pp. 622­641.
Heckman, James J, Rosa L Matzkin, and Lars Nesheim, "Simulation and estimation
 of hedonic models," IZA Discusion Paper, 2003, (843).
  , , and , "Nonparametric identification and estimation of nonadditive hedonic mod-
  els," Econometrica, 2010, 78 (5), 1569­1591.
Hosek, James R. and Trey Miller, Effects of Bonuses on Active Component Reenlistment
 Versus Prior Service Enlistment in the Selected Reserve., Rand, 2011.
Kniesner, Thomas J, W Kip Viscusi, Christopher Woock, and James P Ziliak,
 "The value of a statistical life: Evidence from panel data," Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2012, 94 (1), 74­87.
Lamadon, Thibaut, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler, "Imperfect competition,
  compensating differentials and rent sharing in the US labor market," Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
Lee, Jonathan M and Laura O Taylor, "Randomized safety inspections and risk expo-
  sure on the job: quasi-experimental estimates of the value of a statistical life," American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (4), 350­74.
Le´
  on, Gianmarco and Edward Miguel, "Risky transportation choices and the value of
  a statistical life," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 202­28.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, "The Needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the
  Military to Estimate the Effect of Air Pollutants on Children's Health.," The Journal of
  Human Resources, 2010, 45 (3), 549.
Lyle, David S., "Using Military Deployments and Job Assignments to Estimate the Effect
  of Parental Absences and Household Relocations on Children's Academic Achievement.,"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2006, 24 (2), 319 ­ 350.
Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, "Valuing alternative work arrangements," Amer-

                                                44

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
  ican Economic Review, 2017, 107 (12), 3722­59.
Moss, Michael, "Pentagon Study Links Fatalities to Body Armor," The New York Times,
 2006.
Mrozek, Janusz R. and Laura O. Taylor, "What Determines the Value of Life? A
 Meta-Analysis.," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2002, 21 (2), 253.
Nekipelov, Denis, Paul Novosad, and Stephen P Ryan, "Moment Forests," 2021.
O'Brien, James, "Age, autos, and the value of a statistical life," Journal of Risk and
 Uncertainty, 2018, 57 (1), 51­79.
Patterson, Christina, Jonathan Petkun, and William Skimmyhorn, "I Want You!
 (But Not You): Selection in Military Retention," 2020.
Rohlfs, Chris, "The Economic Cost of Conscription and an Upper Bound on the Value
 of a Statistical Life: Hedonic Estimates from Two Margins of Response to the Vietnam
 Draft," Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis, August 2012, 3 (3).
  , Ryan Sullivan, and Thomas Kniesner, "New estimates of the value of a statistical life
  using air bag regulations as a quasi-experiment," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 2015, 7 (1), 331­59.
Rosen, Sherwin, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
 Competition," Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82 (1), 34­55.
Simon, Curtis J, John T Warner, and Saul Pleeter, "Discounting, cognition, and
  financial awareness: New evidence from a change in the military retirement system,"
  Economic Inquiry, 2015, 53 (1), 318­334.
Stern, Scott, "Do scientists pay to be scientists?," Management science, 2004, 50 (6),
  835­853.
Thaler, Richard and Sherwin Rosen, "The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from
 the Labor Market," in "Household Production and Consumption," National Bureau of
 Economic Research, Inc, 1976, pp. 265­302.
United States Army, "Army Regulation 601-280: Army Retention Program," 2019.
U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division, "American Community Survey," 2019.
Viscusi, W. Kip, "The Value of Life: Estimates with Risks by Occupation and Industry,"
 Economic Inquiry, 2004, 42 (1), 29­48.
  , "The Heterogeneity of the Value of Statistical Life: Introduction and Overview," Journal
  of Risk and Uncertainty, 2010, 40 (1), 1­13.
   and Joseph E. Aldy, "The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market
  Estimates throughout the World.," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2003, 27 (1), 5 ­ 76.




                                                45

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
1    Online Appendix: Overview of the Moment Forest

The moment forest approach of Nekipelov et al. (2021) uses a two-step procedure to estimate
moment-based models with observable heterogeneity. The goal of their procedure is to
estimate models of the general form:

                                     E [Y - m(x; (Z ))] = 0,                                (6)

where Y are outcomes, m is a set of moments, x are observable covariates, and (Z ) is a set
of parameters that are indexed by observables Z . Their approach generalizes the standard
moment model, where  is a universal vector of parameters that applies to all observations
in the sample. The motivation is that parameters often vary by observable characteristics,
e.g. demand parameters vary with demographics. They propose an ensemble estimator,
a moment forest, that consists of a number of moment trees. In each tree, the estimator
first partitions observations based on Z , and then recovers estimates of that  within each
partition. To achieve the partitioning, they leverage a modification of classification trees.
The basic idea is to split the data into two parts and recursively partition the first sample on
the basis of moment fit by cutting of data along a single dimension of X at each step. This
process is repeated until some convergence criteria are met. In a second step, the structure
of the partitioning from the first step is applied to a second sample of observations to recover
estimates of  in each partition. The moment forest's estimate of  is then the average of
 estimated in each tree. They provide proofs of consistency and uniform convergence, and
also show that the rate of convergence for the first step is, under weak regularity conditions,
faster than parametric. This allows the econometrician to ignore the partitioning step when
calculating standard errors in the second step.
In our setting, Y is an indicator of whether a soldier reenlisted, and the moment function is a
logit discrete choice model with a simplified utility structure consisting of three components:
a constant, a bonus, and a hazard rate. At the initial node of the tree, the estimator finds a
model that fits the whole sample. It then searches over each of the X , which as illustrated
by Figure A6 includes demographic variables, educational attainment, and test scores. It
splits the sample into two partitions based on the single best improvement in the fit of the
moment function at that node. It then repeats this split for each partition, continuing until
convergence criteria are met. In the second step, we take the structure from the first step
and estimate parameters within each of the final partitions using the second sample. Doing
so generates the moment forest estimates reported in the paper.



                                                 46

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
2     Online Appendix: Data

The Army's Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis (OEMA) provided all military ad-
ministrative data to Kyle Greenberg and Michael Yankovich as part of a restricted use
agreement that specifies the data can only be stored, accessed, and analyzed using govern-
ment information systems within government facilities. Though the data provided to the
authors was de-identified, the risk of backward induction of personal identities precludes
additional distribution of the data. For access to the raw personnel data, one must make
direct application to OEMA or the Defense Manpower Data Center. Data preparation and
analysis programs are available from the authors on request.
The population for our setting begins with 589,211 soldiers who were 12 months away from
their initial End of Term of Service (ETS) date, the date a soldier's first enlistment contract
ends, between 2002 and 2010. We then exclude 141,179 soldiers who had not reached the
rank of Private First Class by the last year of their initial enlistment as these soldiers are
not eligible to reenlist. We exclude another 17 soldiers who achieved a rank of Sergeant
First Class or higher during their initial enlistment as this is highly unusual and likely a
data error. We exclude another 15,084 soldiers who did not serve for at least one year in the
Army as these soldiers are also eligible for reenlistment. We also drop 3,551 soldiers with
an occupation of cryptologic linguist as we cannot identify the bonus they are eligible for
(more on this below). Finally, we exclude 5 additional soldiers with occupations we cannot
identify, leaving us with an analysis sample of 429,375 soldiers.


2.1     Details on the Selective Reenlistment Bonus Program

The Selective Retention Bonus (SRB) Program is a monetary incentive offered to qualified
Soldiers who reenlist in the Regular Army for continued duty in certain military occupational
specialties (MOSs).
Eligible occupations and locations are determined by the Army's Human Resources Com-
mand (HRC) to meet rank, skill, and mission requirements. Bonus policies change frequently
at irregular intervals. If a soldier's current occupation or desired location is not eligible for
an SRB, then the soldier might still be eligible for an SRB if he is currently serving in a
full-strength or over-strength occupation and is willing to retrain for service in a shortage
occupation.39 Additionally, during the period 2004 through 2010, soldiers in all occupations
  39
     The Army's Personnel Manning Authorization Document (PMAD) establishes authorized manpower
strengths by occupation, rank, and unit. Over-strength occupations are those where the total number of
soldiers in the occupation exceed the authorization established in the PMAD.


                                                  47

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
were generally eligible to reenlist and receive a bonus if reenlisting during a deployment.
Bonus offers with specific effective and expiry dates are periodically announced by the Army's
HRC via Military Personnel (MILPER) messages. MILPER messages contain a complete
menu of SRBs and reenlistment options available to each soldier at the time, thus provid-
ing policy announcements on the Army's reenlistment program several times each year.40
Although these documents come in a variety of formats, they usually consist of tables that
offer bonuses based on observable characteristics of soldiers. These include:

   · Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) : a 3-digit code describing a soldier's occupation.

   · Rank : these include Private 1st Class (E3), Corporal or Specialist (E4), Sergeant (E5),
     and Staff Sergeant (E6) (63 percent of first-term soldiers in our sample have a rank of
     Specialist when they enter their reenlistment window).

   · Skills : codes that indicate additional skills acquired by soldiers, such as parachuting.

   · Locations : countries or specific army bases to which the soldier applies for reenlistment,
     which may or may not be the soldier's present station.

   · Deployment Status : Some bonus premiums apply to deployed soldiers.

About 1-2 years before the ETS date, the soldier enters the "reenlistment window," a time
period during which they have the option to reenlist for another term of service. During this
time, each soldier meets with a reenlistment officer, who explains reenlistment options and
the bonuses that the soldier would receive depending on the reenlistment type they choose.
There are five reenlistment options which classify types of reenlistment.

  1. Regular Army Reenlistment: the soldier has no control over where they are stationed
     in this option, and are not eligible for any location-specific bonuses. The soldier must
     remain in their current MOS.

  2. Current Station Stabilization: this is the same as Option 1, but the soldier may elect
     to stay at their current station. Soldiers who choose this option are eligible for both
     location-specific and non-location-specific bonuses.

  3. Re-training: the soldier has no control over where they are stationed in this option,
     and are not eligible for any location-specific bonuses. The soldier re-trains to a new
     MOS, and receives the bonus offer for the new MOS. Any skills the soldier has are
     carried over.
 40
      For details, see www.hrc.army.mil/Milper.

                                                    48

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
  4. Outside Continental United States (OCONUS) reassignment: the soldier chooses an
     overseas location, and is stationed there. The soldier must remain in their current
     MOS.

  5. Contiguous States and the District of Columbia (CONUS) reassignment: the soldier
     chooses a location in the continental U.S., and is stationed there. The soldier must
     remain in their current MOS.


2.2    Details on the Construction of Bonus Offers

MILPER messages, released by the Army's HRC, are the data source for bonus information.
We compile them into a time series of bonus offers by MOS, rank, skill, location and language.
The MILPER messages list an effective date and an expiration date for each bonus. Fre-
quently, a MILPER message provides a bonus offer with an effective date that is in the
future. On occasion there are multiple updates to a future bonus offer before the bonus
takes effect. To avoid duplicate observations due to this feature of the data, we only keep
the observation from the MILPER message with the latest issue date.
A MILPER message may be rescinded by subsequent messages. If this happens before a
bonus's original expiry date, we update its expiry date. If a bonus is subsequently rescinded
before its original effective date, we drop it from our data observation (because the bonus
never came into effect).
During the period 2002-2010, the Army released at least 90 MILPER messages which an-
nounced changes to reenlistment and bonus policy. Each military personnel message specifies
the occupation, rank, and level of bonus authorized. Some messages, such as the one shown
in Appendix Figure A7, associate a bonus multiplier and a maximum bonus amount with
each occupation and rank. Other messages associate a specific dollar amount with each
occupation in rank. For example, Appendix Figure A7 shows that a Truck Driver (military
occupation specialty (MOS 88M)) in the reenlistment eligibility window in July 2007 with
rank of specialist (SPC) in zone A (i.e., has between 17 months and 6 years of active service)
is eligible for a Selective Reenlistment Bonus (SRB) with multiplier 2. The bonus offer is the
multiplier times the soldier's basic monthly pay, which increases with the amount of time a
soldier has already served in the military, times the number of years of the reenlistment term
that he selects. Since there is a cap on the bonus of $10,000, the formula for calculating the
bonus offer is given by:


       Bk=88M,t=July2007 = max {M ultiplier · BaseP ayE 4,4yos · ReupT erm, $10, 000}     (7)

                                                49

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
For a truck driver with four years of service (monthly basic pay in 2007 of $1,978.50), the
menu of reenlistment options available to the soldier is depicted in Table A10.41
As discussed above, SRBs for different occupations are often location or skill-specific. Lo-
cation refers to a soldier's duty location. A skill refers to a certification achieved through
specific military training. For example, a soldier who successfully complete Airborne training
earns the skill identifier associated with being a "parachutist." If no location or skill is men-
tioned, however, we assume that a bonus offer applies in the broadest sense. For example,
if a MILPER message states that MOS 89R has multiplier 3 for rank E4, we assume that
this applies to all soldiers with MOS 89R and rank E4, regardless of skill or location, unless
there is a location or skill-specific bonus offer for the same MOS active at the same time. If
a skill is specified for a bonus offer, we assume all soldiers with that MOS-skill combination
are eligible for that bonus offer, regardless of their present location. Similarly, if a location
is specified for a bonus offer, we assume all soldiers with that MOS-location combination are
eligible for that bonus offer, regardless of their skills.
While creating a database of potential SRBs, we had to make a few simplifying assumptions.
First, our data does not contain information on the languages spoken by a soldier. There-
fore, we cannot include language-specific bonus offers in our analysis. For this reason our
analysis excludes 3,551 soldiers with the MOS of 98G (cryptologic linguists, later 35P), since
the probability of soldiers in this MOS taking language-specific bonuses is high. We also
remove language-specific bonuses for MOS 98C (signal intelligence analyst) and 97E (human
intelligence collector, interrogator).42
Second, we do not have information on the specific divisions or brigades in which soldiers
serve. However, a few bonuses are specific to these attributes (e.g., bonuses for the 75th
Ranger Regiment or 82nd Airborne Division). If such a category constitutes an overwhelming
majority of the soldiers at a given base (e.g., the 82nd Airborne for Ft. Bragg), we code
bonuses for that category as being specific to the base. If a category is spread evenly over
multiple bases, we remove these bonuses, since the best we can do on the soldier side is
matching soldiers to locations, and we cannot guess that a soldier is in that unit from
location alone.
  41
      Soldiers who select new MOS training (reenlistment option 3) receive a bonus based on the new MOS
they enter. We inferred bonus offers for this option by constructing an average of MOS-specific bonus
offers among shortage occupations. Soldiers who select option 3 are only eligible to reenlist into shortage
occupations.
   42
      The Army redesignated the MOS code for cryptologic linguists (98G) and several other occupations
between 2004 and 2007. We constructed an MOS-by-month crosswalk to match every MOS code to a time-
consistent MOS code to ensure that every soldier matched to the appropriate occupation-specific bonus
offers.



                                                    50

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
Finally, when constructing bonus offers for Option 3 (New Occupation), Option 4 (Choice
of Overseas Post), and Option 5 (Choice of Continental U.S. Post), we treat the bonus
associated with the choice of new occupation or new post as the average of all potential
bonuses across occupations or posts a soldier could select with each particular option. We
explored constructing bonus offers for these options as the maximum bonus among all pos-
sible choices, but found that the average bonus among possible choices was more predictive
of actual bonuses received than the maximum bonus among possible choices.
To assess the measurement error introduced by the aggregation of bonuses across choice
categories, we used the Army's RETAIN database to construct a matrix of actual reen-
listment decisions, including actual bonus received, option selected, and term of additional
service. After matching our constructed bonus offers to the actual bonuses that reenlisting
soldiers received, we found that the correlation coefficient between bonus offers and bonuses
received was 0.56. Among soldiers who reenlisted exactly 12 months prior to their initial ETS
date, the correlation coefficient was 0.80. If our constructed bonus offers exhibit classical
measurement error, then our estimates of the responsiveness to bonus offers will be biased
downwards, implying that the true VSL is smaller than this paper's estimates of the VSL.


2.3    Details on the Construction of Expected Mortality Rates and
       Alternative Formulations

We assume that soldiers' expectation of future risk are based on recent mortality rates of
other soldiers in their same military occupation code (MOS). This assumption seems rea-
sonable for occupations with several soldiers who generally work with other soldiers in the
same occupation within their military unit, such as infantrymen (11B) or combat engineers
(12B). Yet this assumption might not be reasonable for soldiers in low-density occupations,
such as microwave systems operator-maintainer (25P). Consistent with these assumptions,
we find that soldiers in low-density MOSs exhibit little responsiveness to mortality rates of
soldiers within their same MOS, but are much more responsive to mortality rates of soldiers
within their same career management field (CMF), where a CMF represents a broader oc-
cupational category defined by the first two digits of a soldier's MOS (for example, CMF
11 includes MOS 11B, infantryman, and MOS 11C, indirect fire infantryman (mortarman)).
Meanwhile, soldiers in high-density occupations exhibit a similar level of responsiveness to
MOS mortality rates and CMF mortality rates (see Table A11).
Considering this finding, we define our preferred measure of a soldier's expected fatality
rate as the average annual mortality rate among soldiers in the same occupation (MOS)

                                                51

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
over the month of a soldier's decision date and the 11 months prior, where the decision
date is 12 months prior to the soldier's initial ETS date. However, for soldiers in low-
density occupations, which we define as occupations that have an average, Army-wide annual
strength of fewer than 5000 soldiers, we define a soldier's expected fatality rate as the average
annual mortality rate of soldiers in the same CMF over the month of a soldier's decision date
and the 11 months prior. Our results are not sensitive to alternative definitions of low-density
occupations (see Table A4, discussed below).
We construct several alternative measures of expected mortality rates to account for different
ways that soldiers might develop expectations of their mortality rate upon reenlistment. In
addition to our preferred hazard rates, we also consider constructing hazard rates based
purely on MOS mortality rates, CMF mortality rates, Army-wide mortality rates, and MOS-
CMF mortality rates that use different definitions of low-density MOSs.
Table A3 reports estimates from a regression of soldier's future occupational mortality on
these alternative hazard measures. We define a soldier's future occupational mortality as
the average annual death rate of soldiers in the same occupation (MOS) in the 12 months
after a the soldier's decision date. The table indicates that our aggregated hazard measure
that uses the MOS hazard from the previous 12 months for soldiers in high-density MOSs
and the CMF hazard from the previous 12 months for soldiers in low-density MOSs exhibits
the strongest correlation with future MOS mortality rates. The MOS-specific hazard and
CMF-specific hazard are also strongly correlated with future mortality, while the Army-wide
mortality hazard exhibits less correlation with future mortality (compare an R-squared value
of 0.042 for the Army-wide hazard to an R-squared value of 0.463 for our preferred measure
of the mortality hazard).


2.4    Binary Logit Estimates Using Alternative Decision Dates and
       Hazard Measures

Our primary analysis assigns soldiers a bonus offer based on the offer available to the sol-
dier exactly 360 days prior to his or her original ETS date. To test the sensitivity of this
assumption, Table A2 reports binary logit estimates when we consider bonus offers and haz-
ards faced by soldiers at 180, 270, 450, and 540 days prior to their original ETS date. The
VSLs estimated from each of these various decision dates are largely consistent with the find-
ing reported in Table 3. An exception to this are VSL estimates with occupation-by-entry
year-by-term fixed effects using a decision date of 180 days or 540 days prior to a soldier's
initial ETS date, which range from $60,000 to $143,000 and are indistinguishable from zero

                                                 52

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
(see columns (4) and (5) of panels B and E of Table A2). Although not reported in the
table, these lower VSL estimates are predominately due to mortality hazard estimates that
are relatively low in magnitude. Soldiers may be less responsive to mortality risk than our
preferred estimates indicate. Alternatively, since more soldiers decide to reenlist 12 months
prior to their ETS date than they do 6 or 18 months prior to their ETS date (see Appendix
Figure A2), hazard rates constructed from 180 day and 540 day decision dates may suffer
from more classical measurement error than hazard rates constructed from 360 day decision
dates.
Table A4 reports results when using several different measures for the mortality hazard,
including alternative thresholds for classifying occupations as low-density. We note that
VSL estimates using the past year army-wide mortality hazard measure (see panel C of Table
A4), which range from $719,000 to $1.167M, are larger than our preferred VSL estimates,
although the latter estimates are considerably noisier. Our preferred estimates reported in
Table 3 are well within the confidence intervals of VSL estimates from the past year army-
wide mortality hazard, but it is possible that soldiers may be more highly informed about
overall fatality rates on a monthly basis as the data becomes more aggregated. This potential
explanation is worth further exploration in future research as it contrasts with our intuition
that soldiers should be more responsive to a measure of the mortality hazard that is more
strongly correlated with their occupation's future mortality rates (see Table A3). Given
the high degree of variation in occupation-specific mortality hazards and occupation-specific
bonus offers across occupations and across time, and given the fact that soldiers typically
work on a day-to-day basis with others in their same occupations in units composed of people
who work in the same or similar occupations, it seems reasonable to believe soldiers have
good information about the occupation-specific risks they confront and that they would be
responsive to such measures.




                                                53

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                Figure A1: Enlistment to Reenlistment Process Diagram




Figure A2: Months between Initial Expiration of Term of Service (ETS) Date and Observed
Reenlistment Date




Notes: This figure plots the histogram of months between a soldier's initial ETS date and
her observed reenlistment date among soldiers in the analysis sample.


                                               54

                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
Figure A3: Reenlistment Bonus Offers and Fatality Rates for Select Army Occupations,
2002-2010
               Infantry (11B)                                    Combat Engineer (12B)                                   Fire Support (13B)
28




                                                 28




                                                                                                    24

                                                                                                         28




                                                                                                                                                        24
                                            24
14




                                                 14




                                                                                                    12

                                                                                                         14




                                                                                                                                                        12
                                            12
0




                                            0

                                                 0




                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                        0
            Military Police (31B)           24                  Intelligence Analyst (35F)                                  Medic (68W)




                                                                                                    24

                                                                                                         28




                                                                                                                                                        24
28




                                                 28
                                            12




                                                                                                    12

                                                                                                         14




                                                                                                                                                        12
14




                                                 14
0




                                            0

                                                 0




                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                        0
            Truck Driver (88M)                               Wheeled Vehicle Mechanic (91B)                            Supply Specialist (92Y)
                                            24




                                                                                                    24

                                                                                                         28




                                                                                                                                                        24
28




                                                 28
                                            12




                                                                                                    12

                                                                                                         14




                                                                                                                                                        12
14




                                                 14
0




                                            0

                                                 0




                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                        0
     2002        2006               2010              2002               2006                2010             2002            2006               2010


                                    Bonus Offers (left axis, $1000s)                            Mortality Rate (right axis, per 1000)


Notes: This figure reports average bonus offers and average mortality rates over time for
selected occupations. The military occupational speciality (MOS) code for each occupation
is in parentheses next to the name of the occupation. The bonus offers reflect lump-sum
bonus amounts (in thousands of 2019 USD) available to soldiers with 3 years of service
and the rank of Specialist who choose a 4-year, Regular Army Reenlistment in the same
occupation (Option 1 per Figure A1). The mortality rate is the fatality rate of soldiers in
the same occupation over the 12 previous months, but scaled to reflect the mortality rate
per 1000 soldiers over the next four years where future years are discounted at 7.2 percent,
as described in Section 4.2. For reference, a mortality rate of 12 implies an annual mortality
rate of 3.32 death per 1000 person-years.




                                                                         55

                            Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
 Figure A4: Moment Forest Bonus Estimate Distributions, Full Sample and by Subsample
                                                                                 (a) Full Sample


                                                                                           Q1 =              Q2 =          Q3 =
                                                                                           0.015             0.020         0.023




                                                .12
                                                .1
                                                .08
                                                .06
                                                .04
                                                .02
                                                0




                                                      -.01                0            .01                    .02                   .03                .04

                                                                                     Bonus Logit Estimates


                                                                                (b) By Subsample
                       Men, Non-Combat                                                   Men, Combat                                                               Women
                                Q1 =    Q2 = Q3 =                                       Q1 =       Q2 =    Q3 =                                                        Q1 = Q2 = Q3 =
                                0.017   0.021 0.024                                     0.012      0.017   0.021                                                       0.018 0.021 0.024
     .12




                                                                   .12




                                                                                                                                          .12
     .1




                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                          .1
     .08




                                                                   .08




                                                                                                                                          .08
     .06




                                                                   .06




                                                                                                                                          .06
     .04




                                                                   .04




                                                                                                                                          .04
     .02




                                                                   .02




                                                                                                                                          .02
     0




                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                          0




           -.01   0       .01           .02       .03        .04         -.01    0        .01          .02           .03           .04          -.01    0        .01        .02        .03   .04

                      Bonus Logit Estimates                                          Bonus Logit Estimates                                                   Bonus Logit Estimates

Notes: The histograms above display the distribution of logit bonus estimates derived from our
moment forest analysis for the full sample, men in noncombat occupations, men in combat occu-
pations, and women. Bonus offers are in 1000s of 2019 USD. Q1, Q2, and Q3 constitute the 25th
percentile, median, and 75th percentile of estimates. This analysis permits potential splitting on
MOS, initial term-length, entry-cohort, deployment probability, race, education, AFQT, age, state,
and local unemployment rates. To reduce computing time, we convert continuous variables into
discrete variables by grouping soldiers with similar covariate values. In particular, we group soldiers
into deployment probability categories with bandwidths of 5 percentage points (i.e., one group with
deployment probabilities less than 5 percent, another group with deployment probabilities between
5 and 10 percent, and so on), we group soldiers into AFQT categories with bandwidths of 5, we
group soldiers into entry-age categories with bandwidths of 2 years, and we group soldiers into
unemployment rate categories with bandwidths of one percentage point.


                                                                                                56

                                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
Figure A5: Moment Forest Hazard Estimate Distributions, Full Sample and by Subsample
                                                                      (a) Full Sample


                                                                                     Q1 =            Q2 =              Q3 =
                                                                                    -0.022          -0.018            -0.009




                                          .08
                                          .06
                                          .04
                                          .02
                                          0




                                                    -.06              -.04                      -.02                       0                 .02

                                                                        Hazard Logit Estimates


                                                                (b) By Subsample
                    Men, Non-Combat                                             Men, Combat                                                                  Women
                           Q1 = Q2 =       Q3 =                                        Q1 = Q2 =              Q3 =                                  Q1 =     Q2 = Q3 =
                          -0.021 -0.016   -0.007                                      -0.019 -0.015          -0.005                                -0.037   -0.030 -0.025
     .08




                                                         .08




                                                                                                                                .08
     .06




                                                         .06




                                                                                                                                .06
     .04




                                                         .04




                                                                                                                                .04
     .02




                                                         .02




                                                                                                                                .02
     0




                                                         0




                                                                                                                                0




           -.06    -.04        -.02          0     .02         -.06          -.04            -.02             0           .02         -.06           -.04          -.02     0   .02

                  Hazard Logit Estimates                                Hazard Logit Estimates                                                     Hazard Logit Estimates

Notes: The histograms above display the distribution of logit mortality hazard estimates derived
from our moment forest analysis for the full sample, men in noncombat occupations, men in com-
bat occupations, and women. Mortality hazard rates are the four-year discounted sum of annual
mortality rates per 1000 soldiers in the same occupation, as described in the notes for Table 1. Q1,
Q2, and Q3 constitute the 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile of estimates. See the notes
for Figures 2 and A4 for additional details.




                                                                                     57

                            Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
1.8
1.5           Figure A6: Moment Forest VSL Estimates for Alternative Subgroups




                       1.17
1.2




               1.12
                                                                                       1.06
                                                                        1.04
                                                           0.98                                                                               0.96
                                  0.94                                                                                                                                            0.94
                                                                                                                              0.91                             0.89
                                                                                                   0.87
0.9




      0.77                                                                                                         0.77
                                          0.66
0.6
0.3
0.0


      White


               Black


                       Hispanic


                                  Other


                                          HS Dropout/GED


                                                           HS Diploma


                                                                        Some College


                                                                                       AFQT < 50


                                                                                                   50  AFQT < 70




                                                                                                                              Entry-Age  21


                                                                                                                                              Entry-Age > 21


                                                                                                                                                               Low Unemployment


                                                                                                                                                                                  High Unemployment
                                                                                                                   AFQT  70




Notes: The box plots above display the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of VSL estimates
within each subgroup, as derived from the moment forest analysis. The moment forest
analysis produces bonus and hazard estimates for each observation, which we use to construct
percentiles within each subgroup. The text within each box reports the median VSL within
the subgroup. AFQT scores are percentile-ranks (1-99) of a soldier's arithmetic and verbal
reasoning skills relative to a nationally representative sample of 18-23-year-olds. 33 percent
of the sample has an AFQT score below 50, 35 percent has an AFQT between 50 and 69,
and 32 percent has an AFQT of 70 or higher. Entry-age refers to a soldier's age at initial
enlistment into the Army. Soldiers in the low unemployment group are from counties with
unemployment rates below the median unemployment rate within the full sample. Soldiers in
the high unemployment group are from counties with unemployment rates above the median
within the full sample.




                                                                             58

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
Figure A7: Example of a Military Personnel Message Announcing Reenlistment Policy Up-
dates




                                               59

                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                                                                                            Table A1: Reenlistment Proportions by Option and Term, 2002-2010

                                                                                                                                                    Reenlistment Term (Years)
                                                                        Option     Occupation             Home Post Location             0        2      3      4      5      6              Total
                                                                           0       Exit Army                                          0.547                                                  0.547
                                                                           1       No Change              Army Chooses                         0.034 0.018       0.030     0.013    0.023    0.117
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                           2       No Change              Stay at Current Post                 0.005 0.033       0.038     0.022    0.043    0.141
                                                                           3       New Occupation         Army Chooses                               0.006       0.021     0.006    0.007    0.040
                                                                           4       No Change              Pick Overseas Post                         0.003       0.033     0.008    0.008    0.051
                                                                           5       No Change              Pick Post inside U.S.                      0.036       0.035     0.014    0.017    0.102
                                                                         Total                                                        0.547    0.039    0.096    0.156     0.064    0.097    1.000
                                                                        Notes: This table reports the proportion of the total sample that selected a particular combination of reenlistment option
                                                                       and reenlistment term-length. The sample consists of 429,375 first-term, non-prior service enlisted soldiers with reenlistment
                                                                       decisions between 2002 and 2010. Home post location refers to the permanent military base, post, or station to which the
                                                                       soldier is formally assigned. This is not the same as a deployment location. Soldiers are assigned to units, which have their
                                                                  60




                                                                       home bases at permanent locations, and units get deployed to operational locations.
                                                                                         Table A2: VSL Estimates with Alternative Reenlistment Decision Dates

                                                                                                                      (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)
                                                                        Panel A: Decision Date = 360 Days Prior to Initial ETS Date (Baseline Estimates from Table 3)
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.520          0.575           0.592          0.602                   0.540
                                                                          VSL CI                              [0.302, 0.738] [0.332, 0.819] [0.349, 0.836] [0.416, 0.787]           [0.349, 0.730]
                                                                        Panel B: Decision Date = 180 Days Prior to Initial ETS Date
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.571          0.406               0.465             0.143             0.060
                                                                          VSL CI                              [0.230, 0.912] [0.046, 0.766]      [0.084, 0.846]   [-0.380, 0.666]   [-0.428, 0.547]
                                                                        Panel C: Decision Date = 270 Days Prior to Initial ETS Date
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.531          0.518               0.550            0.425             0.379
                                                                          VSL CI                              [0.270, 0.792] [0.234, 0.802]      [0.255, 0.844]   [0.082, 0.768]    [0.049, 0.710]
                                                                        Panel D: Decision Date = 450 Days Prior to Initial ETS Date
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.442          0.513               0.532            0.749             0.693
                                                                          VSL CI                              [0.225, 0.659] [0.270, 0.756]      [0.308, 0.756]   [0.256, 1.242]    [0.173, 1.213]
                                                                        Panel E: Decision Date = 540 Days Prior to Initial ETS Date
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.363          0.448               0.466             0.142             0.096
                                                                  61




                                                                          VSL CI                              [0.118, 0.608] [0.191, 0.706]      [0.246, 0.686]   [-0.388, 0.672]   [-0.460, 0.653]
                                                                        Cohort FE, MOS FE, Term-length FE              X               X               X
                                                                        Deployment Probability Control                                 X               X                X                 X
                                                                        Individual Controls                                                            X                X                 X
                                                                        MOS x Cohort x Term FE                                                                          X                 X
                                                                        County Unemployment Rate                                                                                          X

                                                                        Notes: This table reports implied VSL estimates derived from binary logit estimates of equation (3). Each panel reports
                                                                       VSL estimates when assigning soldiers to the bonus offer, mortality, and deployment probability corresponding to the date
                                                                       indicated in the panel heading. All variables are constructed in the same manner as described in the notes for Table 3.
                                                                       The equations used to produce regression estimates in columns (1) through (5) are identical to the estimation equations in
                                                                       the corresponding columns of Table 3. VSL 95 percent confidence intervals, reported in brackets, are derived by applying
                                                                       the delta method to standard errors clustered on MOS. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
                                                                       respectively.
                                                                                 Table A3: Correlation Between Next Year's MOS Mortality Rate and Alternative Hazard Measures

                                                                                                                                                                      MOS/CMF Hazard         MOS/CMF Hazard
                                                                                        MOS/CMF Hazard                                                                (high density MOSs     (high density MOSs
                                                                                        (high density/low                                                              defined as 2500        defined as 7500
                                                                                         density MOSs)         MOS Hazard      CMF Hazard      Army-Wide Hazard             soldiers)              soldiers)
                                                                                               (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)                       (5)                    (6)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                        Hazard Rate          0.198***            0.178***        0.208***            0.163***              0.196***                0.194***
                                                                                              (0.006)             (0.008)         (0.012)             (0.054)               (0.006)                 (0.009)
                                                                        R2                     0.463              0.435            0.457              0.042                  0.463                  0.455
                                                                        Observations          381,208            381,193          381,208            381,208                381,208                381,208
                                                                        Notes: This table reports estimates from a regression of a soldier's occupational (MOS) mortality rate in the 12 months after a soldier
                                                                       enters his reenlistment window (defined as 360 days before the soldier's initial ETS date) on the hazard measures indicated in each column.
                                                                       A soldier's occupational mortality rate is the death rate for soldiers in his same occupation (MOS) over the next 12 months (it is a single
                                                                       year mortality rate, not a four year mortality rate). The hazard rate reflects the four year discounted annual mortality rate of a soldier's
                                                                       occupation averaged over the month he enters his reenlistment window and the 11 months prior, as described in Section 4.2. For column 1,
                                                                       soldiers in MOSs with an average strength of fewer than 5000 individuals are assigned to the CMF (broader occupation) past year hazard
                                                                  62




                                                                       rate, but mortality rates for the outcome variable are calculated at the narrow occupation (MOS) level for all columns. For columns 5 and
                                                                       6, we define high-density MOSs as soldiers in MOSs with an average strength exceeding 2500 and 7500 soldiers, respectively. This table
                                                                       excludes soldiers with decision years in 2010 because we do not have mortality data past that year. Standard errors clustered on MOS are
                                                                       reported in parentheses. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                                                 Table A4: VSL Estimates with Alternative Hazard Measures

                                                                                                                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
                                                                        Panel A: Panel A: MOS Hazard for MOSs with an Average Strength Exceeding 5000, CMF Hazard for Others (Baseline)
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                   0.520          0.575          0.592          0.602          0.540
                                                                          VSL CI                            [0.302, 0.738] [0.332, 0.819] [0.349, 0.836] [0.416, 0.787] [0.349, 0.730]
                                                                        Panel B: MOS Hazard
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                   0.356          0.388          0.402          0.361          0.321
                                                                          VSL CI                            [0.141, 0.571] [0.142, 0.634] [0.146, 0.659] [0.171, 0.551] [0.143, 0.498]
                                                                        Panel C: CMF Hazard
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                         0.640            0.711            0.713            0.709            0.633
                                                                          VSL CI                                  [0.428, 0.852]   [0.503, 0.920]   [0.519, 0.908]   [0.491, 0.928]   [0.407, 0.859]
                                                                        Panel D: Army-Wide Hazard
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                         0.823            0.951            0.719            1.167            0.929
                                                                          VSL CI                                  [0.280, 1.366]   [0.316, 1.587]   [0.074, 1.365]   [0.347, 1.987]   [0.136, 1.722]
                                                                        Panel E: MOS Hazard for MOSs with an Average Strength Exceeding 2500, CMF Hazard for Others
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                   0.510          0.568          0.589          0.541                        0.484
                                                                  63




                                                                          VSL CI                            [0.291, 0.729] [0.321, 0.815] [0.339, 0.838] [0.371, 0.711]               [0.312, 0.656]
                                                                        Panel F: MOS Hazard for MOSs with an Average Strength Exceeding 7500, CMF Hazard for Others
                                                                          Estimated VSL ($ M)                   0.542          0.602          0.617          0.621                        0.554
                                                                          VSL CI                            [0.325, 0.759] [0.358, 0.846] [0.375, 0.859] [0.415, 0.826]               [0.346, 0.762]
                                                                        Cohort FE, MOS FE, Term-length FE               X                X                X
                                                                        Deployment Probability Control                                   X                X                X                X
                                                                        Individual Controls                                                               X                X                X
                                                                        MOS x Cohort x Term FE                                                                             X                X
                                                                        County Unemployment Rate                                                                                            X
                                                                        Notes: This table reports implied VSL estimates derived from binary logit estimates of equation (3). Panel A reiterates the
                                                                       main VSL results from Table 3, obtained under our preferred estimates of expected mortality rates, while other panels report
                                                                       estimates from alternative definitions of the mortality hazard. All variables are constructed in the same manner as described
                                                                       in the notes for Table 3. The equations used to produce regression estimates in columns (1) through (5) are identical to the
                                                                       estimation equations in the corresponding columns of Table 3. VSL 95 percent confidence intervals, reported in brackets, are
                                                                       derived by applying the delta method to standard errors clustered on MOS. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
                                                                       and 10% level, respectively.
Table A5: Binary Logit Estimates, Full Sample: Average Marginal Effects For All Variables

                                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
   Bonus Offer (1000s of $ 2019)              0.0046***     0.0046***     0.0048***     0.0048***     0.0048***
                                               (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0007)      (0.0007)
   Mortality Hazard (per 1000 soldiers)      -0.0024***     -0.0026***    -0.0028***    -0.0029***    -0.0026***
                                              (0.0005)       (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)
   Deployment Probability                                     0.0489        0.0496      0.2813***     0.2825***
                                                             (0.0381)      (0.0385)      (0.0401)      (0.0402)
   Female                                                                 -0.0946***    -0.0980***    -0.0980***
                                                                           (0.0072)      (0.0068)      (0.0068)
   White                                                                  -0.0157***    -0.0153***    -0.0153***
                                                                           (0.0044)      (0.0043)      (0.0043)
   Black                                                                  0.0858***     0.0842***     0.0836***
                                                                           (0.0044)      (0.0044)      (0.0044)
   Hispanic                                                               0.0245***     0.0244***     0.0233***
                                                                           (0.0037)      (0.0036)      (0.0036)
   AFQT                                                                   -0.0019***    -0.0020***    -0.0020***
                                                                           (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)
   Age at Enlistment                                                      0.0037***     0.0035***     0.0036***
                                                                           (0.0005)      (0.0005)      (0.0005)
   High School GED / Dropout                                              0.1585***     0.1581***     0.1578***
                                                                           (0.0091)      (0.0077)      (0.0077)
   High School Diploma                                                    0.1253***     0.1254***     0.1251***
                                                                           (0.0095)      (0.0084)      (0.0084)
   Some College                                                           0.1076***     0.1080***     0.1079***
                                                                           (0.0099)      (0.0091)      (0.0090)
   Education Missing                                                      0.1439***     0.1446***     0.1445***
                                                                           (0.0130)      (0.0126)      (0.0126)
   Home-County Unemployment Rate                                                                      0.0033***
                                                                                                       (0.0004)

 Cohort FE, MOS FE, Term-length FE                X             X             X
 Deployment Probability                                         X             X             X              X
 Individual Controls                                                          X             X              X
 MOS x Cohort x Term FE                                                                     X              X
 County Unemployment Rate                                                                                  X

 This table reports average marginal effects from binary logit estimates of equation 3 for all variables (excluding
fixed effects) used to derive estimates in Table 3. All variables and estimating equations are identical to those
of Table 3. The omitted race category is `Other' (5.6 percent of sample). The omitted education category
is college graduate (4.2 percent of sample). Standard errors clustered on MOS are reported in parentheses.
***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                       64

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                                                                                        Table A6: Binary Logit Estimates with Individual Service Controls

                                                                                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                                       Panel A: Baseline Estimates from Table 3
                                                                         Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.520          0.575          0.592          0.602          0.540
                                                                         VSL CI                              [0.302, 0.738] [0.332, 0.819] [0.349, 0.836] [0.416, 0.787] [0.349, 0.730]
                                                                       Panel B: With Controls For Rank
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                         Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.496          0.558          0.602          0.622          0.548
                                                                         VSL CI                              [0.245, 0.747] [0.280, 0.836] [0.312, 0.892] [0.375, 0.869] [0.302, 0.794]
                                                                       Panel C: With Controls For Rank and Individual Deployment History
                                                                         Estimated VSL ($ M)                    0.690          0.616          0.664          0.779          0.676
                                                                         VSL CI                             [0.329, 1.051] [0.263, 0.969] [0.307, 1.021] [0.392, 1.165] [0.306, 1.046]
                                                                       Panel D: With Controls for Rank, Deployment History, and Current Deployment Status
                                                                         Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.668          0.601          0.641          0.756          0.657
                                                                         VSL CI                              [0.304, 1.031] [0.246, 0.956] [0.284, 0.997] [0.371, 1.142] [0.291, 1.024]
                                                                       Panel E: With Controls for Rank, Deployment History, Current Deployment Status, and Exposure to Casualties
                                                                         Estimated VSL ($ M)                     0.715          0.645          0.674          0.779          0.679
                                                                  65




                                                                         VSL CI                              [0.337, 1.093] [0.277, 1.013] [0.304, 1.044] [0.384, 1.174] [0.305, 1.053]
                                                                       Cohort FE, MOS FE, Term-length FE             X              X             X
                                                                       Deployment Probability Control                               X             X
                                                                       Individual Controls                                                        X              X              X
                                                                       MOS x Cohort x Term FE                                                                    X              X
                                                                       County Unemployment Rate                                                                                 X

                                                                        Notes: This table reports implied VSL estimates derived from binary logit estimates of equation 3 where the
                                                                       outcome is an indicator for reenlisting. Panel A reiterates the main VSL results from Table 3. Panel B adds rank
                                                                       fixed effects to each specification, where rank is determined when a soldier enters the reenlistment window (360
                                                                       days before initial ETS date). Panel C adds rank fixed effects and an indicator for a soldier having deployed to a
                                                                       combat zone prior to entering the reenlistment window. Panel D adds rank fixed effects, the individual deployment
                                                                       history indicator, and an additional indicator for being deployed when the soldier enters the reenlistment window.
                                                                       Panel E includes the additional controls from Panel D plus an indicator for having been exposed to casualties,
                                                                       which we define as being assigned to the same company where at least one other soldier was wounded or killed in
                                                                       action prior to entering the reenlistment window. The notes for Table 3 contain additional details. VSL 95 percent
                                                                       confidence intervals, reported in brackets, are derived by applying the delta method to standard errors clustered
                                                                       on MOS. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                              Table A7: Binary Logit Estimates for Subsamples

                                                (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)
Panel A: Men in Non-Combat Occupations (N=189,270)
  Bonus Offer                        0.0054***   0.0053***                 0.0056***      0.0053***      0.0053***
  (1000s of $ 2019)                   (0.0008)     (0.0008)                 (0.0008)       (0.0010)       (0.0010)
   Mortality Hazard                          -0.0046***       -0.0054***   -0.0041**       -0.0039**     -0.0036**
   (per 1000 soldiers)                        (0.0017)         (0.0019)     (0.0018)        (0.0018)      (0.0018)
   Estimated VSL ($ M)                          0.853          1.012          0.738          0.738          0.670
   VSL CI                                  [0.162, 1.545] [0.179, 1.845] [0.008, 1.468] [0.059, 1.416] [-0.002, 1.342]
   Log Likelihood                             -127,074       -127,063       -124,931       -121,076       -121,059
Panel B: Men in Combat Occupations (N=168,943)
  Bonus Offer                        0.0029***                0.0029***    0.0033***      0.0029***      0.0030***
  (1000s of $ 2019)                   (0.0006)                 (0.0006)     (0.0006)       (0.0007)       (0.0007)
   Mortality Hazard                          -0.0015**        -0.0013**    -0.0015**     -0.0016***      -0.0013***
   (per 1000 soldiers)                        (0.0007)         (0.0006)     (0.0007)      (0.0005)        (0.0005)
   Estimated VSL ($ M)                          0.530          0.438          0.451          0.544          0.449
   VSL CI                                  [0.210, 0.849] [0.146, 0.731] [0.168, 0.734] [0.305, 0.784] [0.211, 0.686]
   Log Likelihood                             -112,945       -112,943       -111,443       -110,085       -110,074
Panel C: Women (N=71,162)
  Bonus Offer                                0.0065***        0.0065***    0.0067***      0.0081***      0.0081***
  (1000s of $ 2019)                           (0.0006)         (0.0006)     (0.0006)       (0.0006)       (0.0006)
   Mortality Hazard                          -0.0083***       -0.0083***   -0.0074**     -0.0116***      -0.0115***
   (per 1000 soldiers)                        (0.0030)         (0.0031)     (0.0030)      (0.0033)        (0.0033)
   Estimated VSL ($ M)                          1.261          1.274          1.104          1.435          1.415
   VSL CI                                  [0.461, 2.060] [0.440, 2.109] [0.260, 1.948] [0.689, 2.182] [0.677, 2.154]
   Log Likelihood                              -46,431        -46,431        -45,549        -43,629        -43,628
Tests for Equality of Estimates (p-value): Men in Non-Combat Occs vs. Men in Combat Occs
  Bonus Offer                               0.015       0.018         0.017       0.038                     0.037
  Hazard                                    0.090       0.038         0.159       0.204                     0.214
  VSL                                       0.354       0.145         0.432       0.585                     0.526
Tests for Equality of Estimates (p-value): Men in Non-Combat Occs vs. Women
  Bonus Offer                               0.157       0.142         0.171                  0.008          0.009
  Hazard                                    0.141       0.225         0.199                  0.042          0.034
  VSL                                       0.304       0.533         0.373                  0.183          0.149
Tests for Equality of Estimates (p-value): Men in Combat Occs vs. Women
  Bonus Offer                               0.000       0.000        0.000                   0.000          0.000
  Hazard                                    0.026       0.023        0.055                   0.003          0.002
  VSL                                       0.104       0.077        0.152                   0.059          0.038
Cohort FE, MOS FE, Term-length FE                X                X            X
Deployment Probability                                            X            X              X              X
Individual Controls                                                            X              X              X
MOS x Cohort x Term FE                                                                        X              X
County Unemployment Rate                                                                                     X
 Notes: This table reports average marginal effects from binary logit estimates of equation (3) for key subsamples.
All variables and estimating equations are identical to those used to produce estimates in columns (1) - (5) of Table
3. Implied VSL estimates are derived from logit coefficient estimates (not reported). Standard errors clustered on
MOS are reported in parentheses. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                         66

                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                      Table A8: Random Coefficient Results

                       Full Sample Men, Non-Combat Men, Combat             Women
                            (1)          (2)            (3)                 (4)
Bonus Offer             0.0189***        0.0246***         0.0106***      0.0272***
(1000s of $ 2019)        (0.0005)         (0.0015)          (0.0016)       (0.0016)
Mortality Hazard        -0.0145***       -0.0187***       -0.0063***      -0.0417***
(per 1000 soldiers)      (0.0018)         (0.0052)         (0.0011)        (0.0049)
Sigma Bonus             0.0717***        0.0869***         0.0402***      0.0729***
                         (0.0157)         (0.0260)          (0.0140)       (0.0216)
Sigma Hazard            0.0733***        0.0131***         0.0346***      0.0263***
                         (0.021)          (0.004)           (0.011)        (0.008)
VSL ($ M)                  0.769            0.758            0.599          1.530
VSL CI                 [0.571, 0.967]   [0.394, 1.122]   [0.379, 0.818] [1.102, 1.958]
Observations             429,375          189,270           168,943         71,162

 Notes: This table reports estimates from a binary logit random coefficients model
that allows for unobservable heterogeneity in soldiers' responses to the bonus and
mortality rate by assuming these parameters are distributed normally. The outcome
is an indicator for whether a soldier reenlisted. All regressions include entry cohort
fixed effects, initial enlistment term-length fixed effects, MOS fixed effects, and the
deployment probability control, corresponding to the column (2) specification from
Tables 3 and 3. Bootstrap standard errors, estimated from 600 draws with replace-
ment, are reported in parentheses. VSL 95 percent confidence intervals, reported
in brackets, are derived by applying the delta method to bonus and mortality rate
standard errors. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.




                                          67

          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
                                                                            Table A9: Implied VSLs from B-spline Estimates of the Reenlistment Response to Bonus Offers and Mortality Rates

                                                                                                                                              Mortality Hazard Rate (per 1,000 soldiers)
                                                                                                                           1                3            5             8                16                        24
                                                                       Full Sample                            0.943          1.418          0.627            1.306           -0.534           -0.205
                                                                       (w/o Convexity, w/o Monotonicity) [-0.029, 1.547] [0.392, 1.311] [0.652, 9.257] [-5.415, 32.254] [-12.391, 0.955] [-9.375, 3.417]
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413




                                                                       Full Sample                            1.070          0.768          2.189          1.864                                0.116            2.011
                                                                       (w/o Convexity, with Monotonicity) [0.460, 1.508] [0.589, 0.964] [1.228, 2.940] [1.365, 3.300]                       [0.054, 0.811]   [0.266, 4.667]
                                                                       Full Sample                             0.482          0.594          0.672          0.792                               1.440           4.685
                                                                       (with Convexity, with Monotonicity) [0.253, 0.723] [0.540, 0.722] [0.590, 0.938] [0.644, 1.021]                      [1.100, 1.433] [3.103, 14.200]
                                                                        Notes: This table reports implied VSL estimates in millions of 2019 USD for the full sample at the mortality hazard rates indicated in the column
                                                                       headings. VSL estimates are the slopes of the B-spline-derived bid curves in Figure 3. The first row reports estimated VSLs and confidence intervals
                                                                       on the full sample when we impose neither monotonicity nor convexity. The next row reports estimated VSLs and confidence intervals when we impose
                                                                       monotonicity but not convexity. The last row reports estimated VSLs and confidence intervals when we impose both monotonicity and convexity. We
                                                                  68




                                                                       use the method described in Chernozhukov and Hong (2003) to construct the confidence interval (see the notes for Figure 3).


                                                                                                       Table A10: Menu of Reenlistment Options for Truck Driver in July 2007

                                                                                                                                                            Reenlistment Term (Years)
                                                                                                Option Occupation              Home Post Location         2    3      4      5      6
                                                                                                   1     No Change             Army Chooses               $0   $5,936   $7,914   $9,893   $10,000
                                                                                                   2     No Change             Stay at Current Post      $0    $5,936   $7,914   $9,893   $10,000
                                                                                                   3     New Occupation        Army Chooses              n/a    n/a      n/a      n/a       n/a
                                                                                                   4     No Change             Pick Overseas Post        n/a   $5,936   $7,914   $9,893   $10,000
                                                                                                   5     No Change             Pick Post inside U.S.     n/a   $5,936   $7,914   $9,893   $10,000
                                                                                                Notes: This table shows the example of the bonus offer slate for a Motor Transport Operator
                                                                                               (military occupational specialty 88M) with the rank of Specialist (E4) and with four years of service
                                                                                               when entering the reenlistment window in July 2007. Available choices of home post location in
                                                                                               Options 4 and 5 depend on the needs of the Army.
                   Table A11: Logit Estimates in High vs. Low Density MOSs

                                     MOS-level inside hazard                      CMF-level inside hazard

                                          High-Density Low-Density          High-Density Low-Density
                              All MOSs       MOSs        MOSs      All MOSs    MOSs        MOSs
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)          (6)
Panel A: Full Sample
  Bonus Offer                  0.019***     0.020***            0.019***   0.019***       0.020***       0.019***
  (1000s of $ 2019)             (0.003)      (0.004)             (0.002)    (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.002)
   Mortality Hazard           -0.007***     -0.010***            -0.002    -0.014***     -0.013***      -0.028***
   (per 1000 soldiers)         (0.002)       (0.003)            (0.004)     (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.008)
   Estimated VSL ($ M)     0.39                0.52              0.10         0.71           0.65           1.41
   VSL CI              [0.14, 0.63]        [0.22, 0.81]     [-0.29, 0.49] [0.50, 0.92]   [0.40, 0.90]   [0.60, 2.22]
   Observations          429,324             277,898           151,426      429,341        277,898        151,443
Panel B: Men in Non-Combat Occupations
  Bonus Offer          0.022***     0.030***                    0.015***   0.022***       0.030***       0.016***
  (1000s of $ 2019)     (0.003)      (0.006)                     (0.003)    (0.004)        (0.006)        (0.003)
   Mortality Hazard             -0.006      -0.027***            -0.005     -0.026*         -0.028       -0.028**
   (per 1000 soldiers)         (0.005)       (0.010)            (0.005)     (0.014)        (0.030)        (0.012)
   Estimated VSL ($ M)      0.30               0.88              0.31         1.18         0.92             1.76
   VSL CI              [-0.15, 0.75]       [0.15, 1.61]     [-0.35, 0.96] [0.06, 2.31] [-0.81, 2.64]    [0.15, 3.38]
   Observations           189,238            104,054           85,182       189,253       104,054          85,197
Panel C: Men in Combat Occupations
  Bonus Offer           0.012***            0.009***            0.022***   0.012***       0.009***       0.022***
  (1000s of $ 2019)      (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.003)    (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.003)
   Mortality Hazard            -0.004*        -0.002             0.000     -0.008**         -0.005       -0.025**
   (per 1000 soldiers)         (0.002)       (0.003)            (0.004)     (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.010)
   Estimated VSL ($ M)     0.33                 0.25            -0.02         0.66          0.56            1.17
   VSL CI              [0.07, 0.59]        [-0.26, 0.75]    [-0.35, 0.32] [0.32, 1.00] [-0.05, 1.16]    [0.35, 1.98]
   Observations          168,940              131,040          37,899       168,940       131,040          37,899
Panel D: Women
  Bonus Offer                  0.028***     0.030***            0.027***   0.028***       0.030***       0.027***
  (1000s of $ 2019)             (0.002)      (0.004)             (0.003)    (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)
   Mortality Hazard             -0.004       -0.038*             0.005     -0.039***      -0.044**       -0.036**
   (per 1000 soldiers)         (0.007)       (0.021)            (0.007)     (0.012)        (0.022)        (0.016)
   Estimated VSL ($ M)      0.14               1.27             -0.19         1.40           1.50           1.33
   VSL CI              [-0.32, 0.61]       [0.08, 2.46]     [-0.67, 0.30] [0.59, 2.20]   [0.13, 2.86]   [0.17, 2.50]
   Observations           71,141              42,804           28,337        71,143         42,804         28,339
 Notes: This table reports binary logit coefficients from estimates of equation (3) for the samples identified
in each panel heading. The outcome is an indicator for whether a soldier reenlisted. Low-density MOSs are
occupations with an average annual strength below 5,000 soldiers. All estimates are produced from regressions
of the column (2) specification from Tables 3 and 3, which include entry cohort fixed effects, term-length
fixed effects, MOS fixed effects, and the deployment probability control. Standard errors clustered on MOS
are reported in parentheses. ***,**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                           69

                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3877413
