                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              A SEARCH AND LEARNING MODEL OF EXPORT DYNAMICS

                                         Jonathan Eaton
                                         Marcela Eslava
                                          David Jinkins
                                           C. J. Krizan
                                        James R. Tybout

                                       Working Paper 29100
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29100


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




We gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation (Grant SES-0922358),
the United States Census Bureau, and Banco de la Republica de Colombia. We also thank Monica
Hernandez, Gustavo Caballero, and Camilo Acosta for excellent research assistance, as well as
Enrique Montes for expert data advice. Finally we are grateful to the many seminar and
conference participants who have commented on earlier drafts. This paper was written in part by
Census Bureau staff. It has undergone a more limited review than official Census Bureau
publications. All results were reviewed to ensure confidentiality. Any views, findings and
opinions in the paper reflect the views of the authors and do not reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation, the U.S. Census Bureau, the U.S. Department of Labor, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jonathan Eaton, Marcela Eslava, David Jinkins, C. J. Krizan, and James R. Tybout.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Search and Learning Model of Export Dynamics
Jonathan Eaton, Marcela Eslava, David Jinkins, C. J. Krizan, and James R. Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 29100
July 2021
JEL No. F12,F14

                                           ABSTRACT

Exporting abroad is much harder than selling at home, and overcoming hurdles to exporting takes
time. Our goal is to identify specific barriers to exporting and to measure their importance. We
develop a model of firm-level export dynamics that features costly customer search, network
effects in finding buyers, and learning about product appeal. Fitting the model to customs records
of U.S. imports of manufactures from Colombia we replicate patterns of exporter maturation. A
potentially valuable intangible asset of a firm is its customer base and knowledge of a market.
Our model delivers some striking estimates of what such assets are worth. Averaging across
active exporters, the loss from total market amnesia (losing its current U.S. customer base along
with its accumulated knowledge of product appeal) is US$ 3.4 million, about 34 percent of the
value of exporting overall. About half is the loss of future sales to existing customers while the
rest is the cost of relearning its appeal in the market and reestablishing visibility as an exporter.
As finding buyers takes time, the 5-year response of total export sales to an exchange rate shock
exceeds the 1-year response by about 40 percent, with the 1-year response reflecting mostly sales
per exporter-importer match and the 5-year response, reflecting the number of matches almost as
much as sales per match.

Jonathan Eaton                                    C. J. Krizan
Department of Economics                           Center for Economic Studies
Pennsylvania State University                     U.S. Census Bureau
303 Kern Graduate Building                        4600 Silver Hill Road
University Park, PA 16801                         Washington, DC 20233
and NBER                                          c.j.krizan@fastmail.com
jxe22@psu.edu
                                                  James R. Tybout
Marcela Eslava                                    Department of Economics
Department of Economics                           Penn State University
Universidad de los Andes                          517 Kern Graduate Building
Calle 19A # 1-37 Este. Bloque W of. 810           University Park, PA 16802
Bogotá, Colombia                                  and NBER
meslava@uniandes.edu.co                           jtybout@psu.edu

David Jinkins
Copenhagen Business School
david.jinkins@gmail.com
1    Introduction
Quantitative models of global economic activity rely on trade costs to explain why trade flows
between countries constitute only a fraction of total production. But aggregate data provide
little insight into what these costs are. A recent literature has turned to firm-level evidence
to dig deeper into the nature of barriers to trade and how they influence the evolution of
trade flows.
     Our contribution here uses customs records of Colombian manufacturing exports to the
U.S. market for the period 1992-2009 to shed light on the specific nature of trade costs. These
data allow us to identify individual buyers and sellers and their interactions over time. We
can observe, for example, Colombian firms entering into exporting in any given year, and see
how their relationships with their U.S. buyers evolve. We can thus connect aggregate trade
flows to the evolution of the trade patterns of individual cohorts of Colombian exporters.
The data reveal, for example, how the dynamics of individual firm entry jibe with aggregate
magnitudes.
     The data reveal a rich set of patterns. Most exporters abandon the foreign market after a
single sale, while a few remain to accumulate a broad network of buyers. Sellers' relationships
with individual buyers are also highly heterogeneous, both in terms of their longevity and
frequency and size of sales. Finally, the frequency and success rates of firms' new matches
vary systematically with their characteristics and histories.
     The model: To identify and quantify specific trade barriers, we develop a dynamic
model of buyer-seller relationships consistent with these patterns. A basic, quite standard,
feature of the model is that, to connect with a possible buyer, a firm needs to engage in
costly search. The more it spends on searching, the sooner, on average, it connects with a
potential client.
     We model a firm's relationships with its buyers in continuous time. The expected value
of a relationship with a particular client depends on the frequency and size of the buyer's
purchases, and the seller's willingness to invest in maintaining the relationship. The rela-
tionship may end either exogenously or because the seller deems expected future sales to the
customer not worth further investment. The model can thus explain why some relationships
end precipitously while others expire after a stretch of dwindling sales. The reward to search
depends on both the expected value of a successful relationship once established and the
probability of establishing one in the first place. The customs records allow us to quantify
both the value of an ongoing relationship and a firm's ability to find new ones.
     A firm enters a foreign market knowing its own efficiency but imperfectly informed about
its product's popularity there. When the firm encounters a potential client, the client may
or may not want to buy from the firm, informing the seller about its product's popularity


                                              1
in the market. A string of successes signals a high level of buyer enthusiasm, encouraging
the firm to search more intensely for new buyers, while a series of rejections indicates lack
of buyer interest, leading the firm to reduce its search effort or quit the market altogether.
    We model this "learning" channel as follows: A firm's popularity in a market is simply
the probability that a potential buyer there demands its product. The firm starts out
with a belief about this prior that's distributed beta, the conjugate prior of the binomial
distribution. As the firm accumulates successes and failures in its encounters with potential
clients it updates its beliefs and the beta distribution converges to the binomial with the
true probability.
    To this learning channel we also add a "visibility" channel. As an exporter accumulates
clients, its increased visibility may reduce the cost of finding added buyers.1
    Our model thus incorporates three types of frictions, which we quantify individually, that
drive the progress of an exporter in a foreign market: searching for buyers, learning about
product appeal, and establishing visibility. The model replicates patterns in the customs
data regarding, for example, the distribution of buyers across firms and transitions in the
number of buyers for an individual firm.
    Our model relates the heterogeneity in firms' outcomes to their known fundamental
efficiency, as in standard models, but also to the appeal of their product in the export
market, which they learn only over time. Luck also plays a role in a firm's success: a
few successful matches early on establish visibility and encourage the firm to search more
intensely.
    Quantifying the model, we find that standard search frictions constitute the greatest cost
to market penetration, with learning and establishing visibility playing only a modest role.
But learning and visibility are important to understanding the behavior of new exporters.
Their initial contribution to aggregate exports is small, but new exporters play a fundamental
role in driving the overall dynamics of aggregate exports.
    The various trade frictions in our model have implications for how aggregate exports
respond to exchange rate shocks. The response to a permanent change in the exchange rate,
for example, is slower than it is in models in the literature without learning.
    Relationship to the literature: The body of work addressing firm dynamics in open
economies is now large. Alessandria et al. (2020) provide a recent review. To suggest how
our paper fits in, we classify existing work into partial and general equilibrium analysis.
    The partial equilibrium literature treats individual firms' as single agents in isolation, with
wages, exchange rates, and other market-wide variables taken as exogenous. The payoff is
   1
     Additional clients may be also be harder to reach, so that having more existing customers means a
higher cost of adding new ones. Our model allows for either possibility, but since we find that firms with
more clients seem to have an easier time adding new ones, we use the term "visibility."


                                                    2
greater flexibility to explore a broad set of features of exporting firms' behavior. Particular
features that the literature has addressed include investments in foreign customer accumu-
lation (Ruhl and Willis, 2017, Fitzgerald et al., 2019, Rodrigue and Tan, 2019, and Pivetau,
forthcoming), learning (Albornoz et al., 2012; Schmeiser, 2012; Nguyen, 2012; Aeberhardt
et al., 2014; Timoshenko, 2015; Cebreros, 2016; Araujo et al., 2016; Ruhl and Willis, 2017;
Arkolakis, et al., 2018; Li, 2018; Berman et al., 2019), and shipment size and timing (Kropf
and Saure, 2014; Hornok and Koren, 2015; Bekes et al, 2017).
    We follow in this single-agent tradition, adding to the literature in three respects. First,
we combine the features enumerated above into an integrated framework in order to quantify
their individual contributions. Second, we use our model to impute the the contribution of a
foreign market to firm value, isolating the role of firms' accumulated knowledge and market
visibility. Finally, by incorporating learning by new exporters, we quantify the role of luck
(early successes or failures) in establishing new exporters in a foreign market.
    In the market equilibrium literature, aggregates respond to the collective behavior of
individual firms. Examples include Alessandria and Choi (2007, 2014, 2019), Ruhl (2008),
Atkeson and Burstein (2010), Drozd and Nozal (2012), Burstein and Melitz (2013), Alessan-
dria et al. (2014), Impullitti et al. (2013), Arkolakis (2015), Eaton e al. (2016), Handley
and Limao (2017), and Fajgelbaum (2020).2 Endogenizing market-wide variables in this
literature comes at the cost of sacrificing some of the richness in single-agent models.
    While our analysis is partial equilibrium, we connect to the market-equilibrium literature
by simulating transition paths for aggregate exports under alternative assumptions about
the frictions exporters face. We can thus quantify the role of search, learning, and visibility
in shaping short and long-run responses to real exchange rate shocks, distinguishing the ex-
tensive margin of new buyer-seller encounters, some of which evolve into successful matches,
and the intensive margin among existing matches.3


2        Firm-Level Trade: Transaction-Level Evidence
Previous work has established a robust set of facts about the export behavior of firms.4 We
design our model to capture these facts as revealed in our data on Colombian shipments to
the United States. Before describing these patterns we first describe the data themselves.

    2
     Blum et al. (2019) analyze shipment frequency and size in a market equilibrium model, but do not
relate them to export dynamics.
    3
        Piveteau (forthcoming) performs a related exercise.
    4
     Early contributions include Brooks (2006), Besedes (2008), and Eaton et al. (2008). Bernard et al.
(2017), Bernard and Moxnes (2018), and Alessandria et al. (2020) reference and discuss many of the more
recent studies.


                                                       3
2.1       Data
We base our analysis on comprehensive data from the U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal
Foreign Trade Transactions Database (LFTTD), which covers all commercial shipments into
and out of the United States, extracting shipments from Colombia during 1992-2009. Each
transaction record includes a date, the US dollar value of the product shipped, a 6-digit
harmonized system product code, a quantity index, and, critically, an ID for both seller and
buyer.
    These IDs allow us to identify the formation and dissolution of business relationships
("matches") between an individual buyer in the U.S. and seller in Colombia. To identify the
U.S. importer we use the buyer's Employment Identification Number (EIN).5 To identify the
Colombian exporter we used the manufacturer's identification code.6
    We limit ourselves to transactions between non-affiliated trade partners and consider only
imports of manufactures.7 Our final data set, spanning the years 1992-2009, contains 26,625
unique Colombian exporters, 12,921 unique U.S. importers, and 42,767 unique trading pairs.
Value data have been deflated to 1992 prices using the U.S. CPI.8
    In addition to U.S. customs records, we use establishment-level survey data from Colom-
bia's national statistics agency, Departmento Administrativo Nacional de Estadistica (DANE).
These data provide annual information on the total sales, exports, and other characteris-
tics of all Colombian manufacturing plants with at least 10 workers. We use these data to
characterize the size distribution of Colombian plants, the fraction of Colombian plants that
export, and, among exporting plants, the relationship between exports and domestic sales.9
   5
     There are two ways to track U.S. importers in the LFTTD: EINs and the firm identifiers in the Lon-
gitudinal Business Database ("alphas"). Though an EIN does not necessarily identify a complete firm, it is
unique to a firm, and there is an EIN associated with every import transaction. An alpha maps to an entire
firm, but the match rate between trade transactions and alphas is only about 80 percent (Bernard, Jensen,
and Schott, 2009). We use EIN's to maximize coverage.
   6
     This variable is based on Block 13 of CBP form 7501, the import declaration form. Customs brokers
are required to input the data. This field is an amalgamation of the manufacturer's country, company name,
street address, and city. Anecdotal information from customs brokers indicates that commonly used software
constructs the code automatically from the name and address information entered in other fields. So this
variable is sensitive to differences in how exporters' names and addresses are recorded as they pass through
customs, and shipments from the same exporter can appear to originate from distinct Colombian firms. To
gauge the importance of this problem, we've conducted various checks on the matches based on this variable.
Appendix B explains these checks.
   7
    We thus exclude oil and coffee, which constitute the bulk of Colombian exports to the U.S. The National
Federation of Coffee Growers centralizes coffee exports. A few players also dominate oil exports.
     8
       Because of disclosure restrictions, as well as our exclusion of non-manufactures and trade between
affiliated parties, we cover only a fraction of the total value of Colombian exports to the U.S. Table 18
in Appendix B compares patterns in our sample to patterns in aggregates from both U.S. and Colombian
official sources.
   9
       Since these data have been used widely in other studies, we don't provide further description here.


                                                       4
                       Table 1: Average aggregates by cohort age

                   Cohort age    Exporters    Total Exports     Average Exports
                   1 year        1            1                 1
                   2 years       0.29         1.11              3.77
                   3 years       0.18         0.93              5.03
                   4 years       0.14         0.67              4.66
                   5 years       0.12         0.63              5.18
                   6 years       0.10         0.51              4.99
                   7 years       0.08         0.50              5.72
                   8 years       0.08         0.45              5.91
                   9 years       0.07         0.39              5.58
                   10 years      0.06         0.40              6.58

Notes: Based on LFTTD customs records, U.S. imports of manufactured goods from Colombia,
1992-2009. Figures for cohorts aged 2-10 are relative to the corresponding figure for one-year-old
cohorts.

   We now turn to some key patterns in the data that we seek to capture in our modeling
and estimation.


2.2     Cohort maturation
Following Brooks (2006), Table 1 reports average patterns of maturation across cohorts of
Colombian exporters of manufactured goods to the United States. Since maturation patterns
vary little across individual cohorts, we've averaged across the seven cohorts entering each
year between 1993 and 1999. We base the figures in the table on U.S. customs records from
1992 through 2009.
    The second row of the Table implies that, on average, only 29 percent of the firms that
entered initially (year one) continue exporting the next year (column 1), yet these survivors
generated 11 percent more export revenue in year two than the entire cohort did in year one
(column 2), because sales per survivor were 3.77 times as large in year two as sales per cohort
member in year one (column 3). Subsequent rows apply to subsequent years of exporting by
members of that cohort, all relative to the cohort's entry year.10
    Column 1 of Table 1 shows the rate of decline in cohort membership is especially high
between the first and second year, with more than 70 percent of firms dropping out. But
conditional on making it to the second year, the survival probability is much higher, with
an attrition rate around 40 percent the second year, with subsequent attrition lower still.
Firms that were exporting to the United States in 1992 account for fewer than five percent
  10
    Appendix tables A.1-A.3 provide a breakdown of the numbers appearing in Table 1. Similar tables for
Colombian exports of all goods and to all destinations appear in Eaton, et al. (2008).


                                                  5
of the firms exporting to the United States towards the end of the sample.
    Column 2 shows that the rapid initial decline in cohort exporters is not accompanied by
a similar collapse in total cohort sales. The relative stability of total sales means that sales
per firm are growing substantially.


2.3     Patterns of buyer-seller matches
We now characterize buyer-seller matches during 1992-2009.

2.3.1    Monogamous and polygamous matches

The number of Colombian exporters in our sample grew at roughly 2 percent per year, from
2,232 in 1992 to 3,300 in 2009, while the number of U.S. importing firms grew by 3 percent
per year, from 1,190 to 2,079 (Appendix A, Table 17). The number of Colombian exporter-
U.S. importer pairs (representing at least one transaction between them in a year) also grew
at an annual rate of 2 percent. Roughly 80 percent of matches are monogamous in the sense
that the buyer deals with only one Colombian exporter and the exporter ships to only one
buyer in the United States in a given year. However, since the remainder of the matches are
polygamous, the average Colombian exporter sold to around 1.3 U.S. firms per year while the
average U.S. buyer bought from around 2.3 Colombian firms per year. Both figures declined
slightly over the period.

2.3.2    Transition probabilities

Like sellers' exporting stints (Table 1), most buyer-seller matches are short-lived. Even
among those matches involving more than one shipment, the overall year-to-year death rate
is roughly 40 percent, as we show later. There is a great deal of flux in an exporter's portfolio
of clients.
    Table 2 reports the probability with which a Colombian exporter (with the number of
clients in the first column) transitions to the indicated number of clients (along the rest
of the corresponding row) the following year. We classify a firm that stops exporting but
re-appears as an exporter sometime later in our sample period as "dormant", in contrast
with a firm that doesn't appear again in our sample, which we classify as "out". We treat
the pool of potential entrants as firms that ever appear as exporters in our sample.
    Among first-time exporters, roughly 93 percent sell to only one firm in their first year.11
Of these, 62 percent don't export the next year, while only 6 percent go on to establish a
larger number of relationships. For firms with 3 relationships in a year, 12 percent enter into
  11
       Many of these matches involve a single shipment. As we will show later, the overall match success rate
(i.e., shipping to that buyer again) is roughly 41 percent.


                                                     6
a larger number the next year, but 67 percent lose clients. Firms starting with other client
counts also, on average, move to a smaller number the following year. Hence, in addition
to an enormous amount of churning among smaller exporters, we see a general tendency for
firms to lose clients on net from one year to the next.

2.3.3   Ergodic degree distribution

What does this pattern of entry and growth imply about the ergodic distribution of rela-
tionships? The first row of Table 3 gives the ergodic distribution implied by the transition
matrix in Table 2 under the assumption that the number of new entrants equals the number
that exit.
    The second row of Table 3 gives the corresponding actual distribution (averaged over
1992-2009). The ergodic and actual distributions are very close, suggesting that over our
period the transition process has been quite stationary. Both distributions are very nearly
Pareto, reflecting the coexistence of many small scale exporters with a few "super-exporters."

2.3.4   Match maturation

A match is more likely to survive into the following year the larger sales in the initial year.
Table 4 sorts matches into quartiles according to first-year sales, reporting year-to-year
separation rates. In addition to the very low overall survival rates, two patterns stand out.
First, the higher the quartile of initial sales, the lower the annual separation rate for the
next four years. Second, survival probabilities rise year after year across the four quartiles.
     Figure 1 shows average annual sales per match, broken down by initial sales quartile.
The table further distinguishes matches according to their total life span: less than one year
(life=0), 1 to 2 years (life=1), and so forth. For each cluster of bars, the left-most bar
corresponds to sales in the initial year of the match, the next bar corresponds to sales during
the second, and so forth.
     The first message is that initial sales are a good predictor of sales in subsequent years,
conditioning on survival. Annual sales in later years rise monotonically with sales in the
first year across quartiles. (Note the different scales of the vertical axes in different panels
of Figure 1.) Second, sales tend to jump from the first to the second year, in large part
because observations on a match's first year correspond to less than a full calendar year.
(An analogous effect is at work in the final year of a match's life.) Looking at complete-year
observations reveals a tendency for annual sales to grow among matches that start small
and survive, but no such tendency among matches that start in the largest quartile. Finally,
looking across matches with different life spans, those that survive more years tend to have
higher sales in all (full) years than matches that fail relatively quickly. This pattern is robust


                                                7
                Table 2: Transition Probabilities, Number of Clients


     t \t+1        Out    Dormant             1               2          3         4         5     6-10    11+

     Out              .              .     0.932     0.055        0.009       0.002 0.001 0.001 0.000
     Dormant          .              .     0.876     0.100        0.015       0.008     .     . 0.000
     1            0.539          0.080     0.321     0.048        0.010       0.002     . 0.001     .
     2            0.194          0.077     0.375     0.241            .       0.024 0.009 0.004     .
     3            0.090          0.042     0.220     0.271        0.210       0.092     . 0.027     .
     4            0.059              .     0.129     0.216        0.215       0.184 0.083 0.095     .
     5                .              .     0.095     0.184        0.181       0.181 0.126 0.178     .
     6-10             .              .     0.039     0.073        0.089       0.123 0.157 0.419 0.073
     11+              .          0.000     0.000     0.000            .           .     . 0.432 0.526

Notes: Based on LFTTD customs records, U.S. imports of manufactured goods from Colombia,
1992-2009. Figures are cross-year averages of annual transition rates. Confidentiality restrictions
prevent us from reporting numbers for cells that are too sparsely populated.




            Table 3: Ergodic Client Distribution Implied by Transitions


                                         1          2             3          4          5   6-10     11+

            Erg Distribution       0.792     0.112        0.031       0.016       0.009     0.022 0.016
            Data                   0.778     0.116        0.043       0.021       0.011         .     .
Notes: Based on transition probabilities reported in Table 2




           Table 4: Separation Rates, by Age of Match and Initial Sales


                                  1 year     2 years          3 years        4 years    5+ years

                  Quartile   1      82.9           63.2           57.3           55.0        49.7
                  Quartile   2      75.6           58.4           49.4           46.8        43.7
                  Quartile   3      67.7           52.1           44.6           40.8        37.6
                  Quartile   4      52.1           44.5           40.3           39.2        36.7

Notes: Based on LFTTD customs records, U.S. imports of manufactured goods from Colombia,
1992-2009.



                                                          8
        Figure 1: Average annual sales per match, by initial size quartile




Notes: Based on LFTTD customs records for manufactured goods imported from Colombia, 1992-
2009.



across matches in the different quartiles of initial sales.




3     A Model of Exporting at the Transactions Level
Reflecting the data discussed in the previous section, our primary focus is understanding
the dynamics of buyer-seller relationships between exporters from one country (in our case
Colombia) and importers in a single foreign market (in our case the United States). Hence
the model developed in sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 applies to firms from a single source selling
in a single foreign destination.
    We show in section 3.4 how to extend the model to accommodate multiple foreign des-
tinations. We don't have the data to pursue this extension here, but we are interested in
connecting Colombian firms' activity in the U.S. market and at home. Hence in Section
4.1 we modify the the model developed in sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 to apply to the home


                                                9
market, giving us a two-market model with which to explore Colombian firms' activities in
both markets.
    With a single source and destination, our model provides a means of dissecting the
dynamics of aggregate bilateral exports into, first, the sales of individual exporters and,
then, into exporters' sales to individual clients.
    Our model accounts for the irregular intervals at which buyer-seller relationships form and
disband, and the fact that export shipments vary in size and are discrete events distributed
unevenly through time. Formulating our model in continuous time facilitates capturing these
features and more easily allows agents to update their behavior when their circumstances
change. We treat exogenous random variables as Markov jump processes.
    In presenting the model we first consider the relationship between a seller and an individ-
ual buyer. Having derived the seller's return from a relationship with an individual buyer,
we turn to its learning about the popularity of its product in that market, i.e., the chance
that a potential buyer there likes its product. Finally, we characterize its search for buyers.


3.1     A seller-buyer relationship
A relationship is a sequence of shipments from a seller to a buyer. We start with the seller's
profit from an individual shipment, and then show how the dynamics of these shipments
determine the overall value of the relationship.

3.1.1   Profit from a single shipment

Several features of our model are standard. At any time t seller j can hire workers at a wage
wt in real local currency units, each of whom can produce j units of output, where j is
time-invariant and known by the seller. Hence seller j 's unit cost in local currency is wt /j .
Selling at price pjt in foreign currency unit profit in local currency is

                                        pjt /et - wt /j ,                                    (1)

where et is the exchange rate.
   Goods markets are monopolistically competitive with each producer supplying a unique
product. Once buyer i has matched with seller j, the buyer periodically buys from j . Each
shipment generates revenue:
                                              1-
                                        pjt
                               Xijt =             yijt X t ,                           (2)
                                        Pt
where  > 1 is buyers' elasticity of demand, pjt is the price of seller j 's product, X t is the
average spending level among all potential foreign buyers, Pt is the relevant price index for all


                                               10
competing products in the foreign market, and yijt is a time-varying component of demand
idiosyncratic to the ij relationship.12
    We assume that the seller posts a non-negotiable price, charging the optimal markup
over unit cost:13

                                                        e t wt
                                              pjt =                                                          (3)
                                                       - 1 j
From (1), (2), and (3), the profit for seller j generated by an order from buyer i at time t is:

                                                                     1-
                                          1 Xt    et wt /( - 1)
                                  ijt   =                                 yijt .
                                           et            j Pt
    We can combine all the macroeconomic variables affecting the profit of any seller from
this source selling in this destination, along with constants, as:
                                                                       1-
                                           1 Xt     et wt /( - 1)
                                    xt =                                    ,
                                            et            Pt

where xt is common across all potential buyers in the foreign market. We can then write
(dropping subscripts) the profit from a shipment as:

                                              (x, y ) = x-1 y                                                (4)

   Equation (4) is all we take from our specification of preferences and pricing behavior into
the dynamics that follow. Any set of assumptions that deliver this simple multiplicative
expression for a firm's profit from a shipment would serve us equally well. To facilitate our
numerical implementation below we treat the set of possible values of x and y as discrete.

3.1.2    Relationship dynamics

A match can dissolve for two reasons. First, it can simply end exogenously with a constant
hazard  (due, say, to the demise of the buyer or the buyer's finding a more suitable or cheaper
substitute). Second, after each sale to a particular buyer, the seller evaluates whether it's
worth continuing the relationship. Doing so keeps the possibility of future sales to that buyer

    12
       Since not all buyers necessarily face the same range of goods and hence the same aggregate price index
P , we can treat i-specific components of the price index as P as embodied in yijt .
   13
     Alternative specifications include bilateral bargaining between buyer and seller, as in Eaton et al. (2016),
and pricing rules that recognize a link between current sales volume and future growth in customer base,
as in Fitzgerald et al. (2019) and Piveteau (forthcoming). To keep our model tractable, and in view of
Fitzgerald et al.'s (2019) finding that exporters' prices don't covary with market tenure, we opt for constant
mark-up pricing.


                                                       11
alive, but requires paying a fixed cost F .14
    When deciding whether to maintain a match, the seller knows its own efficiency , the
macro state x, and profit from the current sale,  (x, y ) to the buyer in question. It can
thus infer this buyer's current y and calculate the value of the relationship as:

                               (x, y ) =  (x, y ) + max { (x, y ) - F, 0}

where  (x, y ) is the expected value of continuing a relationship that's currently in state
(x, y ). The seller terminates this relationship if  (x, y ) < F.
    If the seller pays F to keep a match active one of several events will next affect it: with
hazard  the relationship is exogenously dissolved; with hazard b , the buyer will place
                               X
another order; with hazard qxx   , x will jump to some new marketwide state x = x; or, with
          Y
hazard qyy  , y will jump to some new buyer-specific shock y = y .15
    Let r be the random time that elapses until one of these (relationship-specific) events
occurs. Given that x and y are independent Markov jump processes, r is distributed expo-
nentially with parameter b + X           Y
                                  x + y , where


                                               X
                                               x =
                                                               X
                                                              qxx                                            (5)
                                                       x =x


and
                                               Y
                                               y =
                                                               Y
                                                              qyy ,                                          (6)
                                                       y =y

are the hazards of transiting from x to any x = x, and from y to any y = y, respectively.
Then, assuming the seller has a discount factor , the continuation value  (x, y ) solves the
Bellman equation:

                                      1
 (x, y ) = Er e-(+)r                                         X
                                                            qxx  ( x , y ) +           Y
                                                                                      qyy  (x, y ) + b  (x, y )
                                b   + X   Y
                                      x + y          x =x                      y =y

                              1                      X                        Y
           =                                        qxx  (x , y ) +          qyy  (x, y ) + b  (x, y )
                ++        b   + X   Y
                                x + y        x =x                     y =y


   14
      The fixed cost could reflect maintenance of the account, technical support, or client-specific product
adjustments. Colombian producers of construction materials interviewed for a related project (Dom´    inguez
et al, 2013) mentioned that a foreign buyer may request costly adjustments to a product or require special
packaging.
  15
     Since sales in the data are discrete events rather than flows, we model the buyer's purchases accordingly.
We think of the buyer not as making use of the products continually but in discrete spurts. For example,
the buyer might be a producer of a product that it makes in batches. At the completion of each batch it
buys inputs for the next batch.


                                                       12
   Before meeting a new buyer, the seller expects that the buyer will be in state y s with
probability Pr(y s ). The expected pay-off to forming a new match for a type- seller in
market state x is thus:16
                                 ( x ) =    Pr(y s ) (x, y ).
                                                   s

    The term  (x), which is identified by data on match-specific revenue streams, determines
a seller's search intensity.


3.2     Learning about product appeal
A seller searches for buyers in the market anticipating that that some fraction   [0, 1] of
them will be willing to do business with it. Given market state x, an encounter with a willing
buyer generates the expected profit stream worth  (x) just derived, while an encounter with
an unwilling buyer generates nothing then or subsequently.
   Each seller enters the market with an unknown  drawn from the (common knowledge)
beta distribution:
                                          ( +  ) -1
                            b(0 |,  ) =             (1 - ) -1 ,
                                         ()( )
                   
where () = 0 z -1 e-z dz is the gamma function (needed to ensure that the distribution
has the proper limits). Given its , the probability that a random sample of n potential
buyers will yield a seller a interested customers is binomially distributed:

                                                           n a
                                     q [a|n, ] =              (1 - )n-a .
                                                           a

Hence, after meeting n potential buyers, a of whom were interested in its product, a seller's
posterior beliefs about its  are distributed:

                                    p(|a, n)  q [a|n, ] · b(|,  ),

where the factor of proportionality is the inverse of the integral of the right-hand side over the
support of . A firm's expected success rate after a successes in n trials has the convenient
closed-form representation:
                                                       1
                                                                          a+
                          a,n = E [|a, n] =                p(|a, n)d =       .                            (7)
                                                   0                     n++

  16
      In our numerical analysis we take the probabilities Pr(y m ) to be the ergodic distribution of y implied
                            Y
by the transition hazards qyy  . We could assume that the distribution at the time of the first purchase is
different from the ergodic one.


                                                           13
As the beta distribution is the conjugate prior of the binomial, this posterior mean converges
to
                                               a
                                        plim        =
                                               n
as n gets large.
   In our formulation a firm learns something about its demand in a market with each
encounter with a new potential buyer, successful or otherwise. We thus depart from other
models with learning in which there is only zero or one signal per period, depending upon
the firm's market participation (Timoshenko, 2015; Arkolakis et al., 2018; Fitzgerald et al.,
2019). Our formulation creates an extra incentive for new entrants to search intensively,
which we quantify in Section 6 below.


3.3     Searching for buyers
A seller continuously chooses a market-specific hazard s with which she encounters a potential
buyer, incurring the instantaneous flow cost c(s, a), which is increasing and convex in s.17
How c(s, a) varies with the number of successful matches a depends on the relative strength
of different forces. The cost might fall with a as successful matches increase the seller's
visibility with additional potential buyers. The cost might rise if the pool of easy-to-reach
buyers becomes "fished out," as in Arkolakis (2010). We leave it to the data to decide the
direction and magnitude of the effect.
    To derive the return to search, recall that when the foreign market state is x, a type-
seller expects the value of a new successful match to be  (x), and the seller believes the next
encounter will be successful with probability a,n . Hence the expected value of an encounter
is a,n  (x)
    Let s be the random time until the next search event, which could be either an encounter
with a potential buyer or a change in the marketwide state xf . Then the optimal search
intensity s for a type- firm with foreign market search history (a, n) solves the the Bellman




   17
      Interviews conducted with Colombian exporters revealed a variety of activities firms pursue to meet
potential buyers in a foreign market (Dom´ inguez, et al, 2013). Activities included maintaining a foreign sales
office; paying the exports promotion office to organize visits with prospective clients, and sending their sales
representatives to those visits; sending sales representatives abroad to visit potential clients on their own;
attending trade fairs; paying a researcher to search the web for foreign firms that purchase products similar
to their own; paying browsers to ensure that their site appear near the top of a search for their product
type; maintaining a web site in English. Interviewees also reported that activities such as traveling to trade
fairs or translating their websites to English led to relationships with one or two clients every few years.
Establishing a larger network of clients required much more costly activities.


                                                      14
equation:

                                                    s
                                                                    e-s
            V (a, n, x) = max Es -c(s, a)               e-t dt +         ·           X
                                                                                    qxx V, (a, n, x )
                              s                 0                  s + X
                                                                       x     x =x


              + s a,n ( (x) + V (a + 1, n + 1, x) + (1 - a,n )V (a, n + 1, x)


(Recall that X
             x is given by (5).) Taking expectations over s yields:


                                 1                     X
   V (a, n, x) = max                  -c(s, a) +      qxx V, (a, n, x )                                 (8)
                       s      + s + X
                                    x            x =x


                           + s a,n [ (x) + V (a + 1, n + 1, x)] + (1 - a,n )V (a, n + 1, x)


Applying the multiplication rule for differentiation and using expression (8) for V (a, n, x),
the optimal search intensity s satisfies:

   c(s , a)
            = a,n [ (x) + V (a + 1, n + 1, x)] + (1 - a,n )V (a, n + 1, x) - V (a, n, x)                (9)
     s

That is, the marginal cost of search equals the expected benefit of a match a,n  (x) plus
the expected value of the information and visibility it generates.


3.4    Entering multiple markets
So far we've focused on firm entry into a single foreign market. We can accommodate firms'
activity across multiple markets, designating a particular market by m. We treat seller j
from a particular source as having an efficiency j that applies across markets. Prior to
                                                                                                  m
searching in a particular market m, a seller's prior about its product appeal there is j,          0,
                                                                                m
which can vary across markets m, as can the seller's true product appeal j        . We assume that
a seller needs to search independently in each market, and that all learning and visibility
effects are market-specific.
    If, as we assume in our application, that all sellers in the source country begin with the
               m     m
same prior j,   0 = 0 in a particular market m, then the more efficient ones (with a higher j )
will initially search more intensely there. Less efficient firms will search less intensively or not
at all. A feature of our specification is that uncertainty about product appeal might actually
lead more firms to search in a market in hope of finding that their product is particularly
appealing there.
    Some of the firms actively searching will experience mostly failed encounters, lowering

                                                    15
                      m
their belief about j    and discouraging further search. Others, enjoying a string of successes,
                                  m
will revise their belief about j    upward, and look for new customers more intensely. The
model thus delivers the prediction that firms' presence across different markets is positively
correlated (due to j ), but imperfectly so (due to heterogeneity across markets in true
                    m
product appeal j      and what a firm has learned about it in each market).18 How a firm fares
                                                 m
in a market reflects its true product appeal j      only imperfectly. Some firms with strong
product appeal may have had such low efficiency that they never bothered to search in the
first place. Other unlucky ones may have been driven from the market, despite their high
  m
j   , by a series of unsuccessful encounters.


4        Specification for Estimation
To adapt our theoretical framework to the data at hand we make some specific assumptions
about destination markets, search costs, and the stochastic processes that generate exogenous
state variables.


4.1      Destinations
Our principal data are U.S. customs records reporting sales of manufactures by Colombian
firms to unaffiliated U.S. buyers. Hence our source country is Colombia and our foreign
destination is the United States. We also observe total sales by Colombian firms in Colombia
itself. Hence we model relationships between Colombian firms with both their U.S. and
domestic customers. It what follows we indicate magnitudes specific to the foreign (U.S.)
market with m = f and specific to the home (Colombian) market with m = h.
    Colombian firms typically don't export to the United States until they've sold in the home
market for several years. Since our model implies that learning effects would be exhausted
by then, we treat firms as aware of their product appeal h in the home market by the time
they enter our window of reference. Since we treat f and h as uncorrelated, all Colombian
firms enter the U.S. market equally naive about their product appeal there. The information
that's relevant for their decision to embark on searching for buyers in the United States is
their efficiency , which we treat as the same in each market. Hence Colombian firms that
sell in the United States would tend to be larger in Colombia than those that don't, and
firms selling in both markets that are larger in Colombia would tend to be larger in the

    18
     Eaton et al. (2011)'s static model also treats firm efficiency as common across markets but demand
shocks as market-specific. While our dynamic model implies positive correlation across destinations in
the cross-section, since we treat j as time invariant, our model doesn't deliver any ergodic correlation in
sales across countries over time unless we introduce demand shocks y that are temporally correlated across
destinations.


                                                    16
United States. As described below, we also assume that Colombian firms in the sample have
exhausted network effects at home.


4.2     Matches and relationships
To connect our theory with data, we impose a particular interpretation of individual transac-
tions. We treat a firm's first sale to a new buyer as a "match," which becomes a "successful
match" or a "relationship" if and only if the firm sells to this buyer again. For each Colom-
bian firm that ever sells in the U.S. market in our period of observation we can thus keep
track of its number n of encounters with buyers, or "matches", and the number a  n that
succeed.


4.3     Search costs
We generalize Arkolakis's (2010) formulation of search costs to allow for network effects,
specifying the cost of searching with intensity sm in market m as:

                                                      [(1 + sm )]1 - 1
                                cm (sm , am ) = m                        .                               (10)
                                                0
                                                     1 [1 + ln(1 + am )]

Here am is the number of previous successful matches the seller has had in market m, m     0 is a
market-specific cost parameter, while the parameters 1 and  are common across markets.
    Several properties of this function merit note. First, the parameter  governs how the
number of previous successes affects the current cost of search, with  > 0 implying a benefit
(say due to increased visibility) and  < 0 consistent with a "fishing out" effect.19 Second, a
seller who is not searching in a particular market incurs no search cost there: cm (0, am ) = 0.,
while the marginal cost of increasing search at zero is strictly positive. Hence some firms
will not search at all while others may search only minimally. Third, given the cumulative
number of successful matches, am , the marginal cost of search increases with s at a rate
determined by 1 . Finally, since am is the cumulative number of successes in market m,
network effects endure, even after a particular match is severed or while a firm isn't actively
searching.




  19
     To limit the dimensionality of our computational problem, we assume that firms with more than a
buyers have both (i) exhausted their learning effects and (ii) reap no additional network effects from further
matches. We choose a to exceed the observed maximum a for 99 percent of sellers in the U.S. market. Also,
we set a = a for all sellers in their home (Colombian) market.


                                                     17
4.4    Processes for exogenous state variables
Our exogenous state variables are , xh , xf , y h and y f . We normalize their logs to have zero
mean, introducing scalars m in the profit function (4) to accommodate level effects.
    We assume that the distribution of efficiency  across firms is log normal with variance
 ,. We treat the Markov jump processes (xh , y h , xf , y f ) as independent Ehrenfest diffusion
processes, with the idiosyncratic match shocks y f and y h having the same distribution.
We allow the overall market processes xf and xh to have different distributions, however,
to accommodate, among other things, the different effects of exchange rate shocks across
markets.
    We specify an Ehrenfest process for z by discretizing its log into 2g + 1 possible values a
distance  apart, g  I + : z  {-g , -(g - 1), .., 0, .., (g - 1), g }. Given its current
value z the process jumps to an adjacent value z with hazard z according to:
                                                     
                                                               1        ln z
                                                                   1-
                           
                            ln z + 
                                                               2        g
                                                     
                    ln z =  ln z -  with probability           1        ln z   .
                                                               2
                                                                   1+   g
                              other
                                                     
                                                                    0
                                                     

We allow for N X possible values for the market state processes xm , m = f, h, and N Y possible
values for the relationship-specific shocks y . Thus, given a grid size g , the intensity matrices
QX = qij X
             i,j =1,N X
                        and QY = qijY
                                       i,j =1,N Y
                                                  implied by the transition hazards introduced in
section 3.1 are each block-diagonal and characterized by a single parameter, .


5     Estimation
Our estimation proceeds in two stages. We first estimate the processes for the aggregate
market variables xf and xh using data on aggregate spending on manufactures in the United
States and Colombia. We then use indirect inference to infer the remaining parameters.


5.1    Stage 1: estimating observable jump processes
We treat the annual manufacturing expenditure data for the two countries as discrete time
observations of underlying independent Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes of the form:

                                      dz = -µzdt + dW
                    
where µ = z /g ,  = z , and W follows a Weiner process.
   Shimer (2005) shows that if z follows a continuous time Ehrenfest diffusion process, it
asymptotes to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process with mean zero as the fineness of the grid

                                               18
                Table 5: Parameters of Market-wide Demand Processes


                                                      Parameter                 value
                      home macro state jump hazard    xh                        1.200
                      foreign macro state jump hazard xf                        1.215
                      home macro state jump size       xh                       0.003
                      foreign macro state jump size   xf                        0.053

 Notes: Our foreign market size measure is the OECD time series of US GDP in Industry, including
imports and subtracting exports of manufactures. Our home market size measure is real Colombian
expenditures on manufacturing goods, taken from DANE. We translated all of the data used for the
estimation into real 1992 US dollars, deflating nominal US dollars with the consumer price index
available on the US Bureau of Labor Statistic website. We used an official Colombian Peso-US
Dollar exchange rate time series downloaded from the Central Bank of Colombia to translate Peso
values to nominal US Dollar values.

increases.20 We use our aggregate expenditure data to estimate, for m = f, h, the corre-
sponding xm and  xm . Given these estimates we infer xm and xm .
    Table 5 reports the estimates for xm and xm . They imply that xf and xh both jump
1.2 times per year, on average. However, jumps in the U.S. market tend to be much larger,
mainly because they reflect movements in the real exchange rate as well as movements in
dollar-denominated expenditures.


5.2     Stage 2: indirect inference
Our data are relatively uninformative about the rate of time discount  and the demand
elasticity  . Using values that are standard in the literature, we set  = 0.05 and  = 5. Also,
to limit the size of the estimated parameter vector: (i) We set the exogenous match failure
rate to be the observed match failure rate among matches at least 3 years old ( = 0.326);
(ii) We specify the search cost function as quadratic in search intensity (1 = 2); (iii) We
assume that the hazard rate for the match-specific shock is once per quarter (y = 4).21
    All of the remaining parameters we estimate jointly using the transactions data sum-
marized in Section 2.1 above. These parameters include the market size scalars (h , f. ),
the fixed costs of maintaining a match (F h , F f ), the parameters of the product appeal dis-
tributions (, ), the dispersion of the productivity distribution ( ), the jump size for the

   20
      Consider an
                Ehrenfest diffusion process with parameter vector (, g, ). Rewriting the parameter vector
as (/ , g/ ,  ), > 0, the autocorrelation parameter µ and the instantaneous variance parameter  are
invariant to . But as  0, the innovation dW approaches normal.
  21
     While we could in principle have estimated these last three parameters, we found them not well-identified
in our data.


                                                     19
match-specific shocks (y ), the hazard rate for shipments (b ), the network parameter ( ),
                                                              f
and the market-specific cost function scaling parameters (h
                                                          0 , 0 ). We collect these parame-
ters into the vector :

                                                                      f
                          = h , f. , F h , F f , , ,  , y , b , , h
                                                                  0 , 0


    We estimate  using the method of indirect inference (Gouri´    eroux and Monfort, 1996).
For each candidate , we first use the model to simulate the foreign and domestic transactions
of an artificial sample of producers. Then, using these simulated data, we estimate a set of
reduced-form regressions that summarize the relationships we want our model to capture.
Finally, searching the support of , we choose the one that makes the regression coefficients
from simulated data as close as possible to the corresponding regression coefficients from the
sample data. Algebraically, our estimator is

                               ^ = min [m
                                        ¯ - m()] W [m
                                                    ¯ - m()] ,
                                      


where m¯ is a column vector of regression coefficients from sample data, m() is the analogous
vector of regression coefficients from data simulated at , and W is a compatible non-singular
weighting matrix. Setting W -1 = var(m   ¯ - m()) maximizes the efficiency of this estimator,
but any non-singular W yields consistent estimates. We use a block-diagonal version of
var(m¯ - m()), with each block corresponding to the moments from a particular regression.
    Tables 6, 7, and 8 report the coefficients from the data-based regressions (with standard
errors in parentheses below).22 We now describe the individual regressions, our reasoning
in choosing them, and the parameters they help most to identify. We base our discussion
about identification partly on our calculation of Andrews et al.'s (2017) sensitivity matrix,
which we report in full in Appendix C.23
    Search. Equation (i) in Table 6 summarizes the effects of a firm's market experience
on its search intensity (s). Recall that our definition of a match allows us to infer both the
number of matches n of a firm (a sale to a new buyer) and its number of successes a  n (a
sale to a new buyer followed by at least one subsequent sale to that buyer). The dependent
variable is the inverse of the time between firm j 's nth and n + 1st matches, regardless of
   22
      To facilitate comparison between the data-based and simulation-based regressions, where possible and
with no loss of information, we've replaced the intercept of each regression with the mean value of the
dependent variable. Several regressions use real peso values as reported by DANE. We're not confident that
they're strictly comparable to the real dollar units used in U.S. customs records.
  23
     Andrews et al. (2017) propose using the sample analog of the matrix (G W G)-1 G W , where G =
- [m()] /  is the Jacobian of the vector of simulated moments. "Intuitively, this matrix is a local
approximation to the mapping from moments to estimated parameters." (p. 1555) We report the results of
this calculation at our benchmark estimates (discussed below) in elasticity form in Appendix C.


                                                   20
whether either is successful. We treat this observation as a proxy for firm j 's search intensity
in a market. The right-hand side is a second-order translog function of firm j 's cumulative
number of successes (anj ) after n matches and cumulative success rate (anj /nj ) in the market.
(To deal with firms that have had no successes, we add 1 to anj and to anj /nnj before taking
logs.).24
    Since the coefficients in this equation reflect all of the elements of , there's no obvious
mapping between them. Our sensitivity matrix suggests that the regression helps most in
identifying the fixed costs of maintaining a relationship, F h and F f , the parameters of the
success rate () distribution,  and  , and the network parameter,  .
    Because equation (i) involves second-order terms, it's difficult to interpret its coefficients.
Evaluating its predicated values on a grid of success rates and cumulative successes shows
that search intensity is only mildly sensitive to success rates, but strongly increases with
cumulative successes.
    Separation. Equation (ii) captures a second basic feature of a firm's exporting behavior:
termination of matches. Here the unit of observation is seller j 's ith match in year t and the
dependent variable, Dexit match , takes a value of one when this match is in its final year.25
In our model the seller endogenously terminates a match when j (xt , yijt ) < F f , which
is more likely when the firm's productivity j or the demand shock yijt is low. Since we
don't observe these variables we use several of their correlates as predictors: current match
          f
sales, Xijt , age of the match, Aijt , and export market tenure, ijt (all in logs). Reflecting
the patterns in Table 4, we allow a firm in its first year of exporting (Dnew to mkt = 1) to
experience a different failure rate.26
    The results in Table 6 reflect patterns we saw in Table 4: matches in their first year
are relatively likely to fail, as are matches that start with relatively small sales; more ex-
perienced exporters tend to have longer-lived relationships, reflecting cross-firm variation in
productivity levels .
    The sensitivity matrix (Appendix C) implies that equation (ii) helps most to identify the
fixed costs of maintaining an established match, F h and F f , and the jump size, y , which
affects the option value of keeping a match active.
    Match success rates. The remaining regressions in Table 6 concern the distribution
of success rates. Equation (iii) relates the average success rate of an active exporter to its
cumulative number of previous meetings (n). Equation (iv ) relates the dispersion in success
  24
      This equation is roughly a second-order approximation to the foreign market policy function (9), ignor-
ing, for instance, the nonlinear firm effects generated by  and f .
  25
       We include only active matches, in which there is a sale in year t, in the sample.
  26
    Note, however, that Table 4 includes single-shipment matches while our estimation of equation (ii)
doesn't drop them, since we don't consider the match "successful".


                                                       21
rates (the squared residuals from equation (iii)) to n. The unconditional mean and variance
in success rates are 0.41 and 0.09, respectively. Among experienced (high-n) firms, the mean
is significantly higher and the variance is significantly lower. Both regressions are informative
about  and  , as well as selection due to learning.
     Client distributions and shipment frequencies. Equation (v ) of Table 7 relates to
the information on client distributions in Table 3. With ( ) representing the fraction of
exporters with no more than active clients, column (v ) reports a regression of ln(1 - ( ))
on ln and (ln )2 .27 This functional form nests a linear relationship between ln(1 - ( ))
and ln implied by a Pareto shape of client distributions found in earlier studies. The
small coefficient on the quadratic term (-0.055) confirms a Pareto shape. Equation (v ) helps
identify the parameters of the theta distribution ( and  ) as well as the network parameter
 , the key determinants of the relative prevalence of large versus small firms.
     Equation (vi) in Table 7 establishes the mean log number of shipments per year in a
continuing match. It serves as a target for the shipment arrival hazard and helps identify b .
     Match-level and firm-level sales. Table 8 collects regressions on the time series
properties of firms' exports, cross-firm dispersion in exports, and patterns of correlation
between exports and domestic sales. These equations are particularly informative about the
parameters h , f. , F h , F f ,  , y .
     Equation (vii) is an AR1 in log match revenues, conditioned on match age and a dummy
to control for first-year effects. Following the discussion in Section 5.1 above, the root
(0.826) and root mean square error (1.208) help identify the jump size y and the cross-firm
variance in productivity,  ,. Also, together with equation (ii), the mean log annual revenue
per match (10.67) essentially pins down the profit function scalar f and the fixed cost of
maintaining a foreign match F f .
     The last four equations in Table 8 concern domestic sales. Since we don't observe firms'
individual matches in the domestic market, these regressions describe establishment-level
panel data merged with Colombian customs records.28
     Equation (viii) is an AR1 for home sales, informative about how much firms adjust their
domestic connections and their associated match-specific sales in response to idiosyncratic
shocks. The equation is particularly helpful in identifying h           h
                                                                 0 and F , and the mean squared
error helps identify  and /( +  ).
     Equation (ix) projects Colombian firm-level exports to the United States on firm-level
                                                                                    2
domestic sales. The coefficient speaks to the variance of productivity shocks (       ), which are
  27
       By construction, the intercept of the (non-parametric version of) this regression must be zero.
  28
    Regressions (viii) through (x) in Table 8 use a combination of the Colombian Annual Manufacturing
Survey (AMS) and Colombian administrative records of exports transactions involving the U.S. market over
1993-2007, merged using firm identifiers.


                                                      22
common to both markets, relative to the variance of market-specific appeal draws, h and
f . It also reflects the size of match-specific (and thus market-specific) idiosyncratic shocks,
y .29
    Finally, equations (x) and (xi) describe the relative importance of home versus foreign
sales. Equation (x) reveals the share of firms that participate in the foreign market. It
speaks to the relative return to maintaining foreign versus domestic business connections,
as implied by the sets of parameters (f , F f , f              h   h  h
                                                   0 ) versus ( , F , 0 ). Equations (xi) gives
the average share of exports to the U.S. market in total sales of exporting firms. It largely
reflects the number of clients in each market, and thus responds especially to differences
between f  0 and 0 .
                    h




5.3       Parameter estimates for the benchmark model
The first two columns of Table 9 report estimates of the parameter vector  for the bench-
mark model. We normalize moments about month-to-month customer transitions from the
customs records to one year. Our estimate of  , for example, implies that, on average,
matches last roughly a third of a year before separating for exogenous reasons.
    Our estimates of the fixed costs (F f =$US 0.30, F h =$US 0.03) are both very small.
While their effect on major exporters is negligible, they keep out fringe players that would
otherwise sell tiny amounts.
    The profit and cost function scalars are more important. We estimate much lower search
                                                  f
costs in the home market (h    0 = 859 versus 0 = 3, 080) and much higher profit per sale
(h /f = exp (-3.88 + 6.14) = 9.77). Both help explain the small share of output exported
to the U.S. (Table 8, regression xi). The difference between the two sets of scalars is identified
by their different effects on match arrival rates (Table 6, regression i) versus revenues from
ongoing matches (Table 8, regressions vii and viii).
    Other parameters are hard to interpret individually. More enlightening are their collective
implications explored in Section 6 below.


5.4       Model fit
In general, our model replicates the patterns in the data, though not all of the model-based
equation estimates correspond closely to their data-based analogs. The model captures av-
erage exporting rates, match-specific sales dynamics, and the client distribution well, as well
as mean values of dependent variables. The model fails, however, to generate the association


  29
       Given the average success rate, /( +  ), the variances of h and f depend only on  +  .


                                                   23
                   Table 6: Match hazards, success rates, and endurance

                                         (i)            (ii)           (iii)         (iv )
                                                          exit match   aij
                                         ln(sij )       Dijt           nij           u2aij /nij
                                             -0.719          0.395         0.413         0.091
         mean, dep. variable
                                          (0.621e-2)     (0.319e-2)     (0.153e-2)    (0.26e-3)
                                                                         0.093         -0.056
         ln(1 + nij )                        ­               ­
                                                                        (0.003)       (0.000)
                                           -0.818
         ln(1 + aij )                                        ­
                                          (0.113)
                                            0.312
         ln(1 + aij )2                                       ­                 ­         ­
                                          (0.017)
                   aij                     -1.132
         ln(1 +    nij )                                     ­                 ­         ­
                                          (0.296)
                 a         2               2.451
          ln(1 + n )                                         ­                 ­         ­
                                          (0.396)
                                 aij       -0.708
         ln(1 + aij ) · ln(1 +   nij )                       ­                 ­         ­
                                          (0.134)
          new to mkt                                       0.034
         Dijt                                ­                                 ­         ­
                                                         (0.011)
             f                                            -0.031
         ln Xijt                             ­                                 ­         ­
                                                         (0.002)
                                                          -0.054
         ln Aijt                             ­                                 ­         ­
                                                         (0.009)
                                                          -0.028
         ln jt                               ­                                 ­         ­
                                                         (0.007)
         observations (rounded)          38,500         23,500         35,800        35,800

Notes: Unit of observation, columns i, iii and iv : seller j 's ith match. Unit of observation,
column ii: seller j 's ith match in its tth year. sij = inverse of time interval between commencement
of match i and commencement of the next one for exporter j Dijt         exit match = 1 if exporter j s ith

match dies in year t. aij = cumulative number of successes for exporter j at time of match i.
  new to mkt = 1 if exporter j s ith match is in its first year. ln A
Dijt                                                                                                    th
                                                                        ijt = log age of exporter j s i
                                                 f
match. ln jt = log age of exporter j in year t. Xijt = foreign sales volume generated by exporter
     th
j s i match.




                                                       24
                Table 7: Client distribution and shipment frequency

                                                      (v )             (vi)
                                                      ln(1 - ( ))      ln(sijt )
                                                        -5.973           0.971
                             mean, dep. variable
                                                       (2.173)          (0.004)
                                                       -1.8813
                             ln( )                                     -
                                                       (0.1123)
                                                       -0.0545
                             (ln )2                                    -
                                                       (0.0211)
                             sample restrictions        >0             sijt > 0
                             observations             43               87,000

Notes:     : number of active clients; () = cumulative distribution of exporters in terms of ;
sijt = number of shipments per year to client i by exporter j in year t.




                       Table 8: Home and foreign sales regressions

                        (vii)                (viii)            (ix)                (x)           (xi)
                                                                                                      f
                            f                    h                 f                f              Xjt
                        ln Xijt              ln Xjt            ln Xjt              Djt            f     h
                                                                                                 Xjt +Xjt
                            10.665               ­                 ­                    0.102         0.127
 mean, dep. variable
                            (0.002)                                                    (0.003)       (0.002)
                             0.328
 Rijt-1                                      -                 -                   -             -
                            (0.018)
     f                       0.826
 ln Xijt-1                                   -                 -                   -             -
                            (0.004)
     h                                            0.976
 ln Xjt-1               -                                      -                   -             -
                                                 (0.029)
     h                                                              0.323
 ln Xjt                 -                    -                                     -             -
                                                                   (0.110)
                          0.063
 ln t                                        -                 -                   -             -
                         (0.014)
 root mse               1.2079               0.4621            2.1665              0.303         0.243
                          f     f              h , Xh            f    h >0           h >0          f    h >0
 sample restrictions    Xijt , Xijt-1 > 0    Xjt    jt-1 > 0   Xjt , Xjt           Xjt           Xjt , Xjt
 observations           25,400               99,300            11,600              119,800       12,500

Notes: Rijt = 1 if exporter j s ith match is in its first year. ln jt = log age of exporter j .
 f                                                                f
Xijt = foreign sales volume generated by exporter j s ith match. Xjt = total foreign sales volume
                       h = total home sales volume generated by firm j . D f = 1 if firm j is an
generated by firm j . Xjt                                                 jt
exporter.




                                                      25
                           Table 9: Structural parameter estimates

                                                       Benchmark model           Known-f variant
                                        Parameter       value    std. error      value std. error
 log of domestic profit scalar          ln h           -3.879    (0.1364)       -3.460    (0.0725)
 log of foreign profit scalar           ln f           -6.135    (0.1993)       -6.273    (0.0759)
 fixed cost, domestic                   Fh              0.027    (0.0047)        0.037    (0.0064)
 fixed cost, foreign                    Ff              0.296    (0.0428)        0.301    (0.0359)
 First  distribution parameter                          0.571    (0.0454)        0.581    (0.0703)
 Second  distribution parameter                         1.894    (0.2320)        4.661    (0.2107)
 demand shock jump size                 y               1.882    (0.2222)        1.951    (0.1810)
 shipment order arrival hazard          b              15.426    (0.1991)       15.431    (0.1428)
 std. deviation, log firm type                          1.386    (0.0095)        1.401    (0.0051)
 network effect parameter                               0.383    (0.0485)        0.508    (0.0479)
 log of home search cost scalar         ln h
                                           0           11.722    (0.1486)       12.480    (0.0850)
 log of foreign search cost scalar      ln f
                                           0           13.002    (0.0095)       13.666    (0.1373)
 log of fit metric                      ln()                10.806                   11.346

 Notes: Both models were fit using the method of simulated moments, targeting the statistics in
Tables 6-8 using a block-diagonal weighting matrix based on the covariance matrices of the targeted
regressions. Standard errors were constructed using the Delta method.


between success rates and firms' search intensities that we observe in the data.30 Appendix
D provides a more detailed summary of the fit, juxtaposing the data-based moments, m          ¯,
with their simulated counterparts, m(), from the benchmark model.
    We haven't targeted the patterns described in Section 2.1, since we treat a successful
match in our data as beginning with the first sale and in our model only with the second.31
It's nevertheless instructive to ask how our model replicates them. Table 10 repeats the cal-
culations reported in Table 1 using data simulated with the benchmark model. Qualitatively,
the patterns match up: The largest drops in the number of exporters occur during a cohort's
first two years, with cohort size dropping gradually thereafter. Total exports rise early in a
cohort's life, declining thereafter. Finally, exports per surviving firm grow rapidly over time,
reflecting both the exit of small-scale firms and client accumulation among survivors.
    On the other hand, "Average exports" and "total exports" vary less dramatically with
cohort age in the actual data than in the simulated data. Also, the drop in cohort membership
is more dramatic in the simulated data during the first year. The difference in the definition
  30
     One reason is that this relationship is statistically weak, and it therefore doesn't receive much weight
                                                                                                         2
in the fit metric. (Note the large standard errors for the coefficients on ln(1 + a/n) and [ln(1 + a/n)] in
column 1 of Table 6.)
  31
     Thus, relative to our model-based definition, the tables in Section 2.1 inflate the one-year-old firm and
total export counts, while they depress mean exports among one-year olds. Restrictions on data access have
temporarily prevented us from making these tables fully compatible. We plan to address the issue in a future
draft.


                                                     26
                     Table 10: Cohort evolutions: simulated data

                  Cohort age    Exporters   Total Exports    Average Exports
                  1 year        1.00        1.00             1.00
                  2 year        0.61        1.73             2.84
                  3 years       0.35        1.34             3.81
                  4 years       0.19        1.81             9.50
                  5 years       0.10        2.29             22.74
                  6 years       0.06        2.12             34.43
                  7 years       0.05        1.89             39.69
                  8 years       0.04        1.69             43.23
                  9 years       0.03        1.89             63.69
                  10 years      0.02        1.46             65.17

Notes: Figures for cohorts aged 2-10 are expressed relative to corresponding figures for one-year-
old cohorts.

                   Table 11: Exporter distribution: simulated data

                             Number of buyers     share of exporters
                             1                   0.77
                             2                   0.10
                             3                   0.05
                             4                   0.03
                             5                   0.02
                             6-10                0.03
                             11+                 0.01

Notes: Figures give the ergodic distribution of current buyer counts across exporting firms.


of matches between Table 1 and 10 may explain these discrepancies.
    Table 11 reports the distribution of client counts across exporters implied by our model.
They match quite closely the actual distributions reported in Table 3, although the Table 3
figures show more exporters with two clients (and fewer with more than two clients) than
the model predicts.
    Finally, Table 12 revisits the analysis of match exit rates in Table 4 with simulated data.
(As with the figures in Table 6, the two datasets define matches differently.) The model
replicates the higher failure rates among first-year matches, and the tendency for matches
that begin in the largest sales quartile to fail less frequently than others. However, the high
failure rates are concentrated among one-year-old matches in the simulated data, while they
decline more more gradually with age in Table 4. Also, unlike in Table 4, the simulated
exporters that begin in the smallest size quartile exhibit failure rates as low as those of
the largest exporters. (Here too, since single-shipment encounters are concentrated in the


                                                27
                      Table 12: Match separation rates: simulated data

                      Match age     Quartile 1    Quartile 2    Quartile 3     Quartile 4
                      1 year        0.60          0.88          0.89           0.63
                      2 years       0.27          0.29          0.31           0.27
                      3 years       0.30          0.32          0.33           0.30
                      4 years       0.31          0.28          0.20           0.32
                      5+ years      0.28          0.30          0.36           0.36

Notes: Figures are percentages of the exporters in each age-initial size category that do not export
during the following year.


smallest size category, differences in the treatment of these encounters in the two tables
contribute to the discrepancy.)


5.5        Results for the known product appeal variant
To understand the role of learning in the foreign market we estimate a variant of the model
in which a firm knows its true product appeal f from the outset. In this world a firm with
low appeal doesn't bother to invest much or at all in searching in the foreign market. A
fully-informed firm has less incentive to search since there's no information from a match.
    The last two columns of Table 9 report parameter estimates for this variant. Most are
similar to those from the benchmark model. But the known-f implies a larger network effect
                                                                f
( = 0.50 versus  = 0.38) and search cost (h                                        h
                                                  0 = 859 and 0 = 3, 079 versus 0 = 1, 826
and f                                                    f
       0 = 5, 982). These higher values help the known  model explain the observed pattern
of small entry, gradual growth, and eventual dominance by high- entrants without relying
on learning. The known-f model does substantially worse according to Rivers and Vuong's
(2002) test statistic for non-nested comparisons.32




   32
                                                                           ^1 - ^ 2 , where ^ 1 and ^ 2 are
        The Rivers and Voung (2002) statistic takes the form Tn = ( n/^n ) 
the MSM fit metrics for the two models, and        2
                                                  ^n  approximates var   ^1 - ^ 2 . This statistic has a standard
normal distribution under the null E (  ^ 1 ) = E (^ 2 ). With model 1 the benchmark and model 2 the known-f
variant, we get Tn = -1,583.2 (treating the weighting matrix W as nonstochastic). Two caveats apply. First,
since the targeted regression coefficients are based on a variety of samples, it's not obvious what sample size
n we should use for this statistic. We use a very conservative approximation to the number of firms we base
our inferences on (n = 1000), Second, this test statistic doesn't recognize randomness in the fit statistics due
to simulation.


                                                       28
6         Implications of the Results
Our results allow us to quantify the value of participating in the domestic and foreign mar-
kets. Ingredients to this calculation are the value of a successful relationship, the cost of
search, and the probability that a match is successful.


6.1         The value of a relationship
In our model a seller benefits from matching with a potential client for three reasons. First
is the obvious one that the seller earns profits from sales to the new client. Second, since
we find a positive network effect ( = 0.383), a successful match lowers the cost of finding
additional buyers. Third, the success or failure of the match informs the seller about the
popularity of its product, so it can adjust its subsequent search effort accordingly. What do
our estimates imply about the magnitudes of these benefits?
    Profits per shipment vary widely with macro conditions, the seller's efficiency, and match-
specific shocks. When macro conditions are average, foreign shipments generate an average
profit of $US 3,413 with a standard deviation of $US 3,458. (The analogous figures in the
home market are $US 32, 567 and $US 32, 993.)33 And matches active in either market for
an entire year generate an average of b = 15.4 shipments.
    These profits are generated within the match itself. The network and learning benefits
from a match derive from subsequent successful relationships. Quantifying these benefits
requires not only assessing the return from such relationships, but the cost of searching for
them and the probability of success.


6.2         The cost of search
For a firm with no prior success in the foreign market, a search intensity sufficient to yield
an average of one new match per year costs cf (1, 0) = $US 1, 539 while an expected yield of
four new matches, about one successful match for a firm with average product appeal, costs
cf (4, 0) = $US 24, 637. (The analogous figures in the home market are ch (1, 0) = $US 428
and ch (4, 0) = $US 6, 848.)
    Our estimated network parameter  = 0.383 implies that these costs fall substantially
as a firm racks up successes: A firm with 2 successful foreign matches pays an expected
cf (4, 2) = $US 20, 142 for the next match, roughly 20 percent less than the cost of the first.
(The analogous figure in the home market is ch (4, 2) = $US 5, 598.)



    33
         All figures are in 1992 US dollars.


                                               29
         Figure 2: Log continuation values conditioned on match history




 Notes: Continuation value trajectories for firms with productivity in the 10th, 50th, and 90th
percentiles of the simulated productivity distribution of exporters. For each productivity type, we
plot values for all successful matches, alternating success and failure, and all failures.



6.3    The probability of success
A firm's true probability of success in the foreign market is drawn from a beta distribution,
which we estimate to have mean /( +  ) = 0.23 and variance / [( +  )2 ( +  + 1)] =
0.232 . Hence, before acquiring export market experience, a firm expects that roughly 1 in
4 encounters with a potential buyer will lead to a business relationship. It also expects to
learn a good deal from the outcomes of its early matches.


6.4    Network and learning effects
Combining these ingredients we can assess the combined importance of network and matching
effects. Figure 2 shows the perceived continuation value from each additional meeting for
firms drawn from the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles among simulated exporters. These
values depend on the firm's belief at each moment about its popularity           ¯f , which in turn
depends on the number of matches (n) it's had already. We show three extreme histories: an
unbroken string of successes (a = n), an unbroken string of failures (a = 0), and alternating
success and failure (n  2a).
    Differences in firms' efficiency imply big differences in their initial perception of the value
of their participation at the outset: the high-productivity firm perceives a value of US$
53,800; the median a value of US$ 452; and the low-productivity firm only US$ 5.
    Both network and learning effects are most powerful for neophyte exporters who haven't
yet formed networks or learned anything about their appeal. The first match has the biggest


                                                30
                    Figure 3: Evolution of success probability belief




Notes: Beliefs of a firm with productivity in the 90th percentile of exporters over success proba-
bility. Top line is five success followed by five failures. Bottom line is five failures followed by five
successes.



impact on continuation values, and most of the impact of additional information is gone by
the twentieth match. For example, if its first match is a success, the highest productivity
firm's value jumps to US$ 165,000. But failures quickly erase firm value. The continuation
value of the median productivity firm with four successful matches is almost the same as the
value of the high productivity firm with four failed matches, at US$ 5,669.
    Learning effects can cause two ex ante identical firms to have very different long term
experiences in an export market, depending on whether their early matches succeed. Because
match histories affect continuation values, they also affect the intensity with which a firm
searches for new clients.
    Figure 3 plots the evolution of beliefs about f for two firms both in the 90th productivity
percentile (where, for concreteness, searching with intensity s means waiting exactly 1/s for
the next match). The top line plots perceived appeal from a sequence of five successes
followed by five failures, and the bottom line perceived appeal from five failures followed by
five successes. They end at the same point, but if success comes early, it takes 10.5 years to get
10 matches while, with initial failure, it takes more than 43 years. The discouraged failure-
first firm takes four times longer to get to 10 meetings because it searches less intensively.


6.5     Value dynamics when product appeal is known
The patterns we've depicted so far reflect both network and learning effects. To gauge the
relative importance of each we redo Figure 2 under the assumption that firms know their
true product appeal from the start. We set f = 0.43 for all firms, corresponding to the

                                                   31
  Figure 4: Log continuation values conditioned on match history, no learning




Notes: Continuation value trajectories for firms with productivity in the 10th, 50th, and 90th
percentiles of the simulated productivity distribution of exporters in the known-f version of the
model. For each productivity type, we plot values for all successful matches, alternating success
and failure, and all failures.



65th percentile of success probabilities among active exporters in our simulated data. Using
the estimated "known-f " policy function in Table 9, we simulate the continuation values of
firms at the 10th, 50th, and 90th productivity percentiles.
    Parallel to Figure 2, Figure 4 shows the histories of only successes, only failures, and
alternating success and failure. With firms knowing their f , continuation values move much
less with experience. A successful match does (more modestly) raise the continuation value
through the network effect of lowering the cost of search, with unsuccessful matches having
no effect.
    How do match arrival times depend on successes and failures in the known-f variant?
Since firms know their success probabilities, the known-f version of Figure 3 (not pictured)
is simply two horizontal lines with height f . But the lengths of these lines still depend
on match histories through the network effect. Figure 5 demonstrates this dependence by
plotting the expected time to ten meetings when five consecutive meetings succeed and the
others fail. The x-axis is the number of meetings before the first success. (For example, if
it's 3, the first 3 meetings fail, the next 5 succeed, and the last 2 fail.)
    Comparing again the expected time to ten meetings with five consecutive successes and
five consecutive failures, Figure 5 presents results for both the baseline model (panel a) and
the known-f variant (panel b) for a firm in the 90th percentile of exporter productivity (again
with f = 0.43 in the known-f variant). As in Figure 3, the time it takes a learning firm to
reach ten meetings depends heavily on the placement of the successes (panel a), taking 12


                                               32
   Figure 5: Time to ten meetings by placement of five consecutive successes




                   (a) Baseline                                          (b) known-f




years if the successes come first but 45 years if the failures come first. For a known-f firm
(panel b), it takes 27 years to reach ten meetings if the successes come first and 32 years if
they come last.34 Hence learning and network effects both matter, but learning contributes
much more to heterogeneity in experience.


6.6     Foreign-market amnesia
Our analysis allows us to quantify the value of a firm's experience in the export market,
which reflects a combination of the expected future profits generated by current business
relationships, the benefits of client networks in reducing the cost of finding new clients, and,
in the benchmark with learning, the knowledge a firm has acquired about its market appeal.
    To assess the value of these intangible assets we generate 2000 different 100-year foreign
demand trajectories using the process reported in Table 5. We calculate the value of access
the foreign market for our firms in years 25 to 100, after burn in. The value to an average
exporter is around US$ 3.4 million. About half represents future sales to existing customers.
The rest reflects mostly the value of knowing market appeal f rather than the visibility
generated by its existing customer network.
    Multiplying by the average number of exporting firms observed during our sample period
implies a total value of US$ 9.6 billion, about 34 percent of the total value of export revenues,

  34
    The reason it takes so long is that the firm knows that only around half of its meetings will succeed.
With f near one it would only take a few years to reach 10 meetings.


                                                   33
US$ 28.3 billion. In other words, a hypothetical experiment of total amnesia about the foreign
market (losing contact with clients and forgetting past successes and failures) would wipe
out about a third of the value of the U.S. market for our Colombian firms.
     Since the distribution of export sales is highly skewed across firms, the largest exporters
dominate these averages. The median exporter would stand to lose only about US $ 370,000
from total U.S. market amnesia, hardly more than a tenth of the average. This loss reflects
mostly lost sales to existing customers. To summarize, the value of a large exporter's expe-
rience in a market is nearly as much in its enhanced ability to find new customers as in its
expected future sales to existing ones. The main benefit of experience for a smaller exporter
is its expected future sales to existing customers.


7        Exchange rate dynamics
A natural task for our model is characterizing the response of exports to an exchange rate
shock. We consider a 20 percent devaluation by scaling the 100-year foreign market demand
trajectories generated by the process reported in Table 5 by 1.2 after the 50th year. Since we
treat the shock as unanticipated, the first 50 years replicate the experiment just discussed
in Section 6.6. We first look at what happens to an average firm in our simulation. We
then turn to aggregate trade dynamics, breaking down the response into different margins
of adjustment. We conclude with a discussion of the implied short and long-run trade
elasticities.
    Our results for individual exporters are based on the 2000 simulations described in Section
6.6. In this section, we consider the total value of the firm, including both its value from
experience and its option value of reentering the foreign market with the same efficiency 
but in a state of foreign-market amnesia. Calculated this way, the mean value of an active
exporter before the shock is about 5 million dollars, and the median is 540 thousand dollars.
The value of the mean exporter increases 34 percent just after the shock. Average exporter
value jumps more than the mechanical 20 percent from the devaluation, because after the
shock exporters search harder and expect to both learn and become visible more quickly.
As time passes, the value of the average exporter decreases. This pattern reflects the role of
matching frictions, which delay the entry of marginally profitable firms.
    How do these changes in value translate into aggregate export dynamics? Figure 6
summarizes the results of simulating the aggregate export trajectories associated with the
exchange rate devaluation.35 The permanent 20 percent real peso devaluation occurs at the

    35
     Our single-agent model misses interactions between exporters in the foreign market. But since Colombia
constitutes a small share of the U.S. spending, such general equilibrium effects are likely negligible.


                                                    34
  Figure 6: Baseline response to a permanent devaluation: export aggregates




         (a) Total sales                (b) Total active matches           (c) Total active exporters

Notes: Figures depict aggregate responses to a permanent 20 percent real devaluation at time 0.
Shaded areas in panels a and b reflect contributions of matches that existed at time 0 (yellow),
matches formed after time 0 by exporters that were active at time 0 (red), and matches formed
after time 0 by exporters that entered the foreign market after time 0 (blue). Thin lines show
patterns in the absence of the shock. Panel c depicts incumbent exporters active before time zero
(red), and exporters entering after time zero (blue). All series are averages across 2000 simulations.



end of the 50th year (marked period 0 in the figure). Panels a and b break down the total
value of a particular aggregate export sales and matches into three segments: contributions
from matches created before period 0 (yellow area), contributions from matches created after
period 0 with exporters that existed in period 0 (red area), and matches formed after period
0 with exporters that entered after period 0 (blue area). Panel c breaks down the aggregate
number of active exporters into those active before period 0 (red area) and those who entered
after period 0 (blue area). The lines show how the boundaries between the shaded areas
would have differed if there had been no permanent devaluation.36
    Panel a describes total export sales. The rapid turnover in matches is striking. Within
several years, incumbent matches have lost about three-quarters of their market share, re-
gardless of whether the exchange rate depreciates or fluctuates around a stationary mean
(the latter case shown by the thin superimposed lines). Nonetheless, given their persistent
productivity () and product appeal (), incumbent exporters retain more than 50 percent
of the market after 25 years by regularly replenishing their client portfolio.
    Despite rapid match turnover, adjustments to the new exchange rate take time to play
out. During the first year, sales within matches account for almost all of the movement in
  36
     Piveteau (forthcoming) provides similar graphs that inspired Figure 6. To highlight the role of learning
and endogenous match separations, we use a decomposition that distinguishes matches to new exporters from
others. Piveteau (forthcoming) distinguishes the consumer margin, the extensive margin, and an aggregate
valuation effect.


                                                     35
                            Table 13: Simulated Trade Elasticities

                               Time since shock    1 year   5 years   25 years
                               Sales               1.20     1.69      1.88
                                                   (0.05)   (0.05)    (0.05)
                               Matches             0.26     0.80      0.94
                                                   (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.03)
                               Exporters           0.14     0.50      0.60
                                                   (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)

Notes: All elasticities are based on 2000 simulations of a 20 percent real devaluation of the
Colombian peso. Standard errors based on cross-simulation standard deviations are in parentheses.


aggregate export sales (Panels a). The total effect of the exchange rate shock grows over
time. The effect grows both because the total number of exporters adjusts, and also because
the number of matches per exporter increases as is implied by Panels b and c. Over a period
of roughly 15 years, these effects add an extra 40-50 percent to the initial response.
    While it is not immediately apparent from Figure 6, the percentage contribution of each
type of match to the corresponding aggregate is nearly invariant to the devaluation shock.
Hence, if we were only interested in the rate at which new exporters displace incumbent
exporters, or the rate at which new matches displace incumbent matches, it would matter
very little whether we were analyzing the aftermath of a permanent devaluation or a period
without any regime switching.37
    Table 13 reports the short, medium, and long-run trade elasticities implied by the per-
manent 20% real peso devaluation with standard errors based on cross-simulation standard
deviations in parentheses. Our long run sales elasticities resemble Piveteau's (forthcoming)
and Boehm et al.'s (2020), but the learning effects in our framework imply a somewhat longer
transition period. Our elasticities are substantially lower than the long run elasticities typi-
cally generated by calibrated general equilibrium models (e.g., Alessandria and Choi, 2014;
Alessandria, et al., 2018).38




  37
      This is true across exchange rate shocks both in the baseline model and in the Known-f model described
in Table 9. The contributions of types of match do differ, however, when we compare across models. In
particular, we find that in the Known-f model the share of new matches going to new exporters is higher
than in the baseline. We discuss these and related comparisons across models in Appendix Section E.
   38
      Alessandria and Choi (2014) use a symmetric 2-country dynamic model with endogenous firm creation,
capital accumulation, fixed exporting costs, and iceberg costs. Analyzing movement from a global 8 percent
tariff to free trade, they find the a trade elasticity rises of about 5 in the short run and 8 in the long run,
which is reached in 5-8 years. In a similar model, but with firms' exporting costs depending upon their
incumbency, Alessandria et al. (2018) estimate a short-run trade elasticity of 4 and a long-run elasticity of
11.55. Their model generates transition dynamics over 10-15 years.


                                                      36
8    Summary
Research exploiting customs records has generated a robust set of stylized facts regarding
firm-to-firm trade dynamics: First, most exporters are inexperienced, ship small amounts,
and have few foreign clients. Second, the typical buyer-seller relationship lasts only a year
or two, so business connections evolve rapidly, and it's common to see firms with only a
few clients cease exporting entirely, giving way to the next entering cohort of inexperienced
exporters. Third, however, each new cohort contains a small number of firms that survive
and grow many times faster than aggregate exports. They do so not by selling more to the
same clients, but by finding new customers.
    We confirm these patterns for Colombian manufacturers shipping to the United States,
and develop a continuous-time model to account for them. Firms wishing to export must
engage in costly search to find potential buyers, who may either reject their products or form
finite-lived business relationships with them. Buyers who form business relationships with
exporters send them favorable signals about the appeal of their products and, in doing so,
encourage them to search more intensely for additional buyers (learning effects). Successful
business relationships also reduce sellers' search costs by improving their visibility (network
effects). Finally, sellers' search intensities depend both on their permanent idiosyncratic
characteristics and on market conditions.
    Fit using the method of simulated moments, the model replicates these patterns in cus-
toms records and allows us to quantify several types of trade costs, including the cost of
searching for potential clients and the cost of maintaining business relationships with exist-
ing clients. It also allows us to estimate the network effect of previous successes on the costs
of meeting new clients, and to characterize the cumulative effects of learning on firms' search
intensities and intangible capital stocks.
    While our model delivers similar long-run elasticities to other one-sided search models,
the presence of learning means that it takes longer to reach the long-run. The reason the long-
run effect of learning and visibility is modest is that they are most important among newer
exporters, which account for a small share of total export volume. Much more important
for aggregate export dynamics are the search frictions that limit the ability of exporters to
connect with new potential buyers.




                                              37
                                  References
Aeberhardt, R., I. Buono, and H. Fadinger (2014): "Learning, Incomplete Contracts and
    Export Dynamics: Theory and Evidence from French Firms." European Economic
    Review 68: 219­249

Albornoz, Facundo, Hector Calvo Pardo, Gregory Corcos, and Emanuel Ornelas (2012)
    "Sequential Exporting." Journal of International Economics 88: 17-31.

Alessandria, George, Costas Arkolakis, and Kim Ruhl (2020) "Firm Dynamics and Trade"
    NBER Working Paper 27934.

Alessandria, George and Horag Choi (2007) "Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net
    Export Dynamics?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 289-336.

Alessandria, George and Horag Choi (2014) "Establishment Heterogeneity, Exporter Dy-
    namics, and the Effects of Trade Liberalization." Journal of International Economics
    94: 207-233.

Alessandria, George and Horag Choi (2019) "The Dynamics of the U.S. Trade Balance and
    Real Exchange Rate: The J Curve and Trade Costs?" NBER Working Paper 25563.

Alessandria, George, Sangeeta Pratap, and Vivian Yue (2014) "Export Dynamics in Large
    Devaluations." Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Alessandria, George, Horag Choi, and Kim Ruhl (2018) "Trade Adjustment Dynamics and
    the Welfare Gains from Trade." Working Paper, The University of Rochester.

Andrews, Isiah, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse Shapiro (2017) "Measuring the Sensitivity
   of Estimated Parameters to Estimation Moments." Quarterly Journal of Economics
   132(4): 1151-1199.

Araujo, Luis, Emanuel Ornelas and Giordano Mion (2016) "Institutions and Export Dy-
    namics." Journal of International Economics 98: 2-20.

Arkolakis, Konstantinos (2010) "Market Access Costs and the New Consumers Margin in
    International Trade." Journal of Political Economy 118(6): 1151-1199.

Arkolakis, Konstantinos (2015) "A Unified Theory of Firm Selection and Growth." Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 131(1): 89-155.

Arkolakis, Konstantinos, Theodore Papageorgiou and Olga Timoshenko (2018). "Firm
    Learning and Growth." Review of Economic Dynamics 27: 146-168.

                                          38
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein (2010) "Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International
    Trade." Journal of Political Economy 118(3): 433-484.

B´
 ek´
   es, G´
        abor, Lionel Fontagn´e, Bal´
                                   azs Murakozy, and Vincent Vicard (2017). "Shipment
    Frequency of Exporters and Demand Uncertainty." Review of World Economics 153(4):
    779-807.

Berman, N., V. Rebeyrol, and V. Vicard (2019) "Demand learning and Firm Dynamics:
    Evidence from Exporters." Review of Economics and Statistics 101(1): 91-106.

Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott (2009) "Importers, Exporters,
    and Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods," in Timothy
    Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen and Mark J. Roberts eds. Producer Dynamics, University
    of Chicago Press.

Bernard, Andrew, Esther Ann Boler, Renzo Massari, Jose-Daniel Reyes, and Daria Taglioni
    (2017) "Exporter Dynamics and Partial-Year Effects." American Economic Review
    107(10): 3211-3228.

Bernard, Andrew and Andreas Moxnes (2018) "Networks and Trade." Annual Review of
    Economics 10(65): 65-85.

Besedes, Tibor (2008). "A Search Cost Perspective on the Formation and Duration of
    Trade." Review of International Economics 16(5): 835-849.

Blum, Bernardo S., Sebastian Claro, Kunal Dasgupta, and Ignatius J. Horstmann (2019).
    "Inventory Management, Product Quality, and Cross-country Income differences."
    American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11(1): 338-388.

Boehm, Chrstoph, Andrei Levchenko and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2020). "The Long and
    Short (Run) of Trade Elasticities." Working Paper, The University of Michigan.

Brooks, Eileen (2006) "Why Don't Firms Export More? Product Quality and Colombian
    Plants" Journal of Development Economics 80: 160-178.

Burstein, Ariel and Marc Melitz (2013) "Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics," in
    Advances in Economics and Econometrics Tenth World Congress. Applied Economics,
    Econometric Society Monographs. Vol. 2. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
    Press.

Cebreros, Alfonso (2016). "The Rewards of Self-discovery: Learning and Firm Exporter
    Dynamics." Banco de M´ exico Working Paper 2016-08.

                                         39
Dom´
   inguez, Juan Camilo, Jonathan Eaton, Marcela Eslava, and James Tybout. (2013)
   "Search and Learning in Export Markets: Case Studies for Colombia." Pennsylvania
   State University, Working Paper.

Drozd, Lukasz A. and Jaromir B. Nosal (2012) "Understanding International Prices: Cus-
    tomers as Capital." American Economic Review 102(1): 364-395.

Eaton, Jonathan, Marcela Eslava, Maurice Kugler and James Tybout (2008). "Export
    Dynamics in Colombia: Firm-Level Evidence," in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin and
    Thierry Verdier, eds., The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Cambridge,
    MA: Harvard U. Press.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz (2011). "An Anatomy of Interna-
    tional Trade: Evidence From French Firms" Econometrica 79(5): 1453-1498.

Eaton, Jonathan, David Jinkins, James Tybout, and Daniel Xu (2016) "Two-sided Search
    in International Markets." Working paper, Pennsylvania State U.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D. (2020). "Labor Market Frictions, Firm Growth, and International
    Trade." Review of Economic Studies 87(3): 1213-1260.

Fitzgerald, Doireann, Stefanie Hallerz, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi (2019) "How Exporters Grow."
    Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Gouri´
     eroux and Monfort, 1996. Simulation-Based Econometric Methods. New York: Ox-
   ford U. Press.

Handley, Kyle and Nuno Lim~
                          ao (2017). "Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory
   and Evidence for China and the United States." American Economic Review 107(9):
   2731-2783.

Hornok, Cec´ilia and Mikl´
                         os Koren (2015). "Per-Shipment Costs and the Lumpiness of
    International Trade." The Review of Economics and Statistics 97(2): 525-530.

Impullitti, Giammario, Alfonso. Irarrazabal, and Luca Opromolla (2013) "A Theory of
   Entry into and Exit From Export Markets." Journal of International Economics 90:
   75-90.

Kropf, Andreas and Philip Saur´
                              e (2014). "Fixed Costs per Shipment." Journal of Interna-
    tional Economics 92(1): 166-184.

Li, Shengyu (2018) "A Structural Model of Productivity, Uncertain Demand, and Export
     Dynamics." Journal of International Economics 115: 1-15.

                                          40
Nguyen, Daniel (2012) "Demand Uncertainty, Exporting Delays and Exporting Failures."
   Journal of International Economics 86: 336-344.

Piveteau, Paul (forthcoming) "An Empirical Dynamic Model of Trade with Consumer Ac-
    cumulation." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Rivers, Douglas and Quang Vuong (2002). "Model Selection for Nonlinear Dynamic Mod-
    els." Econometrics Journal 5: 1-19.

Rodrigue, Joel and Yong Tan (2019). "Price, Product Quality, and Exporter Dynamics:
   Evidence from China." International Economic Review 60(4): 1911-1955.

Ruhl, Kim (2008) "The International Elasticity Puzzle." Working Paper, The University of
    Wisconsin.

Ruhl, Kim and Jonathan Willis (2017) "New Exporter Dynamics." International Economic
    Review 58(3): 703-725.

Schmeiser, Katherine N (2012). "Learning to Export: Export Growth and the Destination
    Decision of Firms." Journal of International Economics 87(1): 89-97.

Shimer, Robert (2005) "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacan-
    cies." The American Economic Review 95(1): 25-49.

Timoshenko, O. A. (2015): "Learning Versus Sunk Costs Explanations of Export Persis-
   tence." European Economic Review 79: 113­128




                                          41
                  FOR ONLINE APPENDIX


A   data tables




                          42
     year   1992    1993    1994    1995    1996   1997   1998   1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009    total

     1992   2,232                                                                                                                                        2,232
     1993     823   1,235                                                                                                                                2,058
     1994     583     330   1,160                                                                                                                        2,073
     1995     440     213     339   953                                                                                                                  1,945
     1996     372     163     178   255      899                                                                                                         1,867
     1997     321     128     133   170      248   877                                                                                                   1,877
     1998     268     104     124   132      153   256    893                                                                                            1,930
     1999     232      85      87   114      117   187    262    1,026                                                                                   2,110
     2000     203      85      79    91      103   136    170      344   1,372                                                                           2,583




43
     2001     187      70      65    79       85   109    145      229     389   1,251                                                                   2,609
     2002     173      64      62    72       68    88    112      171     242     399   1,373                                                           2,824
     2003     165      51      58    62       62    77     86      140     185     301     440   1,719                                                   3,346
     2004     150      52      41    53       63    76     80      132     164     223     327     616   1,768                                           3,745
     2005     140      52      47    39       54    77     69      115     145     196     235     398     661   1,902                                   4,130
     2006     122      46      44    39       44    71     65      110     131     157     168     308     410     564   1,896                           4,175
     2007     113      37      39    31       42    55     48       91     101     132     156     240     305     365     548   1,681                   3,984
     2008      93      29      30    24       38    50     45       74      90     117     130     184     198     230     331     447   1,455           3,565
     2009      80      25      28    24       28    40     39       60      72      88      97     145     175     157     230     248     386   1,378   3,300

                                           Table 14: Number of Exporting Firms, by Entry Cohort
     year   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   total

     1992    469                                                                                                                           469
     1993    352     83                                                                                                                    435
     1994    336     83     92                                                                                                             510
     1995    313     75    102     58                                                                                                      549
     1996    256     67     62     40     60                                                                                               484
     1997    247     84     43     41     48    119                                                                                        581
     1998    225     49     42     36     45    131     63                                                                                 590
     1999    207     51     49     41     39    197     74     81                                                                          739
     2000    180     53     55     37     51    102     53    158    109                                                                   799




44
     2001    150     22     51     41     28     57     36     80    101    111                                                            677
     2002    124     23     47     34     27     28     23     45     65     83     40                                                     538
     2003    147     42     51     31     42     24     22     37     71    107     50     78                                              702
     2004    156     43     53     19     57     21     23     42     78    106     60    107     90                                       855
     2005    150     22     75     17     52     18     23     43     78     80     58     81     75     84                                855
     2006    117     31     52     14     64     43     17     38     61     79     32     51     52    112     78                         838
     2007    103      7     18     11     67     58     19     30     28     64     22     35     33     66     67     62                  689
     2008     95      6      9      8     33     37     17     33     26     34     20     31     37     54     42     53     57           591
     2009     68     22      7      6     13     24     10     23     16     16     14     22     41     25     39     37     36     64    485

                                 Table 15: Value of Exports, by Entry Cohort (millions of $US)
     year   1992    1993   1994    1995   1996    1997    1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   pooled

     1992     210                                                                                                                               210
     1993     428    67                                                                                                                         211
     1994     576   251       79                                                                                                                246
     1995     712   353      300     61                                                                                                         282
     1996     687   411      346    158      67                                                                                                 259
     1997     771   652      321    241     192     136                                                                                         310
     1998     839   468      339    269     297     510    71                                                                                   306
     1999     893   601      561    361     336   1,054   281     79                                                                            350
     2000     885   623      697    407     496     750   313    460     80                                                                     309




45
     2001     801   316      783    519     329     521   251    350    259      89                                                             260
     2002     716   353      757    473     399     318   207    260    268     207    29                                                       191
     2003     891   827      870    493     677     315   257    260    385     355   114     46                                                210
     2004   1,039   828    1,281    358     900     281   291    318    478     476   183    174     51                                         228
     2005   1,071   413    1,593    444     967     231   326    375    535     408   248    204    113     44                                  207
     2006     958   675    1,177    356   1,448     605   256    341    464     505   188    165    126    198     41                           201
     2007     915   175      466    357   1,606   1,048   391    327    278     481   140    145    108    181    123     37                    173
     2008   1,023   208      283    341     860     747   379    443    289     287   153    166    186    236    125    120     39             166
     2009     855   864      262    266     478     607   255    389    221     176   143    152    235    162    169    151     93     47      147

                                   Table 16: Exports per Firm, by Entry Cohort (thousands of $US)
Year   Colombian Sellers    U.S. Importers   Pairs

1992               2,232             1,190   3,087
1993               2,058             1,183   2,824
1994               2,073             1,212   2,810
1995               1,945             1,173   2,588
1996               1,867             1,191   2,490
1997               1,877             1,208   2,480
1998               1,930             1,191   2,495
1999               2,110             1,386   2,793
2000               2,583             1,661   3,411
2001               2,609             1,698   3,483
2002               2,824             1,826   3,733
2003               3,346             2,110   4,483
2004               3,745             2,296   5,071
2005               4,130             2,457   5,552
2006               4,175             2,471   5,607
2007               3,984             2,343   5,307
2008               3,565             2,221   4,751
2009               3,300             2,079   4,467

Table 17: Exporters and importers by year




                       46
B     Data checks
To investigate the quality of the exporter id (manuf id) in the U.S. import records, we ran
a series of robustness checks. The Colombian and U.S. data overlap for the years 2000-2008
and both contain measures of the value of exports as well as the number of exporting firms.
If the manuf id variable is error-prone and noisy, we would expect the U.S. data to over-
report the number of Colombian firms exporting to the U.S. That is, each time a customs
broker wrongly enters the data in the field, a new firm would be created. Table 18 below
summarizes the total value of exports to the U.S. and the number of Colombian firms, by
year, for each data set.
     The datasets align much more closely on value than they do on firm counts. The difference
in value is never more than 10% while the firm count difference ranges from 18% to 74%.
The differences are stable over time.
     To look more closely at the cause of the difference in firm counts, we compared the
number of firms across sources by HS2 categories. The counts in the LFTTD were higher
than the Colombian data in only 28 of the 82 codes and by far the biggest differences are in
HS codes 61 and 62: textiles. In these two product classes the U.S. data identify 4025 more
firms than the Colombian data. If we remove these two sectors from the list, the difference
in firm counts flips and the Colombian data contain 1001 more firms than the LFTTD.
     Title 19 of U.S. code requires that the manuf id variable for textile products represent
the manufacturer of the textile products, not an intermediary. That is, for this sector, in
particular, the CBP 7501 form must report the manufacturer, not an intermediary. By
contrast, prior work by several authors of this paper has shown that the Colombian data
report the exporter, which may or may not be the manufacturer. Given that previous research
(Tybout, 2000 JEL) has shown that developing countries tend to have a disproportionately
large share of small manufacturing firms, it's reasonable to assume that a large part of the

                            Colombia       United States          % difference
             Year   # exporters value   # exporters value     # exporters value
             2000         1775 1038           2721 1140             53%    10%
             2001         2026    995         2744 1019             35%     2%
             2002         2230    870         2986 855              34%    -2%
             2003         2800 1113           3579 1119             28%     1%
             2004         3035 1379           4002 1415             32%     3%
             2005         2861 1554           4288 1438             50%    -7%
             2006         2689 1665           4361 1552             62%    -7%
             2007         2420 1540           4175 1496             73%    -3%
             2008         2161 1570           3758 1474             74%    -6%

                Table 18: Colombian versus U.S. Customs Records


                                             47
reason the U.S. data report so many more firms in the textile sector is that the U.S. data
count many small manufacturers while the Colombian data are, in many cases, reporting
aggregators and intermediaries.
    As a final check of the integrity of the manuf id variable, and the robustness of our main
results, we experimented with a "fuzzy" version of the manuf id variable that did not contain
any street numbers in the string (a likely source of input errors). The effect is to reduce
the number of Colombian firms in the data, an approximation of fixing any extraneous noise
from data entry errors. Next we re-ran Table 4 with the fuzzy data and compared the results
to the original version.
    One of the key findings from Table 4 is the high match separation rates ranging from
about 40% to 66%. Using the fuzzy version did not reduce the separation rates substantially
and left the patterns intact. The fuzzy separation rates ranged from 26% to 62%, a drop of
6% on average. It does not appear that our results are sensitive to a modest reduction in
data entry errors.




                                             48
C     Identification
Following Andrews, et al. (2017), Table 19 below reports estimates of (G W G)-1 G W , where
G = - [m()] /  is the Jacobian for the vector of simulated moments. It was constructed
using our benchmark parameter estimates with all elements converted to elasticity form to
make them unit-free.
    The text discusses results associated with particular equations. Some general observations
are as follows. Most parameters respond to many moments rather than one or a few. Among
parameters with elasticities having absolute value greater than 0.1, most respond significantly
to at least 5 moments and several (F f ,F h , ) respond to more than 15. All parameters
respond to at least 2. The moments affecting the most parameters are those generated
by the match sales autogression (equation vii), the shipping rate regression (equation vi),
the domestic sales autoregression (equation viii), the regression explaining the variance in
success rates (equation iv ), and the fraction of firms that export (equation x).




                                              49
                                                Table 19: Sensitivity matrix, elasticity form

                                    ln h        Fh     Ff     ln f                         y         b              ln h0    ln f0       
        avg. mat death              0.008    0.064   0.010    0.005   -0.009    0.018    0.001    0.001   -0.031   -0.002   -0.002    0.000
               new to mkt          -0.029    0.167 -0.189    -0.014    0.066   -0.054   -0.085    0.003    0.168   -0.004   -0.001   -0.004
             current sales         -0.019   -0.360 -0.234     0.016    0.000   -0.008   -0.195   -0.009    0.180    0.035    0.009    0.008
              exporter age          0.020   -0.259   0.193    0.013   -0.055    0.046    0.050   -0.005   -0.118    0.006    0.004    0.005
                 match age          0.005    0.086 -0.015     0.002    0.002    0.009   -0.004    0.002   -0.007   -0.004   -0.002   -0.001
       avg. match sales            -0.536   -4.896 -1.569    -0.134    0.762   -0.259   -1.329   -0.125    2.067    0.239    0.181    0.084
            1st yr dummy           -0.353   -2.996   1.325   -0.745    0.622   -1.855    2.991    0.058    1.111   -0.172    0.161   -0.107
          match sales, t-1          0.107    1.303 -0.200     0.112   -0.194    0.414    0.055    0.029   -0.745   -0.004   -0.050    0.005
              exporter age         -0.007   -0.105   0.040   -0.010    0.018   -0.038   -0.003   -0.002    0.065   -0.002    0.004   -0.001
        MSE, match AR1              0.065    0.392 -0.325     0.014   -0.054    0.040    0.035   -0.002   -0.033   -0.001   -0.011   -0.002
        degree dist. slope          0.010    0.091 -0.004     0.027   -0.150   -0.479    0.013    0.039    0.120   -0.024    0.013    0.014
        degree dist. curv.          0.020    0.094 -0.031     0.021   -0.078   -0.109   -0.020    0.009   -0.003   -0.005    0.005    0.008




50
      avg. ln #shipments           -0.079   -1.086   1.195   -0.043    0.120   -0.050   -0.636    1.034   -0.560    0.046    0.000   -0.023
         export/dom coef.           0.079    0.546   0.163   -0.081    0.011   -0.111    0.639    0.030   -0.122   -0.078   -0.007   -0.023
          dom. sales AR1           -0.705    1.813 -13.736    0.457   -1.018    1.636    0.672   -0.067   -2.912    1.209   -0.074    0.121
     avg. match hazard              0.000   -0.245 -0.663     0.001    0.010   -0.019   -0.028    0.005    0.558    0.034   -0.001   -0.073
                   ln(1 + a)       -0.004   -0.025 -0.005    -0.004    0.002   -0.018    0.009    0.000    0.015    0.001    0.001   -0.001
                 ln(1 + a)2         0.000   -0.003   0.017   -0.003    0.001   -0.010    0.010    0.001    0.005   -0.002    0.000   -0.001
                            1
                   ln(1 + n   )    -0.018   -0.107 -0.037    -0.018   -0.002   -0.072    0.048    0.000    0.035    0.008    0.005   -0.002
                           1 2
                 ln(1 + n )        -0.039   -0.216 -0.149    -0.024    0.009   -0.108    0.039   -0.004    0.097    0.020    0.009   -0.002
             1
      ln(1 + n ) · ln(1 + a)       -0.013   -0.069 -0.067    -0.004    0.006   -0.019   -0.001   -0.002    0.030    0.008    0.002    0.000
                              a
                     avg. n         0.022   -0.603 -0.870     0.206    1.399   -0.090    0.440   -0.082   -0.693    0.053    0.001    0.032
                  coef., ln n      -0.003   -0.006 -0.061    -0.005    0.010    0.009    0.037    0.000   -0.001    0.000    0.001    0.000
                         a
                    var( n |n)     -0.238   -0.435   1.257   -0.361    1.001   -1.035   -0.447   -0.015   -0.974   -0.009    0.077   -0.053
                  coef., ln n       0.100    1.217 -1.121     0.096    0.117    0.749   -0.350   -0.020   -0.675    0.012   -0.025    0.022
                  f oreign sales
                    total sales
                                    0.157   -0.155   0.419   -0.016    0.048   -0.072   -0.039    0.010    0.172   -0.055    0.006   -0.002
                     #exporters
                      #f irms
                                    0.118    0.572 -1.517     0.048   -0.282    0.014    0.229    0.021   -0.354    0.117   -0.024    0.003
D     Model Fit
The tables in this appendix compare data-based moments (top row) with their model-based
based counterparts (middle row). The bottom row reports standard errors for the data-based
moments in parentheses. The last two rows repeat Tables 6, 7 and 8 in the test.
    Table 20, column 1, shows that the model understates monthly log match hazards. The
quadratic relationship between match hazards and cumulative successes in the data appears
in the model-based simulations, albeit somewhat dampened. And the relation between
success rates and match hazards changes curvature. Column 2 shows that the model under-
predicts match death rates, though it picks up their negative relationship to match sales and
age. (The first year effect seems to be entirely absorbed by this age variable.) As for success
rates, the model comes reasonably close to the data. It misses the positive association be-
tween this variable and number of matches, but does replicate the reduction in success rate
dispersion as the cumulative number of matches grows.
    Turning to Table 21, we see that model gets the nearly-Pareto distribution of client counts
across firms, as the coefficient on ln( )2 is negative but close to zero, just as in the data.
However, the slope of regression v is less negative in the simulated data than in the actual
data, implying that the model predicts relatively more exporters have high-client counts. As
for equation (vi), the estimated model generates more shipments per month among active
matches than we find in the data.
    Finally, Table 22 shows that the model does a good job of explaining match-level sales
dynamics (equation vii), including the dependence of sales on exporters' market tenure. It
also gets the persistence in home market sales almost exactly right (equation viii). It's less
successful at explaining the weak correlation between domestic and foreign sales, perhaps
because the dependent variable is exports destined for the U.S. alone, and not exports to
other destinations, which are not in our model.




                                              51
    Table 20: Match hazards, success rates, and endurance: Model vs. Data

                                 (i)            (ii)            (iii)             (iv )
                                                  exit match     aij
                                 ln(sij )       Dijt             nij              u2aij /nij
                                     -0.719          0.395           0.413              0.091
 mean, dep. variable                  1.527          0.267           0.470              0.066
                                  (0.621 E-2)    (0.319 E-2)      (0.153 E-2)      (0.265 E-3)
                                                                   0.093            -0.060
 ln(1 + aij )                        ­              ­             -0.009           -0.033
                                                                  (0.003)          (0.000)
                                   -0.818
 ln(1 + aij )                     -0.371            ­                   ­              ­
                                  (0.113)
                                    0.312
 [ln(1 + aij )]2                    0.024           ­                   ­              ­
                                  (0.017)
                                   -1.132
           aij
 ln(1 +    nij )                   3.774            ­                   ­              ­
                                  (0.296)
                                   2.451
            aij 2
  ln(1 +    nij )                 -5.555            ­                   ­              ­
                                  (0.396)
                                   -0.708
                         aij
 ln(1 + aij ) · ln(1 +   nij )     0.564            ­                   ­              ­
                                  (0.134)
                                                   0.034
  new to mkt
 Dijt                                 ­          -0.133                 ­               ­
                                                 (0.012)
                                                  -0.032
     f
 ln Xijt                              ­          -0.033                 ­               ­
                                                 (0.002)
                                                  -0.054
 ln Aijt                              ­          -0.077                 ­               ­
                                                 (0.009)
                                                  -0.028
 ln jt                                ­            0.020                ­               ­
                                                 (0.007)
 Notes: Unit of observation, columns i, iii and iv : seller j 's ith match. Unit of observation, column
ii: seller j 's ith match in its tth year. sij = inverse of time interval between commencement of match
i and commencement of the next one for exporter j Dijt        exitmatch = 1 if exporter j s ith match dies in

year t. aij = cumulative number of successes for exporter j at time of match i. Dijt           newtomkt = 1 if

exporter j s ith match is in its first year. ln Aijt = log age of exporter j s ith match. ln jt = log
                                    f
age of exporter j in year t. Xijt      = foreign sales volume generated by exporter j s ith match.




                                                     52
      Table 21: Client distribution and shipment frequency, model vs. data

                                                 (v )          (vi)
                                                 ln(1 - ( ))   ln(b )
                                                                0.971
                          mean, dep. variable    ­              1.489
                                                                  ()
                                                   -1.881
                          ln( )                   -1.199       -
                                                  (0.112)
                                                   -0.056
                          (ln )2                  -0.115       -
                                                  (0.021)
                          sample restrictions      >0          b > 0
                          observations           43            87,000
Notes: : number of active clients; () = cumulative distribution of exporters in terms of ; sijt =
number of shipments per year to client i by exporter j in year t




                                                53
                     Table 22: Home and foreign sales regressions

                           (vii)          (viii)        (ix)          (x)        (xi)
                                                                                      f
                               f              h             f          f           Xjt
                           ln Xijt        ln Xjt        ln Xjt        Djt         h     f
                                                                                 Xjt +Xjt
                               10.665                                   0.102      0.127
     mean, dep. variable       10.957     -             -               0.141      0.062
                               (0.002)                                 (0.003)    (0.002)
                                0.328
     Rijt-1                     0.607     -             -
                               (0.018)
                                0.826
         f
     ln Xijt-1                  0.848     -             -
                               (0.004)
                                               0.976
         h
     ln Xjt                -                   0.964    -
           -1
                                              (0.001)
                                                             0.323
         h
     ln Xjt                -              -                  0.811
                                                            (0.012)
                             0.063
     ln jt                   0.060        -             -
                            (0.014)
                                f              h >0        f
                             Xijt >0        Xjt          Xjt >0        h >0       f     h >0
     sample restrictions      f              h             h          Xjt        Xjt , Xjt
                            Xijt-1 > 0     Xjt-1 > 0     Xjt > 0
     observatiaons         25,400         99,300        11,600        119,800    12,500
Notes: Rijt = 1 if exporter j s ith match is in its first year. ln jt = log age of exporter j .
 f                                                                f
Xijt = foreign sales volume generated by exporter j s ith match. Xjt = total foreign sales volume
                       h = total home sales volume generated by firm j . D f = 1 if firm j is an
generated by firm j . Xjt                                                 jt
exporter.




                                                  54
E      Learning, networks, and aggregate export dynamics
The relative contributions of the different types of matches depend on the learning and visi-
bility effects in our model. To demonstrate how, we contrast the post-devaluation evolution
of aggregates implied by our benchmark model (column 1 of Table 9) with the pattern implied
by the known-f variant (column 3 of Table 9). And we contrast the dynamic implications
of the known-f version of the model with those of a model in which f 's are known and all
firms have maximum visibility, regardless of their exporting history.39
    Figure 7 summarizes our findings. Panels a and b describe the market share of incum-
bent matches (yellow region), new matches with incumbent exporters (red region), and new
matches with new exporters (blue region) after an exchange regime shock. Panel c describes
the number of incumbent exporters who were active before time 0 (red region), and those
who enter after time 0 (blue region). We have superimposed lines that show how the shaded
areas would have shifted if firms had known their true f 's with certainty (dashed red lines),
and if they not only knew their f 's, but also had maximum visibility (dashed green lines).
    Several messages emerge. First, when firms know their true f from the start, the share
of new matches that goes to new exporters is substantially higher. Why? firms with high
f 's dominate entering cohorts, and these firms search more intensely. Firms that were
incumbent in period 0 also tend to have high f 's and invest heavily in search, but since
many of these firms were already well established, revealing their f draws to them doesn't
change their behavior as much.
    Second, when firms start out knowing their f draws, giving everyone maximum visibility
tends to increase share of new matches with new exporters. The simple reason is that in
the benchmark model new exporters have less visibility than incumbents. This experiment
eliminates their disadvantage. Visibility effects aren't as important as learning effects.
    Finally, regardless of whether all firms have maximum visibility or full knowledge of their
f draws, the matches of entering cohorts displace incumbent matches at almost exactly the
same pace. That is, the border between the orange and yellow regions nearly coincides with
the dashed red and green lines in all panels. This sameness reflects the fact that incumbent
matches are unaffected by either beliefs about f or search costs.
    In Table 23, we compare the short-, medium-, and long-run trade elasticities across
models. The first three columns present results for the benchmark model identical to those

  39
     In our simulations of the benchmark model, the maximum number of successful matches is approximately
a = 40 successful matches. So to characterize full visibility, we replace equation (10) with
                                                               
                                                     [(1 + sm )] 1 - 1
                                  cm (sm , 40) = m
                                                 0                     .                             (11)
                                                     1 [1 + ln(1 + 40)]




                                                     55
  Figure 7: Responses to a permanent shock: baseline vs. other specifications




        (a) Total sales              (b) Total active matches           (c) Total active exporters

Notes: Figures depict aggregate responses to a permanent 20 percent real devaluation at time 0.
Shaded areas in panels a and b reflect contributions of matches that existed at time 0 (yellow),
matches formed after time 0 by exporters that were active at time 0 (red), and matches formed
after time 0 by exporters that entered the foreign market after time 0 (blue). Thin dashed lines
show patterns that would have obtained if learning effects (red) or both learning and network
effects (green) had been absent. All series are averages across 2000 simulations of the exchange
rate process.




        Table 23: Simulated Trade Elasticities: Comparing across models

 Favorable          Baseline                    Known    f                    Known    f & Full visibility
 Time since shock   1 year 5 years   25 years   1 year   5 years   25 years   1 year   5 years 25 years
 Sales              1.20   1.69      1.88       1.18     1.66      1.65       1.22     1.63    1.67
                    (0.05) (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.04)   (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.03)   (0.03)  (0.03)
 Matches            0.26   0.80      0.94       0.27     0.76      0.85       0.29     0.72    0.76
                    (0.03) (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)  (0.02)
 Exporters          0.14   0.50      0.60       0.19     0.51      0.61       0.16     0.49    0.55
                    (0.02) (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)  (0.02)

 Notes: All elasticities are based on 2000 simulations of favorable and unfavorable 20 percent
changes in the mean real exchange rate. Standard errors based on cross-simulation standard devi-
ations are in parentheses.




                                                 56
in Table 13, the middle three columns present results for the known-f variant, and the last
three present results for the known-f variant with full-visibility (network effects exhausted).
    The results aren't very sensitive to our assumptions regarding learning or visibility,
though the known-f model generates a bit less long run responsiveness to positive shocks,
mainly because of smaller match elasticities. When potential firms are ignorant of their
potential, they search more intensely in response to favorable long-run changes in demand
since higher potential profits increase the incentive to learn one's market appeal. As for
negative shocks, the associated reduction in entry makes learning less important.
    But visibility does matter over the long run. Giving all firms full visibility eliminates
the search-cost disadvantage of young firms, moving them away from their exit threshold
and dampening extensive margin responses to the shock. Both learning and visibility matter
mainly for new, small-scale exporters, so their impact on aggregate export fluctuations is
quantitatively small.




                                              57
