                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF HOSPITAL CLOSURES

                                     Diane E. Alexander
                                     Michael R. Richards

                                      Working Paper 29110
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29110


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




Diane Alexander and Michael Richards have no financial or material interests relevant to the
paper "Economic Consequences of Hospital Closures". The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Diane E. Alexander and Michael R. Richards. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Consequences of Hospital Closures
Diane E. Alexander and Michael R. Richards
NBER Working Paper No. 29110
July 2021
JEL No. H51,I11,I18,J21

                                        ABSTRACT

Hospitals anchor much of US health care and receive a third of all medical spending, including
various subsidies. Nevertheless, some become insolvent and exit the market. Research has
documented subsequent access problems; however, less is understood about broader implications.
We examine over 100 rural hospital closures spanning 2005-2017 to quantify the effects on the
local economy. We find sharp and persistent reductions in employment, but these localize to
health care occupations and are largely driven by areas experiencing complete closures.
Aggregate consumer financial health is only modestly affected, and housing markets were already
depressed prior to hospital closures.


Diane E. Alexander
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dealexa@wharton.upenn.edu

Michael R. Richards
Baylor University
Department of Economics
One Bear Place #98003
Waco, TX 76798
michael_richards@baylor.edu
1. Introduction

US hospitals have evolved over time from philanthropic-dependent entities into a mix of not-for-

profit and for-profit firms, with the latter accounting for approximately 25% of all community

hospitals at this time.1 Hospitals currently number more than 6,000 across the US and capture a

third of annual health spending (i.e., over $1 trillion per year).2 Approximately 33 million inpatient

stays, 140 million emergency department visits, and 700 million outpatient visits occurred among

community hospitals in 2016 alone, underscoring their central role in the nation's health care

apparatus and delivery system (AHA 2018). These specialized firms also perform a variety of

indirect and socially valuable functions, such as implicitly financing care for the uninsured

(Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo 2018) and even supplying social services in some

circumstances (Ross Johnson 2018).

         Beyond their direct care provision and charitable actions, hospitals can also be a key source

of economic activity in their local communities. Nationally, hospitals employ roughly 4.5 million

workers. This total is not far behind full-service restaurant employers, and is more than a third of

the number of all US workers currently employed in manufacturing­­another industry punctuated

by closures over recent decades (Fort, Pierce, and Schott 2018). As is the case in manufacturing,

firm closures in the hospital industry raise concerns about broader economic impacts. Some

estimate that hospitals collectively generate nearly $3 trillion of economic activity throughout the



1
 Community hospitals are defined as all nonfederal, short-term general, and other special hospitals. Other special
hospitals include obstetrics and gynecology; eye, ear, nose, and throat; long term acute-care; rehabilitation;
orthopedic; and other individually described specialty services. Community hospitals include academic medical
centers or other teaching hospitals if they are nonfederal short-term hospitals. Excluded are hospitals not accessible
by the general public, such as prison hospitals or college infirmaries. Information provided by the American
Hospital Association (AHA) and found here: https://www.aha.org/statistics/fast-facts-us-hospitals.

2
  Summary statistics regarding US national health expenditures are provided by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) here: https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-
reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/downloads/highlights.pdf.


                                                                                                                         1
US, with two-thirds of that sum stemming from downstream, or "ripple", effects on other industries

and sectors (AHA 2018). Such figures suggest that hospitals are not only vital for providing access

to acute and discretionary medical services, but they may also serve their surrounding communities

as an economic anchor, if not an engine for growth.

           Yet, hospitals' duality as a care supplier and key employer does not insulate them against

financial struggles. These challenges are often most severely felt within rural communities, where

low occupancy rates coupled with high fixed costs can generate negative and unsustainable

margins for hospitals (Wishner et al. 2016; Frakt 2019; Bai et al. 2020; GAO 2020; Kacick 2020).

A growing wave of insolvencies and subsequent closures has recently taken place­­leading some

to declare a crisis for rural America (Chartis Center for Rural Health 2020), and which may worsen

with the continued fallout from COVID-19 (Kacick 2020). This wave of closures is also occurring

against a backdrop of more pronounced provider shortages, greater disease burden, and lower life

expectancy among rural areas when compared to their urban counterparts (Iglehart 2018; Cross et

al. 2020; Cross, Califf, and Warraich 2021).3

           Hospitals' market exits have unsurprisingly attracted increasing attention from researchers

and policymakers. Contemporary empirical studies find that hospital closures impede patients'

access to care, especially for time-sensitive conditions in more rural geographies (Buchmueller

2006; Carrol 2019; Gurjal and Basu 2019; Song and Saghafian 2019; GAO 2020; Miller et al.

2020; McCarthy et al. 2021; Nikpay et al. 2021), and rural hospital closures have emerged as an

issue of concern from the Biden Administration.4,5 Beyond health care access, the broader


3
 Of note, some research suggests that recent Medicaid expansions have benefit rural hospitals' finances to some
degree and perhaps forestalled some closure events (Lindrooth et al. 2018; Bai et al. 2020).
4
    Although, the evidence is mixed (e.g., Rosenbach and Dayhoff 1995, Joynt et al. 2015).
5
 https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/07/09/fact-sheet-executive-order-on-
promoting-competition-in-the-american-economy/


                                                                                                                  2
economic implications from rural hospital closures are also of research interest, and are often

presented as a key rational for policy intervention (e.g., MedPAC 2016; Frakt 2019).

       In this paper, we aim to better understand the broader economic ramifications of this

contemporary health care phenomenon. We do so by combining a census of rural hospital closures

across the US from 2005 through 2017 with a unique collection of granular county-level measures

on employment, consumer financial status, and housing market activity. We use generalized

differences-in-differences and event study analyses to quantify if, and to what degree, hospital

exits in rural areas impact the local economy. We subject our findings to a battery of robustness

checks, such as alternative control groups, and alternative estimation strategies to address potential

issues with the differential timing in treatment--i.e., closure events--over our analytic period

(e.g., see Goodman-Bacon 2018).

       While our estimates reveal strong and sharp negative effects on local employment levels,

the declines are largely confined to health care jobs. Implications for overall consumer credit

worthiness or financial strain in these communities are more muted. Housing markets are

depressed in rural areas experiencing closures, but the declines begin in the years leading up to the

hospital closure, with no evidence of housing markets further worsening after the market exit. The

empirical patterns tied to housing are more consistent with population losses creating financial

challenges for rural hospitals, as opposed to the closure of the hospital driving away residents

and/or weakening the attraction of new residents to the area.

       We also conduct a supplementary analysis to examine heterogeneity in effects according

to characteristics of the closure. We find evidence suggesting that the closure of rural Critical

Access Hospitals (CAHs), specifically, have larger negative effects on the local health care labor

market, as well as local consumer credit worthiness, when compared to the closure other rural




                                                                                                    3
hospitals. We also look at heterogeneity along the dimension of whether any of the hospitals' assets

were repurposed, as opposed to a complete shutdown of the health care delivery. The results

demonstrate that full closures are associated with stronger economic effects compared to partial,

particularly with respect to labor market outcomes. Though these analyses require more

circumspect interpretation, they offer some useful nuance that can be informative for policymakers

that may be trying to minimize the economic fallout from rural hospital closures. If rural economies

are sufficiently resilient to withstand the loss of a local inpatient hospital, especially when some

of the health care industry remains, federal funds might witness greater returns when targeting

other economic challenges facing these communities, rather than being used to forestall an

inpatient facility's market exit.

        While other researchers have studied the economic effects of hospital closures in rural

communities, the conclusions have been mixed­­perhaps partly due to the fact that much of the

literature does not account for the potential of reverse causality. Earlier work, for example,

estimated lower consumer welfare when a rural community loses a hospital (McNamara 1999),

and Holmes et al. 2006 finds lower per capita income and higher unemployment when a sole

community hospital closes­­but the study period is well-before the recent acceleration of rural

hospital closures (data covers the 1990s), and the estimation approach does not reveal whether the

outcomes were evolving similarly in the lead up to a closure or demonstrate the persistency of any

effects. Conversely, looking at a shorter time frame (1998-2000) in three states, Ona, Hudoyo, and

Freshwater (2007) fail to detect any economic effects from rural hospital closures, which aligns

with equivocal or null results from studies focused on communities in the 1980s (Probst et al.

1999; Pearson and Tajalli 2003). A contemporary study from Edmiston (2019) finds closures

between 2011 and 2016 to be negatively associated with general employment and wages; however,




                                                                                                  4
the analyses are primarily descriptive, rather than causal, in nature. A recent working paper from

Vogler (2021) reports sweeping negative effects of rural hospital closures, primarily focusing on

overall labor market outcomes.6 While we also find significant effects of closures on employment,

our industry-level results take this analysis a step farther and show that these effects are limited to

the health care sector, with minimal evidence of spillovers. Our comprehensive data on consumer

finances and housing markets also allow for a more detailed examination of closures' impacts on

local economic activity.

         In sum, we offer a highly policy relevant and comprehensive collection of findings for

policymakers, which document both the direct and indirect effects of rural hospital closures on

local economies. These estimates fill an important gap in the literature, as significant public

resources have subsidized rural hospitals for roughly four decades, despite a lack of consensus

around the full costs (i.e., health and economic) to communities that experience a hospital closure.

The bulk of these funds come from the federal Medicare program, and add more than $4 billion to

the public insurer's annual expenditures (MedPAC 2016). While the US health care sector is a

considerable source of jobs and employment growth (Baicker and Chandra 2012; Frogner 2018),

a substantial portion of the sector's financing comes through taxation. Important tradeoffs must be

considered when using public financing to promote the sector's role in employment to avoid

fomenting a "wildly inefficient jobs program" (Baicker and Chandra 2012). Our results are also

timely, as the US health care sector has been the recipient of large, new funding injections (via the




6
  It is difficult to directly compare our results to those of Vogler (2021), as much of the data, data construction, and
regression specifications for closure effects differ across the two papers. The one dataset in common between our
analyses and Vogler (2021) is the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW); we both find a decrease in
log employment after hospital closures­­though Vogler reports non-health care jobs as being a key driver of the
employment declines. Our results are not consistent with such an interpretation.




                                                                                                                      5
CARES Act and follow-on legislation), with additional support possibly needed in the future.

Allocating such funds wisely can ensure their efficient use and maximize their intended benefits.



2. Background

2.1 Rural Hospital Landscape

At this time, just under 2,000 hospitals across the US are considered rural community hospitals.7

The current regulatory regime for rural hospitals began in 1997, when the Rural Primary Care

Hospital (RPCH) program was transformed into the Critical Access Hospital (CAH) program.8

Receiving the CAH designation requires accepting certain constraints (e.g., maintaining inpatient

bed capacity, but fewer than 25 beds, and limiting their average patient length of stay) but also

entitles a hospital to generous cost-based reimbursements from Medicare (as opposed to the

standard prospective payment system used to reimburse other hospitals) and was developed with

the aim of propping up financially ailing rural hospitals. Roughly half of all current rural hospitals

across the US are part of the CAH program (MedPAC 2016; Iglehart 2018; Bai et al. 2020). Some

recent research finds that the CAH program mitigates the risk of rural hospital closure­­though

the net effects on consumer welfare are not necessarily favorable (MedPAC 2012; Gowrisankaran

et al. 2018; Carrol 2019).




7
Around 35% of all community hospitals in the US are rural community hospitals. Information provided by the
American Hospital Association (AHA) and found here: https://www.aha.org/statistics/fast-facts-us-hospitals.
8
  Historically, much of the rural hospital infrastructure began and expanded as part of the Hill-Burton Act in 1946
(Wishner et al. 2016; Iglehart 2018). To help support and sustain these firms, various forms of transfer programs
launched during the 1980s. The Sole Community Hospital program and Rural Primary Care Hospitals (RPCHs)
were two of the early interventions. Then, in 1987, the federal government created a new administrative branch
solely devoted to health and policy affairs concerning rural areas: the Federal Office of Rural Health Policy. Shortly
after, in 1989, the federal government introduced another new hospital classification, the Medicare Dependent
Hospital, that intended to target additional attention and resources to these facilities to help ensure their survival.



                                                                                                                      6
2.2 Rural Hospital Closures and Policy Considerations

A series of rural hospital closures in recent years has attracted considerable media, industry, and

policymaker attention. While issues related to health care access are typically of immediate

concern, a wider range of potential negative economic consequences are also often highlighted.9

Local media reports and isolated case studies of finalized or looming rural hospital closures often

remark on the number of individuals previously working for the hospital, as well as community

leader concerns over retaining as well as attracting other businesses to the area (Wishner et al.

2016; Associated Press 2019, 2020a). It is at least plausible that the compounding loss of high

earners, as well as central figures in the local health care industry, could further challenge these

communities in the wake of losing their local hospital.

         In response, legislation is currently being introduced at both the federal and state levels to

stem further losses of rural hospitals. Policymakers are primarily motivated by two salient

rationales: preserving access and preserving jobs in these communities (Associated Press 2020b).

More specifically, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act included

special transfers restricted to roughly 1,800 rural hospitals across the US (Brady 2020). The

bipartisan Save Rural Hospitals Act­­introduced in the US House of Representatives in 2017­­

would undo spending cuts for these hospitals and possibly increase some of their payments

(Sharfstein 2016; Wishner et al. 2016).10



9
  Research focused on the 1980s argues that rural towns suffer losses of local physicians when a key hospital shuts
down (Hart, Pirani, and Rosenblatt 1995). More recently, Drew Germack, Kandrack, and Martsolf (2019) examined
physician supply following rural hospital closures and found suggestive evidence of negative economic effects when
using American Hospital Association and the Area Health Resource Files databases. Of note, the event study
analyses in Germack, Kandrack, and Martsolf (2019) demonstrate substantive differential trending in the years
leading up to an observed closure in the AHA data, and statistically significant post-closure effects are not evident
until 4­6 years after the county experienced a closure.
10
 The Save Rural Hospitals Act was introduced in the house in 2017, sponsored by Representatives Sam Graves (R-
MO) and Dave Loebsack (D-IA).


                                                                                                                   7
       Yet, it remains an open question as to whether subsidies for rural hospitals are appropriately

targeted or the most efficient use of public funds. For instance, 16% of so-called critical access

hospitals (CAHs) are within fifteen miles of another hospital (MedPAC 2012)­­indicative of

readily available substitute facilities and access points for rural consumers at only modest

additional travel costs. Furthermore, among CAHs that closed in 2014, their median Medicare

payment rate was $500,000 above what these same hospitals would have received under the

standard Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) that has applied to most hospitals in the

US since 1983 (MedPAC 2016). In other words, Medicare spent millions of dollars in excess

payments for hospitals that still failed to remain solvent under a generous (i.e., cost-based)

reimbursement system, and which may have readily available substitutes.

       For these reasons, a growing policy chorus has emerged to encourage more tailored

interventions that explicitly take into account what services are most needed in rural settings (e.g.,

emergency and ambulatory medical care), and how best to ensure their availability for rural

residents (MedPAC 2016). For example, a recent federal policy initiative, the Rural Emergency

Acute Care Hospital (REACH) Act, aims to create a new hospital classification for Medicare

reimbursement that would allow a facility to narrow its scope to emergency care and outpatient

services only (i.e., no longer maintain inpatient beds) and then receive cost-based payments for

these services (Kacick 2020). Proponents argue that such customization can maintain sufficient

rural care access while lowering some of the cost burden on public finances.

       In what follows, our empirics are able to speak to these arguments by taking a

comprehensive look at the economic fallout from rural hospital closures and contrasting the

empirical patterns between full and partial hospital closures­­with the latter effectively

representing a version of what the REACH Act and related policy approaches would aim to do.




                                                                                                    8
3. Data

3.1 Rural Hospital Closures

The Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research at the University of North Carolina

leverages a variety of sources to track rural hospital closures across the US dating back to 2005. A

rural hospital is defined as a short-term, general acute care (and non-federal) hospital that operates

outside of a metropolitan county, operates within a census rural-urban commuting area (RUCA)

type 4 county, or operates as a designated CAH. The center follows the federal Office of Inspector

General in defining a closed hospital as "...a facility that stopped providing general, short-term,

acute inpatient care." Hospital mergers, changes of ownership, or CAH conversions are excluded

from the closure count. Additionally, if a hospital closed and then reopened within the same

calendar year and physical location, then it is not recorded as a rural hospital closure in the

database. The data also differentiate between full hospital closures and partial closures, whereby

the inpatient unit is discontinued but other services (e.g., emergency care, rehabilitation services,

or outpatient care) remain. Importantly, each closure (full or partial) event has a precise calendar

date and associated county location. These features make our subsequent empirical strategies

feasible, and these data are also publicly available.11

        Figure 1 displays the corresponding trends in national closure counts by the type of closure.

Rural hospital closures have accelerated since the Great Recession, and within a typical year, the

majority of closures are full market exits. Figure 2 characterizes the geographic dispersion of these

closures over the 2005-2019 period. Rural hospitals have ceased operations within most regions




11
  The data and their full description can be accessed here: https://www.shepscenter.unc.edu/programs-
projects/rural-health/rural-hospital-closures/. Of note, for a minority of closure cases, we had to supplement the
Center's information with our own web-based information gathering to determine the exact closure taxonomy (i.e.,
full or partial) for a given closure event. A few closure events could not be cleanly assigned to a closure type.



                                                                                                                     9
of the US; though, certain states (e.g., Texas) have witnessed comparatively larger waves of

closures during this time.



2.2 Employment

Our county-level employment information comes from the Quarterly Census of Employment and

Wages (QCEW), which is collected and made available by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics. The

data provide counts of employment by industry, and are estimated to cover more than 95% of all

US jobs. We use the quarterly data beginning in 2001 and going through 2018, and more

specifically, the counts of total employment, private sector employment, health and education

employment, and non-health and non-education private sector employment. The latter three counts

are defined by the accompanying private sectors NAICS codes. One drawback of these quarterly

data is the inability to separate education employment from health services employment (i.e.,

within the combined NAICS 1025 code); however, we believe the estimation advantages of having

more granular timing (i.e., quarterly increments) more than offsets this specific data limitation.

Moreover, the clear linkage between our market events of interest (i.e., hospital closures) and

health care industries suggest that within-county changes in employment levels proximate to these

market events should be overwhelmingly driven by adjustments to the local health care workforce,

as opposed to education jobs.12 We also restrict to counties with complete (i.e., non-missing) count

information for each employment sector for each of the 72 quarters belonging to our 2001-2018

QCEW data.




12
   Additionally, many of these communities' education industry workers are likely to work in the public sector,
rather than the private sector.



                                                                                                                  10
3.3 Consumer Financial Health

Our data on consumer financial information comes from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Equifax Consumer Credit Panel (FRBNY CCP/ Equifax). This dataset consists of detailed credit-

report data for a unique longitudinal panel of individuals and households in quarterly increments

from the first quarter of 2000 to the first quarter of 2020. The anonymized panel tracks a nationally

representative 5% random sample of individuals in the US with a credit file and a social security

number. The underlying data are at the individual-quarter level, which we then collapse to the

county-quarter level.13 From the FRBNY CCP/Equifax we construct several summary measures

of consumer financial health. In particular, we construct the average Equifax Risk Score (referred

to as `risk score' from here on), the average number of bankruptcies in the last 24 months, the

average total balance past due, and the average number of 3rd party collections (i.e., collections not

handled by the original creditor) in the past twelve months.14



3.4 Housing Market Activity

The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) Database is composed of records from originations

and purchases of mortgages, as well as from loan applications that were withdrawn or denied.

Included in the data are loan characteristics and outcomes, collateral characteristics, and

information on applicant demographics. The data is reported by depository institutions and certain

for-profit, non-depository institutions, as required by the original Home Mortgage Disclosure Act




13
     We drop any county-quarter observations with less than 20 underlying observations for privacy concerns.

14
   FRBNY CCP/Equifax data assets are only the source of the analytic data containing these specific outcomes
describing consumer financial health; all of the calculations or subsequent findings and interpretations relying on
this data source are conclusions of the authors; any mistakes are our own.



                                                                                                                      11
legislation from 1975, as well as later amendments.15 The Federal Financial Institutions

Examination Council (FFIEC) compiles the data, which is available annually; the collection effort

has been spearheaded by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) since the 2017

reporting year.

         In order to look at county-level housing market activity in the years before and after the

hospital closure, we look at the total number of loans originated, denied, and purchased in each

county-year from 2001 to 2018. We also construct a measure of the average loan amount for these

loan categories, and separate loans into three loan purpose categories (home purchase, home

improvement, refinance), and by applicant race categories (white, black, and other) in order to see

whether there is any change in the composition of loans over the time period.



4. Empirical Strategy

4.1 Primary Analytic Approach

To examine the effect of rural hospital closures on the local economy, we use a generalized

differences-in-differences (DD) estimation approach. This approach is analogous to other recent

economics research studying health care market events (e.g., Eliason et al. 2019; Prager and

Schmitt 2021). Our treated counties are those that experience a rural hospital closure over the

2005-2017 period. We use counties that never experience a closure during this time interval, have

at least 25% of the county population classified as rural according to the 2000 Census, and have a

hospital present in the county as of 2005 to comprise the control comparison group. The latter



15
  Not all lenders must participate in HMDA reporting. The requirements, which have changed over time, depend on
the lender's asset size, whether it participates in residential mortgage lending, and whether it has a home or branch
office in a metropolitan statistical area, among other factors.




                                                                                                                  12
control group inclusion characteristic is derived from the American Hospital Association annual

survey from 2005, and restricts to non-government, general acute care hospitals. While the exact

number of counties in the analysis varies slightly by dataset, roughly 120 counties are classified

as treated, and more than 1,600 counties as controls (see Table 1).16

        Table 1 summarizes our outcome variables across our two groups of counties (i.e., the

treatment and control groups). The overall population, and hence size of the labor market and

housing market activity, is larger, on average, among counties that experience a rural hospital

closure during our analytic period when compared to our control group counties. However, the

dollar amounts of the housing loans as well as income profiles of borrower applicants is quite

similar across the treatment and control groups in Table 1. Similarly, average credit risk scores

and bankruptcy rates over the preceding 24 months are for counties losing their hospitals are on

par with those from counties that do not experience this market event during our study period.

        Our first generalized DD estimating equation takes the form:



                                Ycqt =  RuralClosurecqt + c + q +  t +  cqt                                     (1)




Our outcomes (Y) are levels of employment for a given worker type for a given county-quarter-

year in the QCEW data (and log transformed), and our aggregate consumer financial health and

housing market outcomes are as described in Section 2.3 and Section 2.4. Equation (1) also




16
  The large number of never-treated control counties relative to counties experiencing a closure is analytically
helpful when using two-way fixed effects estimation to recover a DD estimate since the overwhelming majority of
our counties are "never treated" units, meaning that our key 2x2 comparison is almost entirely between treated units
and never treated units, which avoids complications from a large number of "always treated" units and/or when most
of the units are eventually treated in the presence of treatment effect heterogeneity (see Goodman-Bacon 2018 for a
detailed discussion of the generalized differences-in-differences econometric properties).


                                                                                                                 13
includes county fixed effects (  ), quarter fixed effects (  ), and year fixed effects (  ). The 

parameter for the RuralClosure variable is our DD estimate of interest.

         To strengthen our inferences, and allow for an investigation of how the economic variables

were trending in the treatment and control counties prior to the closure, we further adapt our setup

in Equation (1) to an event study model:



                                   -1                        13+
                        Ycqt =              j   1(Tc + j ) 
                                                            +  j 1 (Tc + j )  + c + q +  t +  cqt                   (2)
                                 j = -13+                    j =0
                                 j -4




The variable Tc represents the quarter-year a given treated county (c) experiences a rural hospital

closure. We then create a series of quarterly event-time dummies (j) that capture the periods

leading up to and following the closure event and span three years in each direction. The omitted

time point is four quarters (i.e., one year) prior to the county's closure event at time Tc. We also

have a summary time dummy for less (more) than three years before (after) the closure event.

Doing so results in a set of pre-closure parameters (  j ) to inform how the treatment and control

counties are trending prior to the closure event.

         Parallel trends are needed to support a causal interpretation of the DD research design;

however, the behavior of the outcomes in the years before a hospital formally closes can also be

of independent empirical interest. Equation (2) allows us to examine any pre-closure changes

across our outcomes of interest.17 Additionally, the series of  j parameters can flexibly allow for




17
  For example, previous work demonstrates that rural hospitals financial performance suffers during the lead up to
the actual closure event, especially within a year of closure (Kaufman et al. 2016; Bai et al. 2020; Chartis Center for
Rural Health 2020).


                                                                                                                    14
any dynamics in the hospital closure effects over time. Across all three analytic data sets and

accompanying estimations, the standard errors are clustered at the county level throughout.18

        We remove counties (32 in total) that experience a rural hospital closure in 2018 or 2019

due to insufficient post-period data, and concerns that their pre-closure labor market changes could

distort the behavior of the control group and thereby bias our DD estimates. We are also forced to

estimate a modified version of Equation (2) when relying on the HMDA analytic data due to

differences in the available data timespan and time intervals of data reporting (i.e., yearly as

opposed to quarterly). Specifically, we condense the DD event-time range to [­6, 6] annual time

periods relative to the hospital closure event. We still use the year prior to closure (in this case t ­

1) as the omitted time period. The application of the event study model is otherwise unchanged

from its use on the quarterly analytic data sets for employment and consumer finances.



4.2 Empirical Challenges

Our primary empirical challenge is the differential timing in closure among our treatment group

counties. As previously noted, our control group is overwhelmingly comprised of never treated

units; yet, there could still be concerns that the generalized DD weighting may be distorting our

estimates and/or the pre-closure evolution in our outcomes of interest.

        To address this issue, we implement a robustness exercise that relies on a "stacked" event

study methodology. First, we only include treated counties where we can observe their outcomes

12 quarters before the hospital closure event and 12 quarters after (i.e., those exhibiting full




18
  Importantly, neither Equation (1) or Equation (2) contain time-varying county characteristics as right-hand-side
variables. Given that we are examining the economic impacts of rural hospital closures changes in any commonly
used geographic characteristics (e.g., population demographics, unemployment rates, poverty rates, etc.) are
potential outcomes from the market shock. Thus, their inclusion in the estimation would risk endogeneity bias from
using potential outcomes as covariates (i.e., using "bad controls").


                                                                                                                15
information pre- and post-closure). Next, we take all of our available control group counties from

Section 4.1 and randomly assign them a placebo closure date based on the sample of actual closure

dates observed within our treated units. Anchored to a control unit's placebo date, we retain the 12

quarters before and after the randomly assigned placebo date. All potential control units without

the full [­12, +12] data available are subsequently excluded from the stacked event study

regressions--paralleling what is done for the treatment group. This process leaves us with a

balanced panel (25 quarters in total) of treatment and control counties where the t = 0 time point

is either the actual hospital closure quarter (treated units) or a placebo closure quarter (control

units) so that all units contribute the exact same amount of analytic information.19 We then re-

estimate Equation (2) on this stacked event study estimation sample to compare to the results from

our primary estimation approach (Section 4.1). The only departure is that we no longer require the

summary long (i.e., +/­ 13 quarters) event time dummies when using this refined analytic sample.

         We also thoroughly test the robustness of our main specification from Equation (1) to using

different criteria for defining control group counties. Specifically, we adjust the chosen threshold

of rurality for analytic sample inclusion from 25% to 50% and then to 75% of the county's

population based on the 2000 US census information. Similar estimates across control group

options from this exercise, coupled with our main event study and stacked event study results,

offer assurances that our empirical inferences are robust and valid.




19
   In other words, we have deliberately imposed an analytic environment where treatment "turns on" at the same
time for all treated units and there is no up- or down-weighting of treated units based on their specific timing of
treatment during our full study period.


                                                                                                                      16
5. Effects on Employment, Consumer Financial Health, and Housing Markets

We find that rural hospital closure is associated with a 2.9% decline in overall employment, and a

more precisely estimated 3.7% decline in private sector employment (top panel of Table 2,

columns 1 and 2). However, it is clear from columns 3 and 4 in the top panel of Table 2 that the

bulk of these employment declines occur within health care related occupations. There is a strongly

significant and approximately 10.6% drop in health care employment following a rural hospital

closure, whereas the estimate in column 4 demonstrates a statistically insignificant 2.2% decline

for all other private sector jobs.20 The lack of detectable effect in column 4 implies no clear

negative spillover effect (i.e., reduced employment in other industries) and no obvious job

switching out of health care and into other sectors of the economy--at least over the short-run.

         The corresponding event studies in Figure 3 support a causal interpretation of the effects

of hospital closures on health care employment found in Table 2. The treatment and control

counties track each other closely until the rural hospital closure event. At that point, employment

levels sharply fall until roughly one year following closure and remain depressed from then on.

The most dramatic changes are again found within health care jobs (Panel C). The post-closure

event-time estimates approximately range from 10-to-13% decreases in health care service

employment during the first three years after a rural hospital has closed. There is no compelling

evidence in Panel D with respect to non-health care related jobs. The event study coefficients are

very close to zero in the year preceding and following the hospital closures. The stacked event

study estimations produce identical findings (Figure A1), with parallel trending prior to the closure

event and then a sharp decline in employment once a rural hospital has closed; the entire decline

is again localized in health care related industries. Similarly, altering the inclusion criteria for


20
  Percent changes are calculated by exponentiating the DD coefficient from the top panel of Table 2 since all of the
employment outcomes are in logs.


                                                                                                                  17
control group counties (Table A2-A4) has no material effect on the DD estimates and inferences

described in Table 2.

       While we find clear evidence of a causal impact of rural hospital closures on local

employment in health care industries, the effect on average consumer financial health is more

muted (middle panel of Table 2). We find a 0.7-point decrease in a county's average credit score

in the aftermath of a rural hospital closure; however, the estimate is imprecise. Given the sample

mean risk score of 690, we can at least rule out large changes in average credit worthiness. The

event study result for the risk score outcome (Panel A, Figure 4) demonstrates a pattern suggestive

of a rural hospital closure effect; however, the individual post-period estimates again lack

sufficient precision at conventional levels. There is no detectable effect on collections or recent

bankruptcies--with the latter outcome relatively rare in the data. While there is a statistically

significant increase in the average total balance past due in Table 2 (the approximately $62 effect

translates to a 7% increase relative to the sample mean), the event study results for the total amount

past due (Panel C, Figure 4) show some evidence suggesting a possibility of differing pre-trends.

       For both risk scores and total balance past due, the stacked event study results (Figure A2)

are equally or better behaved in the pre-period, and offer a more compelling demonstration of post-

closure effects. By two years after the closure event, the average credit worthiness is down by 1

point and the total balanced past due is roughly $50-$70 higher within these affected counties. The

stacked event study estimations still show no closure effects on recent bankruptcies or the number

of collections reported. Re-estimating Equation (1) with the alternative control groups (Table A2-

A4) generates a qualitatively similar pattern for the consumer financial outcomes. If anything, our

preferred analytic sample may slightly understate the closure effects on consumer risk scores and

total debt amounts past due.




                                                                                                   18
       Finally, places which experience a hospital closure were already experiencing worsening

local housing market economic indicators prior to the closure. While the bottom panel of Table 2

reveals large and statistically significant DD estimates for all three housing market activity

outcomes, it is clear in Figure 5 (as well as the stacked versions in Figure A3) that these results

reflect strong differing pre-trends, rather than a discrete change at the closure event. These

differing pre-trends also align with commonly reported root causes of rural hospital financial

struggles--namely, declining populations and high fixed costs. Examining additional and more

nuanced housing market outcomes in Table 3 demonstrates a similar pattern of results. Quantities

of loans are declining, irrespective of type, but this again reflects depressed housing market activity

during the years leading up to the rural hospital closure, rather than a shock to housing markets

following closure (Figure A4). The patterns are not obviously different for different ethnic groups

of borrowers (Figure A5), and the dollar values of the loans are largely unchanged in the wake of

a rural hospital closure (columns 4-6, Table 3, Figure A6).



6. Heterogeneity

6.1 Critical Access Hospital Status

The longstanding CAH program aims to forestall rural hospital closures in order to preserve access

for surrounding communities. The program design and its possible targeting suggest that the

effects of closing a CAH designated hospital could differ from other, non-CAH facilities (40% of

the observed closures in our analytic samples belong to the CAH program).

       We investigate this potential heterogeneity by modifying our previous DD estimating

equation, Equation (1), to incorporate two separate DD parameters:




                                                                                                    19
                       Ycqt = 1 NonCAHClosurecqt +  2CAHClosurecqt + c + q +  t +  cqt                           (3)




Specifically, for Equation (3), we categorize each hospital closure as being either a non-CAH

closure or a CAH closure. The resulting coefficients ( 1 ,  2 ) then inform whether the overall

results displayed in Table 2 are driven by either type of rural hospital closure. The outcomes and

remaining elements of Equation (3) are identical to our DD estimations in Section III.

         Table 4 reports the results from our CAH heterogeneity exploration across the three

domains of economic outcomes. The negative effects on overall and private sector employment

are directionally the same and also modest in magnitude across non-CAH and CAH closures in

the top panel of Table 5. When focused on health care workers, both hospital types are associated

with large and statistically significant negative effects on employment levels­­i.e., 9% and 12%

reductions for non-CAH and CAH closures, respectively.21 That the magnitude of the closure

effect is one-third larger in relative terms, these results could suggest that the local health care

economy is more dependent on the hospital in areas that rely on a CAH. However, the estimate is

not sufficiently precise (i.e., the confidence intervals are overlapping across the two DD estimates)

to conclude that the labor market impact is, in fact, more severe following a CAH closure. Neither

type of rural hospital closure exhibits a detectable impact on private sector employment in non-

health related industries.

         The consumer financial outcomes in the middle panel of Table 5 do not reveal consistent

differences across the two hospital closure types; although, it is clear from the first column of

estimates that any county-level credit score reduction is coming from the negative effects felt in



21
  As before, the percent changes are calculated by exponentiating the DD coefficient in the top panel of Table 4 for
our employment outcomes.


                                                                                                                  20
areas where a CAH closed. The magnitude of the CAH closure effect on local residents' overall

credit worthiness is also comparable to some recent findings from public insurance contractions

(Argys et al. 2020). This empirical pattern could be consistent with these particular hospitals

wielding greater influence in the local health care economy and related labor markets, and

therefore having stronger local economic ramifications when closing. Interestingly, the housing

market declines detailed in Section 5 seem to load more strongly on counties experiencing non-

CAH closure events (bottom panel, Table 5). These patterns are suggestive of different

mechanisms possibly driving CAH and non-CAH rural hospital closures, where the latter seems

more closely linked to overall local economic decline.



6.2 Full versus Partial Closures

Our final empirical exercise examines whether the effects of rural hospital closures on local

economic outcomes differ by the degree of closure (i.e., full versus partial). Partial closures or

facility repurposing efforts commonly include transitions to emergency services, urgent care,

outpatient care, and/or skilled nursing facilities, which could plausibly preserve many of the jobs

previously attached to the inpatient care unit. The existing literature has typically not differentiated

between true closures and rural hospital conversions (Kaufman et al. 2016), which creates some

interpretation and policy prescription ambiguity.

        These analyses also introduce their own empirical complications, however, as the decision

to preserve some service lines, rather than implement a full shutdown, likely reflects a variety of

market conditions and possibly their evolution leading up to closure deliberations and decisions.

Figure 6, for example, shows the 30-year trends in median household income and prevailing

poverty rate for three mutually exclusive county types: 1) those experiencing a partial closure 2)




                                                                                                     21
those experiencing a full closure and 3) those never experiencing either type of rural hospital

closure and belonging to our DD control group. Counties that eventually have their rural hospital

fully close have consistently lower incomes and higher poverty rates on average, compared to the

other two groups, which tend to look more similar. We consequently view these supplementary

analyses as largely descriptive. Yet, given the similarity between the partial closures we observe

in the data and the goal of recent policy proposals, which have essentially advocated for subsidy

programs that would favor partial closures over full closures of rural hospitals, we believe these

analyses are still informative (with important caveats).22

        We modify Equation (1) in the same manner as in Equation (3) to explore any differences

across this rural hospital closure taxonomy:



                       Ycqt = 1 PartClosurecqt +  2 FullClosurecqt + c + q +  t +  cqt                         (4)




As before, the sole departure from Equation (1) is the presence of two separate DD indicator

variables (i.e., FullClosure and PartClosure) for full rural hospital closures and partial rural

hospital closures, respectively. The model is otherwise unchanged­­though as noted, the

assumptions needed to ascribe causal interpretations to the DD estimates are stronger.

        Table 5 presents the results from investigating heterogeneity by hospital closure type

(Equation (4)). Unsurprisingly, the closure effects on local health care related jobs are larger and

more precisely estimated for full closures, with the magnitude of the effect more than twice as

large as partial closures and translating to an approximately 16% decline in employment levels.



22
  Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics across all of our closure types underlying our heterogeneity
analyses in Section 6.


                                                                                                               22
There is also suggestive evidence in column 4 that full closures lead to a negative spillover effect

(4%) on employment in other (non-health care) industries, though this may also stem from

differing pre-trends in these areas, which tend to be worse off. Areas experiencing partial closures

demonstrate a more modest 6% decline in health care employment and no employment reductions

among other job types. For consumer finances and housing market activity the DD coefficients are

generally not substantively different across the closure types and typically lack sufficient precision

to claim a differential impact on these specific outcomes.

        Taken together, there is, at least, suggestive evidence in Table 5 that areas which are able

to repurpose an existing hospital into some other type of health care facility may benefit from

smaller overall impacts on their local health care industries and economies.23 Additionally, such

an approach, which some recent policy proposals would encourage, may be easier to adapt to local

market conditions as well as health needs and priorities than the more rigid CAH requirements that

must be met to qualify for enhanced Medicare reimbursements.



7. Discussion and Conclusions

The hospital industry captures the largest share of annual US health care spending among all

medical service suppliers; yet, certain members of the industry­­namely rural hospitals­­have

experienced a wave of financial insolvencies during the past decade. While hospitals have clear

and vital roles within health care delivery, many argue that their broader economic impacts can be

equally important to lower resourced and less populated communities. Empirically, we find weaker

employment and consumer credit worthiness following rural hospital closures. However, the

former is concentrated almost entirely among health care related jobs, and the latter effect is small


23
 Appendix Tables A5-A8 repeat the descriptive exercise in Section 6.2 for additional housing market outcomes as
well as when further stratifying the closures according to CAH or non-CAH status.


                                                                                                             23
in magnitude and only found among counties losing a CAH. In contrast, local housing markets in

these areas are suffering both in the lead up to the closure event and its aftermath, but are not

further depressed by the local hospital shutting down.

        While hospital closures do not cause broad-based negative spillovers to the local economy,

to the extent that those losing health care jobs do not find employment in other local industries,

there will be a substantial loss of tax revenue for local governments. To quantify the loss in tax

base from health care-related job loss, we conduct a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation.

From Table 2, we found a 10.6% reduction, on average, in the health care labor force following a

rural hospital closure. Examining the labor markets in these same counties one year prior to the

closure event in the QCEW reveals a median health care (and education) workforce size of roughly

3,905 individuals, with a median weekly wage of $610 in nominal dollars.24 Our DD estimate

consequently implies an average loss of 414 health care workers in a representative rural county--

with each worker making roughly $30,500 annually when assuming 50 working weeks per year.25

Combining these estimates suggests an average lost tax base of $12.6 million for counties

experiencing a rural hospital closure, along with the associated economic activity. Conducting the

same calculation using our estimates for the overall labor force reveals a less precisely estimated

but larger in magnitude reduction in jobs (roughly 980 jobs, with a 95% confidence interval of 196

to 1791), suggesting that health care workers that lose their job after a hospital closure do not




24
 We use the median worker count because the mean is substantively distorted by a long right tail. The mean
weekly wage for health care industry workers in these counties is $618.
25
  As the health care sector is combined with the education sector in the QCEW data, this wage estimate may be
biased downwards by the inclusion of relatively lower paying educational workers.


                                                                                                                24
substitute into new jobs within the county.26 Thus, from the perspective of typical local

government, a hospital closure will result in approximately $13 million in lost tax base.

         While our analysis of the economic effects of rural hospital closures from 2005-2017 does

not reveal economic damage as severe or far-reaching, on average, as sometimes feared or

portrayed in media reporting and case studies, it does demonstrate a clear negative shock for local

government finances. It is not surprising, therefore, that local politicians often go to heroic lengths

to try to forestall hospital closures. When making policy decisions about how much to pay rural

hospitals, Medicare's focus is on preserving health outcomes, rather than explicitly trying to

save jobs for rural areas. The direction of contemporary policy momentum, however, appears

to be towards socially financing a narrower scope of in-person services in rural areas

(e.g., emergent and outpatient care), which could impact both the access and economies of

local    communities.       While      important     empirical      caveats     apply,     our    analysis     offers

suggestive evidence that the main economic harms from a hospital closure­­job loss and related

income loss for the rural county­­might be avoided if there is not a full exit from the market.



References

AHA. 2018. "Trendwatch Chartbook 2018: Trends Affecting Hospitals and Health Systems."
         American Hospital Association, Washington DC, available online:
         https://www.aha.org/system/files/2018-07/2018-aha-chartbook.pdf.


Argys, Laura M., Andrew I. Friedson, M. Melinda Pitts, and D. Sebastian Tello-Trillo. 2020.
         "Losing Public Health Insurance: TennCare Reform and Personal Financial Distress."
         Journal of Public Economics, 187:


26
   In addition, column 4 of Table 2 does not indicate health care workers are switching into other jobs on net. The
change in employment in non-health care industries after a closure shows a relatively small, negative coefficient that
is not statistically different from zero.


                                                                                                                   25
Associated Press. 2019. "After Rural Hospital's Closure, County Seeks Other Options."
       September 23, 2019.


Associated Press. 2020. "Alabama Hospital to Close; 17th to Shut Down in 10 Years." March 2,
       2020.

Associated Press. 2020. "Bill to Assist Struggling Rural Hospitals Clears Kentucky House."
       February 28, 2020.


Bai, Ge, Farah Yehia, Wei Chen, and Gerard F. Anderson. 2020. "Varying Trends in the
       Financial Viability of US Rural Hospitals, 2011-17." Health Affairs 39 (6): 942-948.


Baicker, Katherine, and Amitabh Chandra. 2012. "The Health Care Jobs Fallacy." New England
       Journal of Medicine 366 (26): 2433-2435.


Brady, Michael. 2020. "HHS Awards More than $160 Million to Rural Providers." Modern
       Healthcare, April 22 2020, Crains Communications Inc.


Buchmueller, Thomas C., Mireille Jacobson, and Cheryl Wold. 2006. "How Far to the Hospital?
       The Effect of Hospital Closures on Access to Care." Journal of Health Economics 25 (4):
       740-761.


Capps, Cory, David Dranove, and Richard C. Lindrooth. 2010. "Hospital Closure and Economic
       Efficiency." Journal of Health Economics, 29: 87-109.


Carrol, Caitlin. 2019. "Impeding Access of Promoting Efficiency? Effects of Rural Hospital
       Closure on the Cost and Quality of Care." Unpublished manuscript available from author.


Chartis Center for Rural Health. 2020. "The Rural Health Safety Net Under Pressure: Rural
       Hospital Vulnerability." February 2020, The Chartis Group.



                                                                                              26
Cross, Sarah H., Mandeep R. Mehra, Deepak L. Bhatt, Khurram Nasir, Christopher J.
       O'Donnell, Robert M. Califf, and Haider J. Warraich. 2020., "Rural-Urban Differences in
       Cardiovascular Mortality in the US, 1999-2017." Journal of the American Medical
       Association, 323 (18): 1852-1854.


Cross, Sarah H., Robert M. Califf, and Haider J. Warraich. 2021. "Rural-Urban Disparity in
       Mortality in the US from 1999-2019." Journal of the American Medical Association, 325
       (22): 2312-2314.


Drew Germack, Hayley, Ryan Kandrack, and Grant R. Martsolf. 2019. "When Rural Hospitals
       Close, the Physician Workforce Goes." Health Affairs 38 (12): 2086-2094.


Edmiston, Kelly D. 2019. "Rural Hospital Closures and Growth in Employment and Wages."
       KCFed Economic Bulletin, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas Cit, July 16 2019,
       www.kansascityfed.org/economicbulletin.


Eliason, Paul J., Benjamin Heebsh, Ryan C. McDevitt, and James W. Roberts. 2019. "How
       Acquisitions Affect Firm Behavior and Performance: Evidence from the Dialysis
       Industry." Quarterly Journal of Economics: 221-267.


Fort, Teresa C., Justin R. Pierce, and Peter K. Schott. 2018. "New Perspectives on the Decline of
       US Manufacturing Employment." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32 (2): 47-72.


Frakt, Austin B. 2019. "The Rural Hospital Problem." Journal of the American Medical
       Association 321 (23): 2271-2272.


Frogner, Bianca K. 2018. "The Health Care Job Engine: Where Do They Come from and What
       Do They Say About Our Future?" Medical Care Research and Review, 75 (2): 219-231.




                                                                                               27
GAO. 2020. Rural Hospital Closures: Affected Residents Had Reduced Access to Health Care
       Services. Government Accountability Office (GAO) December 22, 2020. Washington
       DC. GAO-21-93.


Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew Notowidigdo. 2018. "Hospitals as Insurers of Last
       Resort." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (1): 1-39.


Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment
       Timing." NBER Working Paper Series, No. 25018.


Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Claudio Lucarelli, Phillip Schmidt-Dengler, and Robert Town. 2018.
       "Can Amputation Save the Hospital? The Impact of the Medicare Rural Flexibility
       Program on Demand and Welfare." Journal of Health Economics, 58: 110-122.


Gurjal, Kritee, and Anirban Basu. 2019. "Impact of Rural and Urban Hospital Closures on
       Inpatient Mortality." NBER Working Paper Series, No. 26182.


Hart, L. Gary, Michael J. Pirani, and Roger A. Rosenblatt. 1995. "Most Rural Towns Lost
       Physicians after Their Hospitals Closed." Rural Development Perspectives 10 (1): 17-21.


Holmes, George M., Rebecca T. Slifkin, Randy K. Randolph, and Stephanie Poley. 2006. "The
       Effect of Rural Hospital Closures on Community Economic Health." Health Services
       Research 41 (2): 467-485.


Iglehart, John K. 2018. "The Challenging Quest to Improve Rural Health Care." New England
       Journal of Medicine, 378 (5): 473-479.


Joynt, Karen E., Paula Chatterjee, E. John Orav, and Ashish K. Jha. 2015. "Hospital Closures
       Had No Measurable Impact on Local Hospitalization Rates or Mortality Rates, 2003-11."
       Health Affairs 34 (5): 765-772.




                                                                                               28
Kacik, Alex. 2020. "A Quarter of Rural Hospitals Are at Risk of Closing." Modern Healthcare,
       April 8, 2020, Crain Communications Inc.


Kaufman, Brystana G., Sharita R. Thomas, Randy K. Randolph, Julie R. Perry, Kristie W.
       Thompson, George M. Holmes, and George H. Pink. 2016. "The Rising Rate of Rural
       Hospital Closures." Journal of Rural Health 32: 35-43.


Lindrooth, Richard C., Anthony T. LoSasso, and Gloria J. Bazzoli. 2003. "The Effect of Urban
       Hospital Closure on Markets." Journal of Health Economics, 22 (5): 691-712.


Lindrooth, Richard C., Marcelo C. Perraillon, Rose Y. Hardy, and Gregory J. Tung. 2018.
       "Understanding the Relationship between Medicaid Expansions and Hospital Closures."
       Health Affairs, 37 (1): 111-120.


McCarthy, Sean, Dylana Moore, W. Andrew Smedley, Brandon M. Crowley, et al. 2021.
       "Impact of Rural Hospital Closures on Health-Care Access." Journal of Surgical
       Research, 258: 170-178.


McNamara, Paul E. 1999. "Welfare Effects of Rural Hospital Closures: A Nested Logit Analysis
       of the Demand for Rural Hospital Services." American Journal of Agricultural
       Economics, 81 (3): 686-691.


MedPAC. 2012. "Serving Rural Medicare Beneficiaries." Report to Congress: Medicare and the
       Health Care Delivery System, June 2012. Washington DC.


MedPAC. 2016. "Improving Efficiency and Preserving Access to Emergency Care in Rural
       Areas." Report to Congress: Medicare and the Health Care Delivery System, June 2016.
       Washington DC.




                                                                                           29
Miller, Katherine E. M., Hailey J. James, George Mark Holmes, and Courtney H. Van Houtven.
       2020. "The Effect of Rural Hospital Closures on Emergency Medical Service Response
       and Transport Times." Health Services Research 55: 288-300.


Nikpay, Sayeh, Craig Tschautscher, Nathaniel L. Scott, and Michael Puskarich. 2021.
       "Association of Hospital Closures with Changes in Medicare-Covered Ambulance Trips
       among Rural Emergency Medical Services Agencies." Academic Emergency Medicine,
       online ahead of print, https://doi.org/10.1111/acem.14273.


Ona, Lucia Y., Agus Hudoyo, and David Freshwater. 2007. "Economic Impact of Hospital
       Closure on Rural Communities in Three Southern States: A Quasi-Experimental
       Approach." Journal of Regional Analysis & Policy 37 (2): 155-164.


Pearson, David R., and Hassan Tajalli. 2003. "The Impact of Rural Hospital Closure on the
       Economic Health of the Local Communities." Texas Journal of Rural Health 21 (3): 46-
       51.


Prager, Elena, and Matt Schmitt. 2021. "Employer Consolidation and Wages: Evidence from
       Hospitals." American Economic Review, 111(2): 397-427.


Probst, Janice C., Michael E. Samuels, James R. Hussey, David E. Berry, and Thomas C.
       Ricketts. 1999. "Economic Impact of Hospital Closure on Small Rural Counties, 1984 to
       1988: Demonstration of a Comparative Analysis Approach." Journal of Rural Health 15
       (4): 375-390.


Rosenbach, Margo L., and Debra A. Dayhoff. 1995. "Access to Care in Rural America: Impact
       of Hospital Closures." Health Care Finance Review 17 (1): 15-37.


Ross Johnson, Steven. 2018. "In Depth: Hospitals Tackling Social Determinants Are Setting the
       Course for the Industry." Modern Healthcare, August 25, 2018, Crains Communications
       Inc. Available online here:



                                                                                            30
       https://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20180825/NEWS/180809949/in-depth-
       hospitals-tackling-social-determinants-are-setting-the-course-for-the-industry.


Sharfstein, Joshua M. 2016. "Global Budgets for Rural Hospitals." Milbank Quarterly 94 (2):
       255-259.


Song, Lina D., and Soroush Saghafian. 2019. "Do Hospital Closures Improve the Efficiency and
       Quality of Other Hospitals?" SSRN 3318609, available here:
       https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/e128/da2b61465dae871ed0228a9e5d252ac563d9.pdf.


Vogler, Jacob. 2021. "Rural Hospital Closures and Local Economic Decline." SSRN Working

       Paper Series. Posted 9 March 2021. Available here: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3750200.



Wishner, Jane, Patricia Solleveld, Robin Rudowitz, Julia Paradise, and Larisa Antonisse. 2016.
       "A Look at Rural Hospital Closures and Implications for Access to Care: Three Case
       Studies." Issue Brief, Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, Kaiser Family
       Foundation (KFF), July 2016




                                                                                               31
Figures

                         Figure 1: Rural hospital closure taxonomy, 2005-2019




Notes: data from the University of North Carolina Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research.




                                                        1
            Figure 2: Geographic variation in rural hospital closure intensity, 2005-2019




                                                                                                        11 - 21
                                                                                                        8 - 11
                                                                                                        4-8
                                                                                                        1-4
                                                                                                        0-1
Notes: data from the University of North Carolina Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research and include
full hospital closures as well as partial hospital closures.




                                                       2
                                   Figure 3: Event study results for rural closure effects on county-level employment (in logs)

                                                                                         (A) All jobs                                                                                                                         (B) Private sector
                                               .04




                                                                                                                                                                                               .04
   Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure




                                                                                                                                                   Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure
                                                                                                                                                                                      .02
                                      .02




                                                                                                                                                                             0
                            0




                                                                                                                                                                    -.02
                  -.02




                                                                                                                                                           -.04
         -.04




                                                                                                                                                   -.06
 -.06
                                                     +)

                                                             1

                                                                 t-9

                                                                       t-7

                                                                             t-5

                                                                                   t-3

                                                                                          t-1


                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                               9

                                                                                                                                          11


                                                                                                                                           )




                                                                                                                                                                                                      +)

                                                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t-9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t-7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t-5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t-3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                                                         (+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (+
                                                          t-1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           t-1
                                                                                                t+

                                                                                                       t+

                                                                                                              t+

                                                                                                                     t+

                                                                                                                            t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t+
                                     3(




                                                                                                                                                                                      3(
                                                                                                                                       t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t+
                                                                                                                                      13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                  t-1




                                                                                                                                                                   t-1
                                                                                                                                   t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t+
                                                                       Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)                                                                                                    Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)



                                                                       (C) Health care industry                                                                                                                    (D) Non-health care industry
                                             .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                .05
 Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure




                                                                                                                                                    Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure
                      -.05         0




                                                                                                                                                                         0
 -.15      -.1




                                                                                                                                                   -.05
                                                     +)

                                                             1

                                                                 t-9

                                                                       t-7

                                                                             t-5

                                                                                   t-3

                                                                                          t-1


                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                               9

                                                                                                                                          11


                                                                                                                                           )




                                                                                                                                                                                                      +)

                                                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t-9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t-7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t-5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t-3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                                                         (+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (+
                                                          t-1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           t-1
                                                                                                t+

                                                                                                       t+

                                                                                                              t+

                                                                                                                     t+

                                                                                                                            t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t+
                                     3(




                                                                                                                                                                                      3(
                                                                                                                                       t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t+
                                                                                                                                      13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      13
                  t-1




                                                                                                                                                                   t-1
                                                                                                                                   t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t+
                                                                       Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)                                                                                                    Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)


Notes: Analytic sample and estimation parallel to regressions in Table 2, with event time dummies replacing the rural
closure indicator variable. The omitted time point is the fourth quarter (i.e., one year) prior to the rural hospital closure.




                                                                                                                                               3
         Figure 4: Event study results for rural hospital closure effects on consumer finances

                         (A) Risk score                                      (B) Bankruptcies past 24-months




               (C) Total balance past due                                (D) Number of collections past 12-months




Notes: Analytic sample and estimation parallel to regressions in Table 2, with event time dummies replacing the rural
closure indicator variable. The omitted time point is the fourth quarter (i.e., one year) prior to the rural hospital closure.




                                                              4
Figure 5: Event study results for rural hospital closure effects on housing markets: number of loans

                                                    Originated




Notes: Analytic sample and estimation parallel to regressions in Table 2, with event time dummies replacing the rural
closure indicator variable. The omitted time point is one year prior to the rural hospital closure.
                                                         5
                                                  Figure 6: County characteristics by type of closure




                                    60000 50000
                             Median income
                        30000   40000
                                    20000




                                                   1990                  2000                    2010                  2020
                                                                                      year

                                                          Partial closure                               Full closure
                                                          >25% Rural, hospital in 2005, no closure
                                    22    20
                         Percent in poverty
                        16       18 14




                                                   1990                  2000                    2010                  2020
                                                                                      year

                                                          Partial closure                               Full closure
                                                          >25% Rural, hospital in 2005, no closure


Notes: data on county-level median income and percent in poverty from the the Census Bureau's Small Area Income
and Poverty Estimates. Counties in our sample are classified into three categories: those that ever experienced a partial
closure, those that ever experience a full closure, and those that are at least 50% rural, but have never experienced a
hospital closure.




                                                                                  6
Tables

                                   Table 1: Summary statistics
                                                      Ever closure          Never closure


             Total employment (median)
             All                                        33,840                   29,794
             Private sector                             26,934                   23,350
             Health care                                 3,868                    3,458
             Non-health care                            22,990                   19,597
             Unique counties                              117                     1,642
             Observations                                8,424                   118,224

                                                Ever closure          Never closure


            Consumer financial health
            Risk score                                 678                691
            Total balance past due                    1,024               849
            # bills sent to collection (12m)          0.914              0.794
            Bankruptcy (24m)                          0.015              0.015
            Unique counties                            128               1,869
            Observations                              9,216             134,549

                                               Ever closure          Never closure


            Loan characteristics
            Loans denied                           789                   509
            Loans originated                      1,911                 1,288
            Loans purchased                        652                   396
            Loans denied: amount                    78                    81
            Loans originated: amount               101                   102
            Loans purchased: amount                145                   137
            Applicant income: denied                68                    69
            Applicant income: originated            94                    94
            Unique counties                        128                  1,869
            Observations                          2,304                 33,642
         Notes: Employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Quar-
         terly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), at the county-quarter
         level. Data on loans from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
         Database, at the county-year level. Data on consumer financial informa-
         tion comes from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit
         Panel (CCP), at the county-quarter level. Control group (never closure)
         counties are those that never experienced a rural hospital closure and had
         50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area accord-
         ing to the 2000 Census.



                                                  7
Table 2: Rural hospital closure effects on county-level consumer financial health and housing
markets
                                                                Employment (in logs)
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                                       Private          Health care       Non-health care
                                        All
                                                       sector           industries          industries
            1(Rural closure)         -0.029          -0.036              -0.101                -0.022
                                      (0.012)         (0.013)             (0.025)             (0.014)
            FEs: county, year           Yes             Yes                 Yes                 Yes
            Observations             126,648          126,648             126,648            126,648
            R2                         0.07            0.09                 0.23              0.09
            Mean dep. var.            10.32            10.06                8.16               9.87
            Unique counties           1,759            1,759               1,759              1,759

                                                                Consumer finances
                                       (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                      Risk          Tot. balance         Collections      Bankruptcies
                                      score           past due           (past 12m)        (past 24m)
            1(Rural closure)          -0.730         61.617                 -0.002            0.000
                                     (0.458)          (20.644)             (0.026)           (0.000)
            FEs: county, year          Yes              Yes                  Yes               Yes
            Observations            143,765           143,765              143,765           143,765
            R2                       0.79               0.11                0.07              0.48
            Mean dep. var.          690.19            860.20                 0.80              0.01
            Unique counties          1,997             1,997                1,997             1,997

                                                                Housing market activity
                                                  (1)                    (2)                  (3)
                                               Originated               Denied             Purchased
              1(Rural closure)                 -524.74                 -285.32              -224.73
                                                (247.99)                (125.14)            (115.17)
              FEs: county, year                   Yes                     Yes                 Yes
              Observations                      35,946                  35,946               35,946
              R2                                  0.18                    0.27                 0.16
              Mean dep. var.                   1,327.78                 527.31               412.61
              Unique counties                    1,997                   1,997                1,997
         Notes: Employment data from the BLS QCEW, at the county-quarter level. Data on loans
         from HMDA, at the county-year level. Data on consumer financial information comes from
         the Consumer Credit Panel, at the county-quarter level. Control group (never closure) coun-
         ties are those that never experienced a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of
         the county population living in a rural area according to the 2000 Census. Analytic data re-
         stricted to a balanced panel of counties with valid data across all variables for all time periods
         (2001Q1-2018Q4). Year, quarter (if data are quarterly), and county fixed effects included in
         all regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P
         value at 0.05 * P value at 0.10


                                                            8
Table 3: Rural hospital closure effects on origination loan volumes and amounts by lending purpose



                                 Number of loans originated                    Amount of loans originated (thousands)
                        (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)              (5)           (6)
                    Home purchase Home improvement Refinancing Home purchase Home improvement Refinancing
1(Rural closure)       -177.24             -46.56              -300.35         6.78                5.84             -4.49
                        (79.47)             (20.27)            (157.64)       (8.58)              (4.96)           (4.58)
FEs: county, year         Yes                 Yes                Yes           Yes                 Yes               Yes
Observations            35,940              35,551             35,920        35,940              35,547            35,920
R2                       0.16                0.15               0.21          0.12                0.06              0.08
Mean dep. var.          536.06              101.02             692.36        113.79               56.64            129.24
Unique counties          1,997               1,997             1,997          1,997               1,997             1,997
Notes: Employment data from the BLS QCEW, at the county-quarter level. Data on loans from HMDA, at the county-year
level. Data on consumer financial information comes from the Consumer Credit Panel, at the county-quarter level. Con-
trol group (never closure) counties are those that never experienced a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of
the county population living in a rural area according to the 2000 Census. Analytic data restricted to a balanced panel of
counties with valid data across all variables for all time periods (2001Q1-2018Q4). Year, quarter (if data are quarterly), and
county fixed effects included in all regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P
value at 0.05 * P value at 0.10




                                                           9
Table 4: Heterogeneous rural hospital closure effects on county-level consumer financial health
and housing markets: by CAH status

                                                                       Employment (in logs)
                                       (1)                     (2)                   (3)                    (4)
                                                             Private              Health care          Non-health care
                                       All
                                                             sector               industries             industries
      0(CAH)                        -0.024                  -0.030                 -0.090                  -0.019
                                     (0.012)                 (0.013)                 (0.027)               (0.014)
      1(CAH)                          -0.037                 -0.045                 -0.117                 -0.027
                                     (0.024)                 (0.027)                 (0.047)               (0.028)
      FEs: county, year                Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes
      Observations                  126,648                 126,648                 126,648                126,648
      R2                              0.07                   0.09                     0.23                   0.09
      Mean dep. var.                 10.32                   10.06                    8.16                   9.87
      Unique counties                1,759                   1,759                   1,759                  1,759

                                                                       Consumer finances
                                      (1)                       (2)                     (3)                  (4)
                                     Risk                  Tot. balance             Collections         Bankruptcies
                                     score                   past due               (past 12m)           (past 24m)
     0(CAH)                          -0.170                 70.199                       -0.016             0.000
                                    (0.572)                  (24.092)                   (0.033)            (0.001)
     1(CAH)                        -1.550                     49.056                     0.020              0.000
                                    (0.735)                  (35.943)                   (0.039)            (0.001)
     FEs: county, year                Yes                      Yes                        Yes                Yes
     Observations                   143,765                  143,765                 143,765               143,765
     R2                                0.79                     0.11                   0.07                  0.48
     Mean dep. var.                  690.19                   860.20                   0.80                  0.01
     Unique counties                  1,997                    1,997                  1,997                 1,997

                                                                       Housing market activity
                                                 (1)                            (2)                      (3)
                                              Originated                       Denied                 Purchased
         0(CAH)                                -746.96                       -394.66                   -308.98
                                                (375.82)                      (189.90)                 (175.21)
         1(CAH)                                 -193.40                       -122.30                   -99.10
                                                (253.67)                      (125.74)                 (117.03)
         FEs: county, year                        Yes                           Yes                      Yes
         Observations                           35,946                         35,946                   35,946
         R2                                       0.18                           0.27                     0.16
         Mean dep. var.                        1,327.78                        527.31                   412.61
         Unique counties                         1,997                          1,997                    1,997
Notes: "CAH" stands for Critical Access Hospitals. Hospital classifications are provided within the rural hospitals clo-
sure database. Employment data from the BLS QCEW, at the county-quarter level. Data on loans from HMDA, at
the county-year level. Data on consumer financial information comes from the Consumer Credit Panel, at the county-
quarter level. Control group (never closure) counties are those that never experienced a rural hospital closure and had
50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area according to the 2000 Census. Analytic data restricted
to a balanced panel of counties with valid data across all variables for all time periods (2001Q1-2018Q4). Year, quarter
(if data are quarterly), and county fixed effects included in all regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the county
                                                            10
level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P value at 0.05 * P value at 0.10
Table 5: Heterogeneous rural hospital closure effects on county-level consumer financial health
and housing markets: by closure type

                                                                       Employment (in logs)
                                       (1)                     (2)                   (3)                     (4)
                                                             Private              Health care           Non-health care
                                       All
                                                             sector               industries              industries
     1(Part closure)                  -0.003                  -0.004                -0.062                    0.006
                                     (0.018)                 (0.020)                 (0.027)                 (0.022)
     1(Full closure)                -0.053                  -0.064                 -0.145                   -0.043
                                     (0.017)                 (0.019)                 (0.044)                 (0.020)
     FEs: county, year                 Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
     Observations                    126,000                 126,000                126,000                 126,000
     R2                                0.07                    0.09                   0.23                    0.09
     Mean dep. var.                   10.31                   10.05                   8.16                    9.87
     Unique counties                  1,750                   1,750                  1,750                   1,750

                                                                       Consumer finances
                                      (1)                      (2)                     (3)                    (4)
                                     Risk                 Tot. balance             Collections           Bankruptcies
                                     score                  past due               (past 12m)             (past 24m)
     1(Part closure)                 -0.601                   8.183                   0.017                  0.001
                                    (0.635)                  (24.578)                (0.035)                (0.001)
     1(Full closure)                 -0.802                 107.015                  -0.028                  0.000
                                    (0.743)                  (33.951)                (0.037)                (0.001)
     FEs: county, year                Yes                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes
     Observations                   143,117                  143,117                 143,117                143,117
     R2                               0.79                     0.11                   0.07                   0.48
     Mean dep. var.                  690.24                   859.97                   0.80                   0.01
     Unique counties                  1,988                    1,988                  1,988                  1,988

                                                                       Housing market activity
                                                  (1)                           (2)                        (3)
                                               Originated                      Denied                   Purchased
         1(Part closure)                       -400.11                        -191.87                   -161.04
                                               (222.16)                         (89.96)                  (87.10)
         1(Full closure)                        -527.95                        -339.26                   -263.35
                                               (438.34)                        (237.43)                 (216.52)
         FEs: county, year                        Yes                             Yes                      Yes
         Observations                           35,784                         35,784                    35,784
         R2                                       0.18                           0.27                      0.16
         Mean dep. var.                        1,319.09                        524.71                    409.57
         Unique counties                         1,988                          1,988                     1,988
Notes: "Partial Closures" are rural hospital events where some services remained open (e.g., emergency department and
lab services) or the facility was repurposed (e.g., transformed to a skilled nursing facility). The 9 hospital closures that
we could not assign as full or partial closures are dropped from the sample for this analysis. Employment data from the
BLS QCEW, at the county-quarter level. Data on loans from HMDA, at the county-year level. Data on consumer fi-
nancial information comes from the Consumer Credit Panel, at the county-quarter level. Control group (never closure)
counties are those that never experienced a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of the county population
living in a rural area according to the 2000 Census. Analytic data restricted to a balanced panel of counties with valid
                                                            11
data across all variables for all time periods (2001Q1-2018Q4).     Year, quarter (if data are quarterly), and county fixed
effects included in all regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P value at
0.05 * P value at 0.10
A.1   Appendix (for online publication)

Appendix Figures




                              12
Figure A.1: Stacked event study results for rural closure effects on county-level employment (in
logs)

                                                                                      (A) All jobs                                                                                                                     (B) Private sector
                                                .02




                                                                                                                                                                                            .02
    Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure




                                                                                                                                                Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure
                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                    -.02
               -.02




                                                                                                                                                       -.04
 -.04




                                                                                                                                             -.06
                                                          1

                                                              t-9

                                                                    t-7

                                                                          t-5

                                                                                t-3

                                                                                       t-1


                                                                                                1

                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                                     7

                                                                                                                            9

                                                                                                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                                                                                                          t-9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t-7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t-5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t-3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11
                                                       t-1




                                                                                                                                                                                                   t-1
                                                                                             t+

                                                                                                    t+

                                                                                                           t+

                                                                                                                  t+

                                                                                                                         t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t+
                                                                                                                                t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t+
                                                                      Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)                                                                                                Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)



                                                                     (C) Health care industry                                                                                                                   (D) Non-health care industry
                                                 .05




                                                                                                                                                                                             .04
    Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure




                                                                                                                                                Change Relative to One Year (t-4) Pre-Closure
                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
                        -.05          0




                                                                                                                                                       -.02          0
 -.15       -.1




                                                                                                                                             -.04
                                                          1

                                                              t-9

                                                                    t-7

                                                                          t-5

                                                                                t-3

                                                                                       t-1


                                                                                                1

                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                                     7

                                                                                                                            9

                                                                                                                                   11




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                                                                                                          t-9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t-7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t-5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t-3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t-1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11
                                                       t-1




                                                                                                                                                                                                   t-1
                                                                                             t+

                                                                                                    t+

                                                                                                           t+

                                                                                                                  t+

                                                                                                                         t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t+

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t+
                                                                                                                                t+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t+
                                                                      Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)                                                                                                Quarters Relative to Closure Event (time = t)


Notes: Control counties are randomly assigned a closure date from the sample of dates of actual closures. Event time
dummies are defined based on real dates for actual closures and the assigned closure dates for the control sample.
Only counties with observations for the full 12 quarters before and after the closure or assisnged closure are used,
and observations that fall outside the -12 to +12 quarter window are dropped. The event time regression is the same
as that described in the paper, except the event time dummies are interacted with a dummy for treatment. The event
time coefficients plotted are those on the interaction of treatment and event time. The omitted time point is the fourth
quarter (i.e., one year) prior to the rural hospital closure.




                                                                                                                                        13
  Figure A.2: Stacked event study results for rural hospital closure effects on consumer finances

                        (A) Risk score                                   (B) Bankruptcies past 24-months




               (C) Total balance past due                             (D) Number of collections past 12-months




Notes: Control counties are randomly assigned a closure date from the sample of dates of actual closures. Event time
dummies are defined based on real dates for actual closures and the assigned closure dates for the control sample.
Only counties with observations for the full 12 quarters before and after the closure or assisnged closure are used,
and observations that fall outside the -12 to +12 quarter window are dropped. The event time regression is the same
as that described in the paper, except the event time dummies are interacted with a dummy for treatment. The event
time coefficients plotted are those on the interaction of treatment and event time. The omitted time point is the fourth
quarter (i.e., one year) prior to the rural hospital closure.




                                                          14
Figure A.3: Short stacked event study results for rural hospital closure effects on housing markets:
number of loans

                                                      Originated




Notes: Control counties are randomly assigned a closure date from the sample of dates of actual closures. Event time
dummies are defined based on real dates for actual closures and the assigned closure dates for the control sample. Only
counties with observations for 4 years before and after the closure or assisnged closure are used, and observations that
fall outside the -4 to +4 year window are dropped. The event time regression is the same as that described in the
paper, except the event time dummies are interacted with a dummy for treatment. The event time coefficients plotted
are those on the interaction of treatment and event time. The omitted time point is one year prior to the rural hospital
closure.
                                                          15
Figure A.4: Event study results for rural hospital closure effects on housing markets: by purpose

                                                 Home purchase




                                                    Refinance




                                               Home improvement




Notes: Analytic sample and estimation parallel to regressions in Table 3, with event time dummies replacing the rural
closure indicator variable. The omitted time point is one year prior to the rural hospital closure.




                                                         16
   Figure A.5: Event study results for rural hospital closure effects on housing markets: by race

                                                         White




                                                         Black




                                                         Other




Notes: Analytic sample and estimation parallel to regressions in Table 3, with event time dummies replacing the rural
closure indicator variable, but run separately by race of applicant. The omitted time point is one year prior to the rural
hospital closure.



                                                           17
Figure A.6: Event study results for rural hospital closure effects on housing markets: average loan
amount




Notes: Analytic sample and estimation parallel to regressions in Table 2, with event time dummies replacing the rural
closure indicator variable. The omitted time point is one year prior to the rural hospital closure.




                                                         18
                           Figure A.7: County characteristics by type of closure




Notes: Population data from the Census Bureau's 2010-2019 intercensal county-level population estimates. Counties
in are classified into three categories: those that ever experienced a partial closure, those that ever experience a full
closure, and those that are at least 50% rural, but have never experienced a hospital closure. "Partial Closures" are
rural hospital events where some services remained open (e.g., emergency department and lab services) or the facility
was repurposed (e.g., transformed to a skilled nursing facility). Control group (never closure) counties are those that
never experienced a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area
according to the 2000 Census.




                                                          19
Appendix Tables

                               Table A.1: Summary statistics by closure type

                                       Part closure        Full closure     CAH closure           Not CAH closure            Never closure


   Total employment (median)
   All                                   46,804              24,922               24,356                40,764                   29,794
   Private sector                        36,904              19,702               19,264                32,630                   23,350
   Health care                            5,858               2,708                2,636                 5,211                    3,458
   Non-health care                       30,299              17,224               16,032                26,928                   19,597
   Unique counties                          49                  59                  46                    71                      1,642
   Observations                           3,528               4,248               3,312                 5,112                    118,224

                                    Part closure      Full closure    CAH closure          Not CAH closure       Never closure


 Consumer financial health
 Risk score                              687              669              681                   675                 691
 Total balance past due                  913             1,136             970                  1,061                849
 # bills sent to collection (12m)       0.812            0.978            0.819                 0.976               0.794
 Bankruptcy (24m)                       0.015            0.015            0.015                 0.016               0.015
 Unique counties                          55               64               51                    77                1,869
 Observations                           3,960            4,608            3,672                 5,544              134,549

                                    Part closure      Full closure    CAH closure          Not CAH closure       Never closure


  Loan characteristics
  Loans denied                          769               762              638                   888                  509
  Loans originated                     1,911             1,722            1,673                 2,068                1,288
  Loans purchased                       604               631              561                   712                  396
  Loans denied: amount                   85                74               78                    79                   81
  Loans originated: amount              108                95              101                   100                  102
  Loans purchased: amount               142               148              138                   150                  137
  Applicant income: denied               72                66               65                    70                   69
  Applicant income: originated          101                89               92                    96                   94
  Unique counties                        55                64              51                     77                 1,869
  Observations                          990              1,152            918                   1,386               33,642
Notes: Employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), at
the county-quarter level. Data on loans from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) Database, at the county-year
level. Data on consumer financial information comes from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel
(CCP), at the county-quarter level. Control group (never closure) counties are those that never experienced a rural hospital
closure and had 50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area according to the 2000 Census. Of the
CAH closures, 27 were full closures, 20 were partial closures, and 4 were unknown. Of the non-CAH closures, 37 were
full closures, 35 were partial closures, and 5 were unknown.



                                                           20
Table A.2: Rural hospital closure effects on county-level consumer financial health and housing
markets: 25% rural threshold
                                                          Employment (in logs)
                                      (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)
                                                     Private         Health care        Non-health care
                                      All
                                                     sector          industries           industries
            1(Rural closure)       -0.028          -0.036             -0.104                 -0.021
                                    (0.012)         (0.013)            (0.025)              (0.014)
            FEs: county, year         Yes             Yes                Yes                  Yes
            Observations           154,656          154,656            154,656             154,656
            R2                       0.06            0.08                0.21               0.09
            Mean dep. var.          10.13             9.85               7.92                9.67
            Unique counties         2,148            2,148              2,148               2,148

                                                          Consumer finances
                                     (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                    Risk           Tot. balance        Collections       Bankruptcies
                                    score            past due          (past 12m)         (past 24m)
            1(Rural closure)       -1.183           65.136                -0.000             0.000
                                    (0.460)          (20.581)            (0.026)            (0.000)
            FEs: county, year         Yes              Yes                 Yes                Yes
            Observations           187,407           187,407             187,407           187,407
            R2                       0.76              0.09                0.05              0.42
            Mean dep. var.         689.90            859.37                0.81              0.01
            Unique counties         2,605             2,605               2,605             2,605


                                                              Housing market activity
                                               (1)                     (2)                   (3)
                                            Originated                Denied              Purchased
              1(Rural closure)              -615.47                 -334.35               -258.49
                                             (248.31)                (125.23)              (115.27)
              FEs: county, year                Yes                     Yes                   Yes
              Observations                     47,154                 47,154                47,154
              R2                                 0.16                   0.24                  0.14
              Mean dep. var.                  1,114.64                444.74                346.72
              Unique counties                   2,624                  2,624                 2,624



         Notes: Notes: Control sample limited to counties at least 25




                                                         21
Table A.3: Rural hospital closure effects on county-level consumer financial health and housing
markets: 50% rural threshold
                                                          Employment (in logs)
                                      (1)            (2)               (3)                  (4)
                                                   Private          Health care        Non-health care
                                      All
                                                   sector           industries           industries
            1(Rural closure)        -0.017         -0.024            -0.090                -0.010
                                   (0.012)         (0.013)            (0.025)              (0.014)
            FEs: county, year        Yes             Yes                Yes                  Yes
            Observations           109,296         109,296            109,296             109,296
            R2                       0.05            0.07              0.16                 0.09
            Mean dep. var.          9.81             9.52               7.58                9.34
            Unique counties         1,518           1,518              1,518               1,518

                                                               Consumer finances
                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                     Risk           Tot. balance         Collections       Bankruptcies
                                     score            past due           (past 12m)         (past 24m)
           1(Rural closure)        -1.512            77.259                 0.002             0.000
                                    (0.464)           (20.758)             (0.027)           (0.000)
           FEs: county, year          Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes
           Observations            139,094             139,094            139,094            139,094
           R2                        0.74                0.07               0.04              0.38
           Mean dep. var.          689.62              854.65               0.81               0.01
           Unique counties          1,933               1,933              1,933              1,933


                                                               Housing market activity
                                                (1)                     (2)                    (3)
                                             Originated                Denied               Purchased
              1(Rural closure)               -807.06                 -423.16               -335.56
                                              (248.02)                (125.27)              (115.01)
              FEs: county, year                 Yes                     Yes                   Yes
              Observations                    35,036                   35,036                35,036
              R2                                0.13                     0.21                  0.11
              Mean dep. var.                  684.89                   302.31                203.34
              Unique counties                  1,948                    1,948                 1,948



         Notes: Notes: Control sample limited to counties at least 50




                                                          22
Table A.4: Rural hospital closure effects on county-level consumer financial health and housing
markets: 75% rural threshold
                                                          Employment (in logs)
                                     (1)            (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                                  Private          Health care       Non-health care
                                     All
                                                  sector           industries          industries
            1(Rural closure)        -0.012         -0.020          -0.084                -0.005
                                   (0.012)        (0.014)           (0.026)              (0.014)
            FEs: county, year        Yes            Yes               Yes                  Yes
            Observations           56,808         56,808             56,808              56,808
            R2                      0.05           0.06               0.13                0.08
            Mean dep. var.          9.45           9.14               7.21                8.96
            Unique counties         789            789                789                 789

                                                               Consumer finances
                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                     Risk           Tot. balance         Collections      Bankruptcies
                                     score            past due           (past 12m)        (past 24m)
           1(Rural closure)        -2.237            89.230                -0.007            -0.000
                                    (0.479)           (21.410)             (0.029)           (0.000)
           FEs: county, year          Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes
           Observations             82,431             82,431              82,431            82,431
           R2                         0.71               0.05                0.04             0.32
           Mean dep. var.           691.17             835.44               0.80              0.01
           Unique counties           1,147              1,147               1,147             1,147


                                                               Housing market activity
                                                (1)                     (2)                   (3)
                                             Originated                Denied              Purchased
              1(Rural closure)               -895.13                 -479.84               -365.68
                                              (246.95)                (125.17)              (114.50)
              FEs: county, year                 Yes                     Yes                   Yes
              Observations                    20,910                   20,910                20,910
              R2                                0.09                     0.14                  0.08
              Mean dep. var.                  525.22                   234.75                158.83
              Unique counties                  1,166                    1,166                 1,166



         Notes: Control sample limited to counties at least 75




                                                          23
Table A.5: Rural hospital closure effects on origination loan volumes and amounts by lending
purpose and closure type

                                  Number of loans originated                    Amount of loans originated (thousands)
                        (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)              (5)           (6)
                    Home purchase Home improvement Refinancing Home purchase Home improvement Refinancing
1(Part closure)          -74.73             -27.35             -297.30           6.75              19.98               -0.96
                         (70.11)             (12.72)           (159.18)         (7.24)              (9.32)            (7.19)
1(Full closure)         -217.13               -62.35            -248.09          7.35                -7.02             -7.10
                        (133.99)             (39.77)           (274.78)        (16.37)              (4.75)            (6.16)
FEs: county, year          Yes                 Yes                Yes            Yes                  Yes               Yes
Observations             35,778              35,389             35,758         35,778              35,385             35,758
R2                        0.16                0.15               0.21           0.12                0.06               0.08
Mean dep. var.           532.36              100.53             687.86         113.83               56.64             129.27
Unique counties           1,988               1,988             1,988           1,988               1,988              1,988
Notes: "Partial Closures" are rural hospital events where some services remained open (e.g., emergency department and lab
services) or the facility was repurposed (e.g., transformed to a skilled nursing facility). The 9 hospital closures that we could
not assign as full or partial closures are dropped from the sample for this analysis. Employment data from the BLS QCEW,
at the county-quarter level. Data on loans from HMDA, at the county-year level. Data on consumer financial information
comes from the Consumer Credit Panel, at the county-quarter level. Control group (never closure) counties are those that
never experienced a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area accord-
ing to the 2000 Census. Analytic data restricted to a balanced panel of counties with valid data across all variables for all
time periods (2001Q1-2018Q4). Year, quarter (if data are quarterly), and county fixed effects included in all regressions.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P value at 0.05 * P value at 0.10




                                                           24
Table A.6: Heterogeneous rural hospital closure effects on employment: by closure type and CAH
status


                                                                                Health care            Non-health care
                                  All                Private sector
                                                                                industries               industries
                          (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)       (5)         (6)           (7)        (8)
                        CAH              All       CAH             All      CAH           All         CAH          All
                       closures         others    closures        others   closures      others      closures     others
 1(Part closure)         0.003           -0.007     0.005      -0.010      -0.112        -0.034        0.028       -0.008
                        (0.041)         (0.015)    (0.047)     (0.015)      (0.049)     (0.031)       (0.052)     (0.016)
 1(Full closure)       -0.078           -0.035    -0.094      -0.043         -0.140    -0.149        -0.075       -0.021
                        (0.031)         (0.018)    (0.035)     (0.021)      (0.085)     (0.046)       (0.034)     (0.023)
 FEs: county, year        Yes             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
 Observations          121,248          122,976   121,248     122,976      121,248      122,976      121,248     122,976
 R2                      0.07             0.07     0.09         0.09         0.23        0.24          0.09        0.09
 Mean dep. var.         10.30            10.32     10.04       10.06         8.14         8.16         9.86        9.88
 Unique counties        1,684            1,708     1,684       1,708        1,684        1,708        1,684       1,708
Notes: "Partial Closures" are rural hospital events where some services remained open (e.g., emergency department and
lab services) or the facility was repurposed (e.g., transformed to a skilled nursing facility). The 9 hospital closures that
we could not assign as full or partial closures are dropped from the sample for this analysis. "CAH" stands for Critical
Access Hospitals. Hospital classifications are provided within the rural hospitals closure database. Employment data
from the BLS QCEW, at the county-quarter level. Control group (never closure) counties are those that never experi-
enced a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area according to
the 2000 Census. Analytic data restricted to a balanced panel of counties with valid data across all variables for all time
periods (2001Q1-2018Q4). Year, quarter, and county fixed effects included in all regressions. Standard errors are clus-
tered at the county level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P value at 0.05 * P value at 0.10




                                                             25
Table A.7: Heterogeneous rural hospital closure effects on consumer finances: by closure type and
CAH status


                            Risk score           Tot. balance past due       Collections (12m)      Bankruptcies (past. 24m)
                          (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)            (8)
                        CAH          All         CAH             All         CAH          All        CAH             All
                       closures     others      closures        others      closures     others     closures        others
 1(Part closure)         -1.406      -0.136     -43.430        38.867         0.072       -0.015      0.001          0.000
                        (1.029)     (0.794)    (35.451)       (31.255)       (0.065)     (0.038)     (0.001)        (0.001)
 1(Full closure)         -1.857       0.022    109.970       105.670         -0.024      -0.031      -0.000          0.001
                        (1.157)     (0.936)    (59.301)       (38.577)       (0.051)     (0.052)     (0.001)        (0.001)
 FEs: county, year        Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
 Observations          137,933     139,733      137,933         139,733     137,933     139,733     137,933        139,733
 R2                      0.79        0.79         0.10            0.11        0.07       0.07         0.47           0.48
 Mean dep. var.        690.82       690.45       852.09          857.14       0.79        0.80        0.01           0.01
 Unique counties        1,916       1,941        1,916           1,941       1,916       1,941       1,916          1,941
Notes: "Partial Closures" are rural hospital events where some services remained open (e.g., emergency department and lab
services) or the facility was repurposed (e.g., transformed to a skilled nursing facility). The 9 hospital closures that we could
not assign as full or partial closures are dropped from the sample for this analysis. "CAH" stands for Critical Access Hospi-
tals. Hospital classifications are provided within the rural hospitals closure database. Data on consumer financial information
comes from the Consumer Credit Panel, at the county-quarter level. Control group (never closure) counties are those that
never experienced a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area accord-
ing to the 2000 Census. Analytic data restricted to a balanced panel of counties with valid data across all variables for all
time periods (2001Q1-2018Q4). Year, quarter, and county fixed effects included in all regressions. Standard errors are clus-
tered at the county level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P value at 0.05 * P value at 0.10




                                                           26
Table A.8: Heterogeneous rural hospital closure effects on county-level housing markets: by clo-
sure type and CAH status

                             Loans originated                  Loans denied                   Loans purchased
                          (1)               (2)           (3)                (4)           (5)               (6)
                       CAH closures      All others    CAH closures       All others    CAH closures      All others
  1(Part closure)          130.85        -703.13            46.31        -327.70             46.35        -278.85
                          (164.51)        (323.81)         (83.66)        (126.01)          (47.82)        (129.53)
  1(Full closure)           24.18         -944.52          -70.14          -542.44          -71.14         -408.18
                          (194.53)        (743.90)        (177.90)        (389.19)         (166.07)        (355.98)
  FEs: county, year          Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
  Observations             34,560          34,938          34,560          34,938           34,560          34,938
  R2                        0.20            0.19            0.30            0.28             0.17            0.17
  Mean dep. var.          1,298.10        1,320.10         512.84          524.73           400.61          409.24
  Unique counties           1,920           1,941           1,920           1,941            1,920           1,941
Notes: "Partial Closures" are rural hospital events where some services remained open (e.g., emergency department
and lab services) or the facility was repurposed (e.g., transformed to a skilled nursing facility). "CAH" stands for
Critical Access Hospitals. Hospital classifications are provided within the rural hospitals closure database. Data on
loans from HMDA, at the county-year level. Control group (never closure) counties are those that never experienced
a rural hospital closure and had 50 percent or more of the county population living in a rural area according to the
2000 Census. Analytic data restricted to a balanced panel of counties with valid data across all variables for all time
periods (2001Q1-2018Q4). Year and county fixed effects included in all regressions. Standard errors are clustered
at the county level. *** P value at 0.01 ** P value at 0.05 * P value at 0.10




                                                         27
