                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHAT HAPPENS WHEN EMPLOYERS CAN
                        NO LONGER DISCRIMINATE IN JOB ADS?

                                         Peter J. Kuhn
                                         Kailing Shen

                                      Working Paper 29116
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29116


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2021




We thank David Card, Kory Kroft, Dan Kreisman, Rafael Lalive, David Ong, and seminar
participants at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Universidade do Minho,
University of Toronto, Peking University HSBC Business School, Georgia State University,
IESR (Jinan University), Melbourne Institute of University of Melbourne, East Asian Institute of
National University of Singapore, Renmin University, East China Normal University, Nanyang
Technological University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Peter J. Kuhn and Kailing Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What Happens When Employers Can No Longer Discriminate in Job Ads?
Peter J. Kuhn and Kailing Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 29116
July 2021
JEL No. J16,J63,J71

                                          ABSTRACT

When employers' explicit gender requests were unexpectedly removed from a Chinese job board
overnight, pools of successful applicants became more integrated: women's (men's) share of call-
backs to jobs that had requested men (women) rose by 63 (146) percent. The removal `worked' in
this sense because it generated a large increase in gender-mismatched applications, and because
those applications were treated surprisingly well by employers. The removal had little or no
effect on aggregate matching frictions. The job titles that were integrated however, were not the
most gendered ones, and were disproportionately lower-wage jobs.


Peter J. Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and IZA
and also NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu

Kailing Shen
Research School of Economics
ANU College of Business & Economics
HW Arndt Building (25a)
The Australian National University
Canberra ACT 0200
Australia
and IZA
kailing.shen@anu.edu.au
                               1. Background and Motivation
           Explicit requests for male or female applicants were once a common feature of job
ads in the United States, Canada and Europe. While many of these countries prohibited such
ads during the last 50 years, explicitly gendered job ads are still used in many nations, which
together account for a substantial portion of the world's labor force. 1 Yet despite many
countries' continued acceptance of explicitly gendered job ads, and despite this history of policy
interventions, little is currently known about the effects of allowing versus prohibiting explicit
gender requests on the firms and workers in a labor market. 2

            One of policymakers' motivations for banning gendered job ads has been a widely
stated desire to eliminate a practice that is, on the surface, overtly discriminatory. Other
possible motivations include reducing gender segregation in employment, increasing women's
access to better jobs, and improving labor market matching efficiency by eliminating `artificial'
barriers to the employment of otherwise qualified workers. Gendered ad bans could however
fail to achieve these goals for at least six reasons. First, if gendered ads were used mostly for
affirmative-action purposes before the ban, banning them could increase gender segregation.
Second, employers who previously requested a particular gender could simply ignore any new
`gender-mismatched' applications caused by the ban, leading to a null effect on segregation.
Third, such employers could avoid even receiving new applications from the `unwanted' gender
by putting other signals of their gender preferences (such as code words) into their job ads.
Fourth, qualifications for many predominately male and female jobs could be so different that
few additional qualified applicants become available when employers `open up' their jobs to
workers of all genders: at least in the short run, signaling an openness to male nurses and
female electricians may not yield any new, qualified applicants. Fifth, if men's application
decisions respond more strongly to the ban than women's do, women may be crowded out of
jobs that previously invited them, without gaining much access to jobs that previously invited
men. Finally, banning gendered ads could raise labor market frictions by making it harder for




1
  For U.S. examples of gender- and race-specific job ads before 1974, see Darity and Mason (1998) and
Walsh et al. (1975).
Appendix 1 documents gendered ad bans in various countries since 1970. Appendix 1 in Kuhn, Shen and
Zhang (2020) gives recent examples of gendered ads in large labor markets -- including India, Indonesia,
Brazil, Nigeria, Mexico, and Russia.
2
  In previous work, we have studied how and when employers use gendered job ads when such ads are
permitted (Kuhn and Shen 2013; Delgado Helleseter, Kuhn and Shen 2020). In the same policy
environment, Kuhn, Shen and Zhang (2020) show that employers' gender requests direct workers'
application decisions, and predict a worker's chances of success conditional on applying to a job. But apart
from Card, Colella and Lalive (2021) we are not aware of any other research that estimates the effects of
prohibiting explicitly discriminatory job ads.


                                                     1
both men and women to locate jobs where their applications are likely to succeed, and harder
for them to avoid jobs where they are not wanted.

        Motivated by these questions, this paper studies what happened when employers'
`preferred gender' field was removed without advance notice from all the job ads on a Chinese
job board on March 1, 2019. Using data on ads whose content was changed by the job board
overnight, we estimate the causal effects of removing this single piece of information on
workers' application decisions and on the gender composition of successful applicant pools.
Importantly, we can calculate these effects separately for jobs which originally requested men
and for jobs which originally requested women, which allows us to estimate whether the ban
increased women's access to `men's' jobs, and men's access to women's. We also estimate the
ban's effects on three indicators of search frictions: the arrival rate and quality of applications
received by firms, and workers' call-back chances conditional on applying. We also characterize
the types of jobs that were opened up by the ban in terms of the gender mix of the incumbent
workforce and the wages offered.

         Our first main finding is that the ban integrated call-back pools in the jobs that formerly
specified a preferred gender: it raised the share of women in the pool of successful applicants
to jobs that previously requested men (M jobs) and raised the share of men in the pool of
successful applicants to jobs that previously requested women (F jobs). Notably, these effects
were immediate--they are visible in the first week after the ban--and they persist for at least
six months afterwards. The ban had these effects because (a) it generated a large number of
additional gender-mismatched applications, and (b) these applications were treated surprisingly
well by employers (both before and after the ban).

        Second, these effects were not symmetric: women's share of call-backs to M jobs rose
by 3.0 percentage points, or 63 percent, while men's share of call-backs to F jobs rose by 9.9
percentage points, or 146 percent. Proximate causes of this asymmetry include a larger increase
in male applications to gender-mismatched jobs, and the fact that men did not reduce their
applications to men's jobs after the ban, while women did reduce their applications to women's
jobs. On a more fundamental level, women's jobs on this board appear to be less differentiated
than men's and to require fewer industry-specific skills. This may have made it easier for men to
enter women's jobs than vice versa, at least in the short run.

         Third, the gender requests posted by employers before the ban were overwhelmingly
not used for affirmative-action purposes (i.e. to request the under-represented gender in a job
title or workplace). It follows that the ban acted to integrate jobs and workplaces, though it is
important to note that these integrating effects mostly occurred in relatively low-wage jobs.
This is primarily because explicit gender requests were disproportionately used in less-skilled




                                                 2
jobs before the ban--a tendency that appears to be widespread. 3 Related, the ban's integrating
effects did not touch many of the most extremely gendered jobs on this board, such as drivers,
electricians, and nurses. This could reflect deeply ingrained stereotypes, plus the fact that some
of these jobs require specific skills and certifications that take time to acquire. In the longer run,
banning explicit gender requests may impact jobs like nurses and electricians as well, by
signaling that investing in these skills may pay off for gender-atypical workers.

         Finally, while we do not detect any spillover effects of the ban on jobs that never made
a gender request (N jobs), we document some interesting changes in the segments of the XMRC
labor market that were directly treated by the ban: F and M jobs. Specifically, total application
rates to these jobs increased substantially (by 14.1 and 8.6 percent respectively), mostly
because gender-mismatched workers who were discouraged by employers' gender requests
began to apply in greater numbers. Perhaps because these new applicants were highly qualified
on other dimensions (like education, experience and location), the quality of applications to F
and M jobs appears to have increased as well. Notably, while this loosening of labor markets at
F and M jobs should benefit employers, it did not necessarily hurt workers. This is because
many of the (lower-yield) gender-mismatched applications that were made after the ban would
not have been made before the ban. They were discouraged by employers' gender requests,
and thus had no chance of yielding a call-back.

         Our analysis contributes to a large literature on gender segregation in employment and
its causes (Bielby and Baron 1984, Sorensen 1990, Blau et al. 2013, Baker and Cornelson 2018),
and to a more recent empirical literature on directed search by workers. The latter literature
has considered the effects of posted wages (Belot et al. 2018, Banfi and Roldan 2019);
affirmative action statements (Ibanez and Riener 2018, Leibbrandt and List 2019); job
characteristics such as negotiated salaries, competitiveness, and flexible work hours (Leibbrandt
and List 2014, Flory, Leibbrandt and List 2015, Mas and Pallais 2017); and information on the
number of competing applicants (Gee 2018) on workers' application behavior. We also
contribute to a literature that studies the effects of prohibiting the use of various types of
information in the recruiting process. This information includes the worker's gender (Goldin and
Rouse 2000, Krause et al 2012), ethnicity (Behagel et al 2015), criminal history (Agan and Starr
2018, Doleac and Hansen 2020) credit history (Bos et al. 2018, Ballance et al. 2020) and salary
history (Agan, Cowgill and Gee 2021). Relative to these papers, a unique aspect of our paper is
that the prohibition applies to what workers see when they apply for jobs, not to what
employers see when they are deciding whom to interview or hire.

        Previous work on explicit gender requests in job ads includes Kuhn and Shen (2013) who
provide a model of why and when employers might choose to include requests for demographic
characteristics in job ads. Consistent with that model (which is based on application processing

3
    Delgado Helleseter, Kuhn and Shen (2020) document this fact on four different job boards.

                                                      3
costs), we show that profiling is more common in less-skilled jobs. Delgado Helleseter, Kuhn and
Shen (2020) and Ningrum et al. (2020) show that there is a strong interaction between gender-
profiling and explicit employer requests for other demographic characteristics, including age,
marital status and beauty. Specifically, employers ask women to be young, single and attractive,
and men to be older and married. Finally, Kuhn, Shen and Zhang (2020) show that ­in a policy
environment where gendered job ads are permitted-- employers' gender requests direct
workers' application decisions, and predict a worker's chances of success conditional on
applying to a job.

        The most closely related research to our paper is Card, Colella and Lalive (2021), who
study the effects of Austria's prohibition of stated gender preferences in worker recruitment in
2004. One advantage of their setting relative to ours is that they observe several hiring
outcomes ­specifically, which workers were hired, the wage they earned and their job
durations. In contrast, while we have some measures of match quality and recruiting frictions,
we cannot see what happens after the call-back stage of the recruitment process. Card et al.
also study somewhat longer-term causal impacts than we do; we focus on a one-year period
surrounding the ban. Advantages of our setting include the following. First, the removal of
gender labels from the XMRC website was not accompanied by any other legislative or
regulatory changes affecting discrimination in job advertising or recruitment. In contrast, the
Austrian Equal Treatment Act also regulated other aspects of recruitment, promotion and pay.
Second, the treatment in our case was sudden and unexpected, being implemented overnight.
This, combined with our high-frequency data, allows us to use a sharp temporal discontinuity as
our main identification approach.


         Third, Card et al.'s setting is one where vacancies are recommended to jobseekers by
caseworkers of the Austrian labor market service (Arbeitsmarktservice or AMS), based on
employers' descriptions of the job and the ideal applicant (including gender). Our environment
is a more common one where jobseekers decide where to apply based on the content of posted
job ads. Since we have application data, we can learn considerably more about the mechanisms
via which the ad ban operates in this more typical environment. Fourth, our data and setting
allow us to create an accurate counterfactual for gender-targeted job advertisements after the
ban: We know exactly which jobs would have contained explicit gender requests after the ban
because we can observe the same ad before and after its gender request was forcibly removed. 4
A final difference between the papers' approaches is Card et al.'s focus on gender segregation
across firms as their main outcome of interest; inspired by a long literature on gender-
stereotyping of different types of work, we focus more on the ban's integrating effect at the job

4
  Notably, the gender labels were attached to these ads when they were first posted, at which time there
was no expectation of an imminent ban. Card et al. are forced to classify jobs that are likely to be more
versus less impacted by the ban, by constructing a gender preference index using characteristics of the
job advertisements and firm fixed effects.

                                                    4
title level. Despite these differences in setting, data and focus, several key results are common
to both papers. Most notable of these is the fact that prohibiting explicit gender requests
integrated labor markets. In both papers, this integration occurred despite the ban's
segregating effect in the small number of cases where employers requested gender-atypical
workers before the ban.


              2. XMRC, the Policy Change, and the Analysis Sample
2.1 XMRC and the Policy Change
    Our data consist of internal records of XMRC.com, an Internet job board serving the city of
Xiamen and surrounding XiaZhangQuan region since 2000. Xiamen and its surroundings
comprise a high-income coastal Chinese city with a population (including migrant workers) of
about 14 million people. XMRC is a private firm, commissioned by the local government to
serve private-sector employers seeking relatively skilled workers. 5 Its job board has a traditional
structure, with posted ads and resumes, on-line job applications, and a facility for employers to
contact workers via the site.

         Advantages of the XMRC data for the analysis of a gendered ad ban include the
following. First, before the ban, ads on the site contained a simple, standardized indicator of
employers' gender requests: when a job profile was created, the hiring agent selected the
preferred gender from drop-down menu: F, M, or N (no request). Workers saw this selection
when they read job ads and searched for jobs. On many other job boards (both in China and
elsewhere), explicit and implicit gender requests must be inferred by parsing the text of the ad,
a process which requires some judgment calls. 6 Second, our data come from a period during
which XMRC offered a very simple search technology: workers used keywords and menus to
look for jobs, and (much less often) employers did the same to find workers. On some other job
boards today, proprietary algorithms display suggested job matches to individual workers based
on the worker's location, qualifications, employment history and recent searches. In these
cases, unlike ours, workers' application decisions are jointly determined by the jobs that are
suggested to them by the board's algorithms and their choices from that set. 7

        Third, the removal of gendered job ads on XMRC was sudden and unexpected: While
China introduced fines for job boards posting such ads in 2016, enforcement (especially for




5
  The only other major local job site, XCMIHRSP (formerly XMZYJS) serves private sector firms seeking
mostly production and low-level service workers. Public sector recruitment operates via separate
channels.
6
  For example, in Spanish one must decide whether the job titles "abogada" and "abogado" are explicit
gender requests.
7
  We do not observe which ads were viewed by workers; thus our estimated effects should be interpreted
as incorporating workers' decisions regarding which types of jobs to search for.

                                                  5
regional boards like XMRC) was haphazard. 8 Essentially, XMRC was able to ignore this
regulation until late February 2019, when it was directed to remove the pre-configured `desired
gender' field from all its ads overnight, without any advance notice to recruiters or workers. To
interpret our results, it is important to note that only these encoded gender labels were
removed on March 1, 2019: expressions of gender preferences in the text of the job description
were not removed from ads that were present on the site on March 1. 9 Thus, our main
estimates refer to the effects of removing only the most salient expressions of gender
preferences from a job ad. In our robustness analysis, we show, as one might expect, that
estimated treatment effects are modestly higher when we exclude ads which contained
additional statements of gender preference in their text. These `embedded' preferences were
not removed on March 1, 2019.

         Fourth, while XMRC ads and resumes are not representative of the employed
population of Xiamen, we believe they are quite representative of the stock of skilled, private-
sector vacancies and job-seekers in large Chinese cities (which are younger, better educated,
better paid, more female, and much more likely to have non-local hukou than these cities'
employed populations). 10 This is because (a) Xiamen has a similar demographic profile to other
large, prosperous Chinese cities, and (b) XMRC is the dominant platform for skilled, private
sector workers in Xiamen. 11 XMRC attributes this dominance, in part, to its close association
with the local government, which provides complementary services (e.g. for social security and
payroll taxation) that are electronically and physically linked to the job board, thus providing
`one-stop shopping' for local employers. Finally, while the XMRC board we study caters to the
more skilled side of Xiamen's labor market, we note that explicit gender requests are
considerably more common at lower than higher skill levels (Kuhn and Shen, 2013). This
suggests that our results could underestimate the impact of removing such labels in the labor
market as a whole.

2.2 Sample Construction
        Our main analysis sample is extracted from the population of 239,564 ads present on
XMRC during the one-year period surrounding the ad ban, and the 4,338,694 applications that
were made to those ads during that time period. From these, we retain only the ads that `span
the ban': they were posted before the ban, and received a positive number of applications both
before and after the ban. As a result, every ad in our sample has an explicit gender label (F, N,

8
  See Appendices 2 and 3 in Kuhn, Shen and Zhang (2020) for a recent history of regulation and practice
regarding gendered job ads in China.
9
  For ads newly posted or renewed by the employer after March 1, XMRC personnel were instructed to
monitor the content and ask employers to remove any discriminatory content. By construction, these ads
are not included in our estimation sample.
10
   Hukou refers to the province of a Chinese person's permanent residence permit, which in most cases is
determined by their province or city of birth. See Table A4.4 in Kuhn, Shen and Zhang (2020).
11
   Table 2 in Delgado Helleseter, Kuhn and Shen (2020) provides descriptive information about Xiamen in
comparison with other large Chinese cities. At the time of our study, the large national job boards like
51job and Zhaopin did not have a large presence in Xiamen.

                                                   6
or M) that was assigned when it was posted. In addition, recruitment for the ad was active (in
the sense that the ad was receiving applications) both before and after the ban. This allows us to
study how application and recruitment behavior changed within the same ad, before and after
its explicit gender request was removed by the job board.

        In all, our primary dataset comprises 3,130,317 applications made by 204,343 workers
(resumes) to 116,725 ads, placed by 154,437 firms, resulting in 348,062 call-backs. Thus there
was an average of 26.8 applications per ad and 2.98 call-backs per ad. 11.1 percent of
applications (for which we have call-back information) received a call-back, suggesting that call-
backs indicate a relatively high level of success in the recruiting process. Overall, 11.6 percent of
job ads requested female applicants, 12.5 percent requested male applicants and the remaining
75.8 percent did not specify a preferred gender. 41.2 percent of applications came from women.
Reflecting XMRC's focus on skilled jobseekers, the average ad requested 13.30 years of
education and the mean requested worker age was 29.78. Among the 75.7 percent of ads that
posted a wage, the mean posted wage was 5,794 and 4,432 RMB per month in jobs requesting
men and women respectively, yielding a raw gender wage gap of 23.5 percent. 12

         In addition to this main analysis sample, we construct two additional samples to address
specific questions and conduct robustness checks. The first of these ­our call-back sample--
addresses the fact that we do not observe all the call-backs that were made on XMRC.
Specifically, we only see call-backs for the job ads where the recruiter used XMRC's internal
messaging system to contact applicants, which account for 62 percent of all applications. Thus,
while we use our full sample for most of our analysis, our analyses of call-back outcomes are
limited to the 1,939,935 applications for which call-backs are observed. Fortunately, Appendix 2
shows that this sample has very similar observable characteristics to the full sample. In
addition, Appendix 7 shows that replicating our main full-sample analyses that do not require
call-back data on the call-back sample yields almost identical results.

        Our second alternative sample replicates our main estimation sample ­which comprises
applications made between September 2018 and August 2019-- on two different periods:
January ­ August 2018 and January-August 2019. The latter period contains the date on which
the 2019 ban occurred, and the former contains the date on which it would have occurred in
2018. Unfortunately, these two periods cannot be designed to exactly mimic our main analysis
sample because we have no XMRC data from 2017. While this restricts the length of the pre-
ban period in both years to just two months, it allows us to compare trends in our main
outcomes between 2018 and 2019 on both sides of the ban date. It also allows us to conduct a
difference-in-difference analysis of the ban's effect ­which uses equivalent days or weeks from
2018 as controls for 2019-- as a robustness check of our main results. Notably, since important
events affecting China's labor market ­especially the Spring Festival-- are determined by the
lunar calendar, this new DiD sample requires us to line up days and weeks between 2018 and

12
  Wages are calculated using the midpoint of each job's posted wage range. See Appendix 1 for
additional descriptive statistics on the ads and applications in our main analysis sample.

                                                  7
2019 to that they represent the same days and weeks relative to the start of the Spring Festival
in both years. Additional details are provided in Appendices 2 and 11.

                                   3. Estimation Approach
         Of the three types of jobs in our data --M jobs, which requested men before the ban; F
jobs, which requested women before the ban; and N jobs which never made a gender request--
only F and M jobs are directly treated by the ad ban, in the sense that only these jobs had their
contents changed. But even though these treated ads comprise only about one fourth of the
ads in our sample, there are two main reasons why we might expect changes in their contents to
affect the non-treated (N) ads. The first is treatment spillovers, or substitution effects: for
example, the ban could re-direct some workers' applications from non-gendered ads into
formerly gendered ads, because workers who once felt excluded now apply there. Second, the
ban could cause changes in the equilibrium levels of job search and recruiting intensity. For
example, if the ban made it harder for workers to find jobs (because it became harder for
workers to direct their applications away from jobs where they are less likely to succeed),
workers might compensate by applying to more jobs of all kinds. 13 To incorporate these types
of spillover and equilibrium effects, we therefore need to estimate the effect of the ban on the
non-treated ads (N) as well at as the directly treated ones. We cannot use N jobs as controls for
F and M jobs.

         To estimate the ban's effects on all jobs and workers, our main approach uses a full year
of data surrounding the gendered ad ban, and estimates the discontinuity in each of our
outcome measures on the first day of treatment--March 1, 2019. Two key choices in any such
design are the bandwidth around the policy change, and the parametric modelling of trends in
the running variable (in our case, time) within that interval. Motivated by the fact that
continuity assumptions play an especially important role in RD-in-time contexts like ours
(Hausman and Rapson 2018), our approach to these issues begins with an inspection of the raw
trends in each of our outcome variables. For a key subset of the outcomes we examine ­
specifically, the gender composition of applicant and call-back pools--these trends are quite
smooth during the six months on either side of the ban. For these outcomes we analyze the
data at the weekly level using the full year of data surrounding the ban, and fit a flexible
polynomial to the time trend over this entire interval. Appealing features of this approach
include the ability to estimate causal effects of the ad ban over a longer time horizon.

         For our remaining outcome variables, the time trends during the year surrounding the
ban are far from smooth. This is especially true for outcomes related to the overall level of
recruiting activity, such as the total number of applications received by a job in a given day or
week. Because the ad ban happened 24 days after the 2019 Chinese New Year, it occurred
shortly after an annual spike in recruiting activity associated with the return to work of millions

13
  Alternatively, workers could become discouraged and search less. Shimer (2004) shows that offer
arrival rates can affect optimal search intensity in either direction.

                                                  8
of workers, many of whom travel home to rural areas for the New Year and Spring Festival
holiday. To abstract from these trends, we turn to daily data and focus on a narrow window of
30 days surrounding the ban. This window starts after the peak of post-holiday recruiting
activity and exhibits relatively smooth time trends within both the pre-and post-ban periods. In
this sample, we estimate local linear regressions, fitting different linear trends on either side of
the ban. While this approach sacrifices a lot of data, we believe it provides the most accurate
estimates of the ban's causal effects on these outcome variables.

         As an alternative approach to identification, Appendix 11 (discussed in Section 7) uses
our DiD sample to produce difference-in-difference estimates that use weeks in 2018 as controls
for 2019. This allows us to relax the smoothness assumptions we need for our main estimates
by using a full set of calendar week fixed effects to capture sharp time trends that are common
to both years. It also obviates the need to focus on just a 30-day window for the above
outcomes: We can now use weekly data for the entire year for all our outcome variables. In
addition to some data constraints (most importantly a shorter pre-ban period and poorer-
quality call-back data), the cost, of course, is the need for a parallel trends assumption.
Fortunately, the main results are very similar.

 4. Did the Ad Ban Change the Gender Mix of Successful Applicant Pools?
4.1 Unadjusted Time Trends
         To provide a first look at the how the ban affected the gender mix of applicant and
called-back worker pools, Figure 1 displays aggregate, unadjusted time trends in these outcomes
for non-gendered (N) jobs, and for jobs that (initially) requested women and men (F and M
jobs). It shows, first of all, there was no perceptible change in these two outcomes at the time
of the ban in N jobs-- the 75 percent of job ads whose contents were not altered overnight. In
jobs that initially requested men, however, removing that request raised women's share of call-
backs by about three percentage points-- from 4.86% to 7.93%. This shift was immediate,
constant in magnitude, and persisted for the lifetime of these ads (up to six months after the
ban). Figure 1(b) also shows that the main mechanism for this effect was application behavior:
the share of women in applicant pools to male jobs increased from 5.57% to 10.52%.
Interestingly, this surge in applications was attenuated by only a modest decline in women's
relative chances of success in men's jobs. Specifically, conditional on applying, women's call-
back rates in M jobs fell from 86.6 percent of men's to 73.3 percent. Similarly, Figure 1(c) shows
that the ad ban raised men's share of call-backs to (previously) female jobs by almost 13
percentage points, from 6.81% to 19.44%. Again this effect was immediate, constant, and
permanent; and the main mechanism was application behavior: men's share in the applicant
pool rose from 10.04% to 25.95%. Interestingly, this surge in applications was reinforced by a
small increase in men's relative chances of success in women's jobs, from 65.4 percent of
women's to 68.8 percent.


                                                 9
        Could the sharp jumps in application patterns on March 1, 2019 be associated with
some other event at that time of year that we cannot observe? To check for this possibility,
Figure 2 turns to our DiD sample, which lines up weeks in 2018 and 2019 such that the first week
after 2018's pseudo-ban starts on the same lunar day as the actual ban. While the time trends
for N jobs show no jumps on that date in either year, the time trends in applications and call-
backs in both F and M jobs show a clear pattern: large jumps in 2019 and no change in 2018.
We view this as compelling evidence that the 2019 jumps in the above outcomes were caused
by the gendered-ad ban.

         To summarize, Figures 1 and 2 and illustrate three main results. First, the ban caused a
large upsurge in the share of `gender-mismatched' applications to the ads whose contents were
changed by the ban. Second and somewhat surprisingly, the rise in male applications to
formerly female jobs was much larger than the increase in female applications to male jobs. We
will explore possible causes for this asymmetry later in the paper. Third and perhaps most
unexpected is how well gender-mismatched applications were treated by employers both before
and after the ban, with success rates ranging from 65 to 87 percent of gender-matched
applications. This fact explains why the upsurge in gender-mismatched applications changed
the gender mix of call-back pools.

4.2 Regression Analysis

         We next apply regression analysis to our main estimation sample to control for three
potentially confounding factors affecting the time trends in Figure 1. The first of these factors is
duration dependence within recruiting spells: since all our job ads were posted before the ban,
the post-ban weeks will, on average, occur later in a recruiting spell. This could affect our
estimates if, for example, men and women had different tendencies to apply to new versus old
ads. Second, as recruiting spells become complete after the ban, the mix of job ads remaining in
the estimation sample could change. For example, if ads for receptionists tend to be filled
relatively quickly, then these stereotypically female jobs will be under-represented in the post-
ban period relative to the pre-ban period. While we expect both these factors -the average age
of ads and the mix of ads remaining active--to change relatively smoothly with calendar time,
we nevertheless assess the effects of controlling for them on our main results. Finally, we are
concerned that cyclical and seasonal factors could affect application and call-back patterns, for
both macro-economic and cyclical reasons.

       In more detail, we run regressions in which an observation is an ad-week cell, where j
denotes ads and t denotes weeks. The outcome variable,    is the female share of applications
to the job, or the female share of call-backs to the job occurring in week . 14 Our objective is to

14
  Call-backs to an application can of course take place in a later week than the application. Our
estimation approach in this section counts call-backs in the week they occurred; this allows the ad ban to
affect call-backs to applications that were made before, as well as after the ban.

                                                    10
estimate the ban's effect on the representation of women among successful applicants to jobs
that (initially) requested men (M jobs), requested women (F jobs), or that never made an explicit
gender request (N jobs). We parameterize the effects of the ad ban on these outcomes as
follows:

            1      2      3      4    5
          =      +      +  ( ) +    +                                                            (1)

where  and  indicate the job's gender request when it was first posted. Thus, we treat non-
gendered (N) jobs in the pre-ban period as our reference category. In this parameterization,  4
measures how the female share of applications or call-backs differed between F and N jobs
during the pre-ban period. Analogously,  5 compares the female share between M and N jobs
in the pre-ban period.  3 measures the ban's effect on the female share in ads that do not
express a gender preference. Finally, 1 and  2 measure how banning gendered ads affected
recruitment outcomes in jobs that requested men and women before the ban, relative to the
ban's effect on non-gendered jobs.

         Column 1 of Table 1(a) reports regression results for female applicant shares exactly as
specified in equation 1, with no additional controls. 15 Importantly, because the female share is
estimated much more precisely in weeks when, say, 20 applications arrived than when just one
application arrived, all these regressions are weighted by the total number of applications
received in that week. 16 Column 1 suggests, first of all, that removing all the gender labels from
this job board had a small positive effect on the female share of applications to previously non-
gendered job ads: the coefficient of .0048 represents about a 0.5 percentage point increase on
the pre-ban female share of 40.9 percent. Removing gender labels, however, raised the female
share of applications to jobs that previously requested men by 4.95 percentage points, from a
base of 5.58 percent.17 Even more dramatically, removing gender labels reduced the female
share of applicants to previously female jobs by 15.91 percentage points. Thus, the ban raised
the male share of applicants to `female' jobs from a base of 10.04 to 25.95 percent. These
results mirror the patterns observed in Figure 1.

      To address possible contamination of the above results from vacancy duration
dependence, column 2 of Table 1 controls for the age of each job ad using a quartic for the


15
   Because only ad-week cells that contain a positive number of applications provide information on
female shares, Table 1 is estimated on the subset of ad-weeks that received at least one application. This
is considerably smaller than the total number of application-weeks in our data, because many of those
weeks occur late in a recruitment spell, when few applications arrive.
16
   We have verified that these application-weighted regressions of the female applicant share yield
numerically identical estimates as unweighted linear probability models where an observation is a single
application that is made in a job*week and the outcome is the probability the application came from a
woman.
17
   This effect (like all the results summarized in this Section) is the sum of the post-ban coefficient and the
corresponding interaction term, i.e. 4.95 = 0.48 + 4.47.

                                                      11
number of weeks since it was posted. Column 3 introduces a quartic in calendar time to control
for secular and seasonal trends. Column 4, which is the most saturated specification that
identifies the effect of the ad ban on all three job types (F, M and N) adds fixed effects for job
ads to control for any selective re-filling of vacancies. Notably, these three treatment effects
remain very similar to the ones in columns 1-3. Notably, column 4 implies that the ban raised
the female applicant share to M jobs by 0.53 + 3.48 = 4.01 percentage points, or 4.01/5.58 =
71.9 percent. At the same time, the ban raised the male applicant share to F jobs by a much
larger 13.92 ­ 0.53 = 13.39 percentage points, or 13.39/10.04 = 133 percent. The ban's effect on
the gender mix of N jobs remains very small and precisely estimated.

         Finally, we do two things to assess whether Table 1's results are robust to our use of a
quartic to capture seasonal and cyclical effects. First, Appendix 5 shows that the ban's
estimated effects are unchanged if we replace the quartic in calendar time by fifth- or sixth
order polynomials, by separate quadratics on either side of the ban, or by separate quartics on
either side. Second, column 5 of Table 1 adds a full set of calendar week fixed effects to the
regression. Since the gender ad ban happened at a single point in time, the treatment effect on
the non-gendered job (N) ads is no longer identified, but the ban's effects on the F and M jobs
relative to the N jobs remain identified, and are essentially unchanged from the previous
columns.

         Table 2 performs a parallel analysis to Table 1 for call-backs, which exhibit very similar
patterns. Focusing again on the column 4 results, Table 2 shows that the large increases in
gender-mismatched applications caused by the policy also led to substantial increases in the
gender mix of successful applicants at those jobs. Specifically, we estimate that banning
gendered ads raised the representation of women among call-backs to men's jobs by (2.46 +
0.49=) 2.95 percentage points, or 2.95/4.77 = 61.8 percent. It raised the share of men in the
call-back pool to F jobs by (10.39 ­ 0.49 =) 9.90 percentage points, or 9.90/6.79 = 145.8 percent.
The ban had no statistically significant effect on the share of women in the call-back pool to N
jobs. All these results survive the same robustness checks that were applied to our application
analysis (i.e. using a variety of polynomials in Appendix 5, and adding calendar week fixed
effects in column 5 of Table 2).

        In sum, Section 4 has demonstrated that (a) the ban increased the representation of
gender-mismatched workers in call-backs to previously gendered jobs; (b) the main mechanism
was via changes in application behavior, and (c) these effects are considerably stronger for men
than women.




                                                12
     5. Which Types of Work, and Which Types of Workplaces were Most
                           Affected by the Ban?
5.1 Historical Gender Mix of the Job Titles Most Affected by the Ban
        Table 2 has shown that the gendered ad ban increased women's representation in jobs
that previously requested men, and increased men's representation in jobs that previously
requested women. Whether these changes reduced gender segregation, however, depends on
how employers used their gender requests before the ban. If employers' gender requests
mostly reproduced the gender mix of the incumbent workers in a job or workplace, our
estimates imply that the ad ban reduced gender segregation. However, if the explicit gender
requests on XMRC were used primarily for affirmative action purposes (i.e. to attract gender-
atypical applicants), the ban would be impeding employers' good-faith attempts to integrate
their workforces.

          To distinguish between these scenarios, we turn to data on all the call-backs issued on
XMRC between January and August 2018--a period that pre-dates our estimation sample. In
Figure 3 we group these call-backs by their job title, and use the gender mix of call-backs to a job
title as a proxy for the gender mix of the incumbent workers in that type of work (i.e. the
workers who were previously hired into the title). Job titles are the short piece of text (typically
3-8 words) at the top of a job ad that summarize the main type of work involved; they are more
detailed and descriptive than six-digit SOC codes. 18 In Figure 3, the horizontal axis shows the
incumbent female share in a job title, calculated in this way. The vertical axis shows the share of
job ads for that title that explicitly requested men or women in our estimation sample. The
message of Figure 3 is unmistakable: Overwhelmingly, employers on XMRC did not use explicit
gender requests for affirmative action purposes (i.e. to `lean against the wind'). Instead,
employers requested workers whose gender was already dominant in the job title being filled.

         Given that employers' gender requests reinforced existing stereotypes, just how
historically male or female were the jobs that men and women entered (in the sense of
increasing their share of call-backs) as a result of the ban? Motivated by Table 2's evidence that
the ban did not affect gender mix in non-gendered (N) jobs, we focus our attention on the
substantial changes that occurred in F and M jobs. We begin in Table 3(a), by using the above
historical title-level means to calculate the incumbent male share of all job ads that requested
men (i.e., all M jobs) in our estimation sample. In a sense, these M jobs were the ones that were
`opened up' to women by the ban (since it removed their requests for men). This share is 0.878,
indicating that the jobs whose requests for men were removed had a high incumbent male
share. To measure the incumbent male share of the job titles where women's call-back shares
actually increased as a result of the ban, Appendix 3 decomposes the total increase in women's

18
  See Marinescu and Wolthoff (2020), who show that job titles are more predictive of wages and
application decisions than are six-digit SOC codes.

                                                  13
share of call-backs to M jobs (i.e. the 2.46 + 0.49 = 2.95 percentage point percentage point
treatment effect identified in Table 2) into contributions from individual job titles: Each title's
contribution is the product of the title's prevalence among M ads (T) and the pre- versus - post
ban increase (within M ads) in women's share of call-backs to that title (T). 19 Using these
contributions as weights, column 2 calculates the incumbent male share of the job titles that
women entered as a result of the ban as 0.677. While this is still more historically male than an
average job (0.499), it is much less male than a typical male-requesting job.

         Table 3(b) repeats the preceding exercise for men's entry into F jobs, showing first that
the jobs that requested women before the ban were historically 78.5 percent female (i.e. less
female than the male-requesting jobs were male.) The jobs that men entered as a result of the
ban, however, were 73.4 percent female, indicating that men made deeper inroads into
historically female job titles compared to women's inroads into men's. This is starkly illustrated
by column 3 of Tables 3(a) and (b): the gap between the historical male share of the jobs the
ban `opened up' to women and jobs they actually entered (20.1 percentage points) was almost
four times as large as the analogous number for men (5.1 percentage points).

         To paint a broader picture of the historical gender mix of the job titles that women and
men entered because of the ban, Figure 4(a) plots the relationship between the incumbent male
share in a job title and the (pre- versus post ban) change in women's share of call-backs to those
jobs. Overall, consistent with Table 2, Figure 4(a) shows that women's access to jobs that
previously requested men increased after the ban. In addition, Figure 4(a) shows that these
increases were substantial in male-requesting jobs with incumbent male shares of up to about
80 percent, but small and statistically insignificant (1.87 percentage points, p=0.130) in job titles
whose incumbent male share was above that level. Similarly, Figure 4(b) shows that men's
inroads into jobs that previously requested women were smallest in the job titles that were the
most historically female. In contrast to Figure 4(b) however, we still see substantial and
statistically significant increases in men's call-back share even in job titles that were historically
more than 80 percent female. When a request for female workers was removed from jobs with
titles that were 80 percent or more female, men's call-back share still increased by 6.56
percentage points (p = 0.000).

5.2 Historical Gender Mix of the Positions, Workplaces and Firms Most Affected by the
        Ban
        In Table 3(c) we apply the methods used for job titles in Tables 3(a) and (b) to measure
the incumbent gender mix of the positions, workplaces, and firms that women and men entered
as a result of the ban. A position (firm x job title cell) is a particular type of work at a given firm,

19
  For simplicity and transparency, these decompositions were performed on unadjusted pre-post-ban
changes in the gender mix within job titles. Thus, the total ban effects that they account for differ slightly
from the regression coefficients in Tables 1 and 2.

                                                     14
such as all the HR managers at Dell Computer. A workplace (firm x location cell) refers to the
operations of a firm at one of the 47 different job locations that are coded in XMRC's system. 20
Table 3(c) shows that ­in addition to pulling women into job titles that were historically more
male than average--the ban also pulled both men and women into positions, workplaces and
firms where their gender had been under-represented. For both men and women, the ban's
integrating effects were strongest at the position level, which is the most disaggregated unit we
consider, and next-strongest at the title level. In these two categorizations (which both involve
the type of work that is performed) the ban's integrating effect was stronger for men than
women; we discuss possible reasons for this below. Interestingly, the ban also acted to
integrate firms and workplaces, but these effects were considerably weaker, and slightly
stronger for women than men.

5.3 Wage Levels in the Jobs Most Affected by the Ban
          Finally, to characterize the level of wages in jobs that men and women entered because
of the ban, Table 3(d) applies the same decomposition methods used in parts (a) and (b), but
changes the outcome variable from a job title's incumbent gender mix to the mean posted wage
in all (historical) ads for title. 21 To provide some context for this exercise, column 1 reports the
mean (historical) log wages of all the job ads requesting men, women and making no request.
Column 1 shows, importantly, that jobs that make explicit gender requests are
disproportionately low-wage jobs. Specifically, job ads requesting men (women) offer wages
that are 8.858 ­ 8.738 = .120 and (8.858 ­ 8.634 = .224) log points lower than jobs that make no
gender request. This is a common feature of gender requests on a number of different job
boards (Delgado Helleseter et al. 2020), and is consistent with the idea that firms abstain from
gender typing in the most skilled jobs because it is more important to identify the single best
candidate (Kuhn and Shen 2013). Thus, simply because of the way employers tend to use
gender requests in job ads, we should not necessarily expect the removal of gender requests to
substantially raise either men's or women's access to highly paid positions. Next, column 2 of
Table 3(d) shows that --compared to all jobs that had previously requested men--the M jobs
that women entered after the ban paid about 11.7 percent less; for men this number was
almost identical (11.0 percent less). Thus, while the ban integrated workplaces, its effects were
concentrated in types of work that were not highly paid. 22



20
   The 47 locations available in the data pertain to a mix of geographic units. These include the six districts
of the city of Xiamen, various cities (including Xiamen), provinces within mainland China, and outside
mainland China. 93.2% of the applications are sent to job ads located in the city of Xiamen or one the six
districts of Xiamen.
21
   See Appendix A3.4 for details on how the shift-share analysis was applied to posted wages.
22
   Table 3(d) is not directly informative of the ban's effects on either men's or women's wage-earning
opportunities. This is because opportunities depend on all the call-backs a worker receives and how each
individual worker's call-back set changes. For example, if all the additional women who got call-backs
from M jobs previously only got offers from N jobs, their mean call-back wages probably fell (though the

                                                      15
5.4 Which Job Titles Mattered Most?
          Another advantage of the shift-share decomposition underlying Table 3 and Figure 4 is
that it lets us list the individual job titles that account for the main treatment effects we
identified in Table 2. To that end, Appendices 3.1 and 3.2 list the 20 job titles that made the
largest contributions to those effects (for women and men separately). Consistent with Table 3
and Figure 4, only 13 of top 20 job titles that accounted for women's increased representation
in male-requesting jobs had above-average historical male shares (for example, warehouse
management). The remaining seven titles (like manager's assistants) made substantial
contributions to women's increased representation in M jobs because they were common (i.e.
with high 's) and sometimes requested men. In contrast, 18 of the 20 most important titles to
which men gained access were female-dominated (like administration specialist); only two (like
warehouse management) were historically male. Thus, the fact that the ban removed some
gender requests that `leaned against the wind' limited the magnitude of ban's overall
desegregating effect, especially for women.

         As a point of reference for the job titles most impacted by the gendered ad ban,
Appendix 3.3 lists the historically most male- and female-dominated jobs on XMRC. These
extremely gendered titles include a substantial large number of driving titles (call-backs to
"driver" positions were 99.66 percent male), and skilled trades (plumber, welder, electrician,
mold fitter and internet management staff were each more than 99 percent male). By far the
largest female-dominated title in this list was "administration and receptionist", which was
98.25 female. Notably, only one (relatively small) title ­civil construction worker--in these 80
extremely gendered job titles appears among the 40 titles that account for most of the ban's
effects. Thus, the ban left these extremely gendered jobs essentially untouched.

         Taken together, the results in this Section shed additional light on the striking
asymmetry of the ad ban's effects on women and men documented in Section 2 of the paper.
Aside from the fact that the ban raised men's applications to F jobs much more than women's
applications to M jobs, one more fundamental potential cause of this asymmetry is the
surprisingly large share of driving jobs among highly male jobs. Whether for personal preference
and safety reasons (as documented in Cook et al.'s (2021) study of Uber drivers), strong cultural
norms, or anticipated insider resistance, Chinese women did not move into driving jobs after the
ban. Another potential contributor is the large role of skilled trades in extremely male-
dominated job titles: in the short time horizon of our study, women interested in entering such
jobs would not have the time to acquire the required credentials. A final possibility is a granular
form of skill specificity: If we think of job titles as indicators of distinct skills (or skill bundles)
that are needed to perform a job well, then the number of distinct titles describing the most


maximum may not have changed). The opposite is the case if these women previously only had call-backs
from F jobs.

                                                  16
gendered jobs on XMRC would provide an indicator of how likely a random applicant is to be
qualified for those jobs. Defining highly male (female) vacancies as vacancies that requested
men (women) in job titles with a historical male (female) call-back share of at least 80 percent,
Appendix A3.5 shows that 23, 33 and 50 percent of highly female vacancies were in the 5, 10
and 20 most common job titles, compared to 14, 23 and 33 percent highly male vacancies.
Much of this difference is associated with the dominant role of female job titles related to
administration, clerical, and reception tasks, which ­in contrast to trades--seem less industry-
specific. The predominance of such highly female titles may have made it easier for men to
access women's jobs (in the short run) than the converse.

                6. Effects of the Ban on Firm and Worker Well-being

          So far, our analysis has shown that the gendered ad ban integrated pools of successful
applicants. As already noted, however, this integration may have come at a cost: the ban may
have made it harder for workers to find good jobs, and for firms to hire qualified workers. To
investigate these effects, this Section investigates the ban's effects on two indicators of firms'
ability to recruit qualified workers --the arrival rate of applications to job ads and the match
quality of those applications (application arrivals and quality, respectively)--and one indicator
of workers' ability to find good jobs: the call-back rate per application submitted (application
yield). 23 The first stage of our analysis is conducted on an aggregate level that combines all the
job ads in our sample, regardless of whether they made a gender request. The goal of this stage
is to see whether the ad ban--which changed the contents of about one fourth of the ads on
the job board--had any detectable effects on aggregate outcomes, allowing for the fact that
treatment of some ads can have spillover effects on other ads, for example via changes in
workers' application behavior. The second stage of our analysis focuses only on the ads that
were directly treated by the ban (i.e. the F and M jobs), where we expect to see the largest
effects on firm and worker well-being. Specifically, how did removing the gender requests from
an employer's job ad affect the number and quality of applications that employer received?
And how did workers' chances of getting a call-back from those job ads change after
applications were `officially' opened up to both genders? In addition to answering these
questions, this disaggregated analysis has two additional functions: to illuminate the
mechanisms behind the ban's integrating effects identified in Sections 4 and 5, and to shed
additional light on the striking gender asymmetry in those effects.




23
   We explored using the posted wages of workers' call-backs as an additional measure of worker well-
being, but our estimates were very imprecise. We suspect this is because wages attached to individual
jobs are posted in wide ranges and are not available for all jobs. These issues have less impact in Section
5, where we used mean posted wages of job titles to generate descriptive information on which titles that
were most affected by the ban.

                                                    17
6.1 Aggregate Effects of the Ban
         As a first look the ban's aggregate effects on firm and worker well-being, Figure 5 shows
unadjusted trends in application arrivals, quality and yield during our year-long sample period
surrounding the ban. Notably, all three outcomes show pronounced time trends shortly before
the ad ban, associated with large changes in recruiting and job search activity before and during
China's Spring Festival. Most dramatically, part (a) of Figure 5, on application arrival rates,
shows a steady decline in applications per job ad between October 2018 and the end of January
2019. This reflects the fact that many employment spells in urban China end at the start of the
Spring Festival, so there is little incentive to change jobs or workers as the holiday approaches.
During the Spring Festival (the shaded area shortly before the ban), application activity rises
dramatically. This suggests that many workers are looking for new job matches to start after the
holiday. The sharp increase in application activity slows dramatically during the two weeks
before the ban.
         While the pronounced holiday effects in Figure 5(a) make it hard to estimate the ban's
effects on outcomes like the overall application arrival rate, there is no obvious discontinuity in
overall arrival rates in the week of the ban. Figure 5(a) does, however, show a pronounced
`fanning-out' of application rates between F, N and M jobs at the ban date, with daily
applications to the previously gendered jobs (F and M) rising above applications to N jobs; we
will study these differential trends by job type in Section 6.2. Parts (b) and (c) of Figure 5 show
that the large increase in applications during the Spring Festival coincided with a substantial rise
in application quality and yield, complicating our attempts to isolate the ban's effects on these
outcomes as well. Still, in sharp contrast to Figures 1 and 2 (which showed large discontinuities
in the gender mix of applications and call-backs) none of the three series in Figure 5 exhibit
obvious discontinuities at the time of the ban.
         Motivated by the trends in Figure 5, our main analyses of the ban's effects on firm and
worker well-being fit local linear regression discontinuity models to daily data from the 30-day
period surrounding the ban. During this window, the time trends in all these outcomes on
either side of the ban are much less pronounced than during the Spring Festival. This gives us a
better chance of isolating the ban's causal effects, but it does reduce the statistical power of
some of our estimates, relative to the main effects identified in Section 4. 24
         Starting with the ban's effects on firms' overall abilities to fill a vacancy, columns 1 and 2
of Table 4 study the daily arrival rate of applications to active vacancies. 25 Focusing on the 30-
day period surrounding the ad ban, these columns estimate:


24
   In Appendix 11 we identify the ban's effects on application arrivals, quality and yield using an
alternative approach that allows us to use data from a much longer period surrounding the ban. This
approach uses 2018 data as a `control' for 2019 outcomes, thus relying on a different set of identifying
assumptions. The results are broadly similar.
25
   A vacancy is defined as active between the time it is posted and the time it receives its last application.
We focus on the application arrival rate rather than the total number of applications eventually received,
because the completed applicant pool size is, in part, a choice made by the firm.

                                                      18
                                   1   2
                       =  +  ( ) +   +  ( ) + 
                                                                                       (2)

where     is now the number of applications (including zero) received by ad j on day t, and t
indexes days relative to the gendered ad ban. The parameter  gives the size of the
discontinuity on the first treatment day (March 1, 2019), while the  s allow for different linear
time trends on either side of the ban. In column 1, the controls,  , include day-of-week fixed
effects and a quartic in job age. Column 2 adds job ad fixed effects, giving us our most tightly
controlled estimate of the ban's effects on the total number of applications received per day by
a representative job ad on XMRC, essentially comparing the flow of applications within each
individual job ad before versus after the ban. It is a fairly precisely estimated zero. Specifically,
the estimated coefficient shows an increase in the daily arrival rate of .0017 on a baseline rate
of .140. The 95 percent confidence interval around the coefficient runs from -.0008 (a 0.6
percent decline) to .0042 (a 3.8 percent increase). 26 Thus, while our estimates do not rule out a
very small negative effect of the ban on overall application arrival rates, in combination with
Figure 5(a) they suggest that the ban did not reduce the size of employers' applicant pools.
         As a second indicator of whether the ad ban affected firms' ability to recruit, columns 3
and 4 of Table 4 use an index of the mean quality of applications received by an ad during a
week. This quality index is based on an indicator developed by XMRC to measure the match
between the job's requirements (from the job description) and the worker's previous working
experience (from the resume). 27 To assess the validity of this score as a proxy for match quality,
we regressed our call-back indicator on it, while controlling for job ad, applicant, and job day
fixed effects. 28 In the sample of 3,023,024 applications with non-missing match scores, a one
standard deviation increase in the match score raises the chance of a call-back by 1.028
percentage points (p=.00000). This represents a 9.26 percent increase relative to the mean call-
back rate of 11.1 percent in the data.
         Aside from the different outcome variable, the only change in how columns (3) and (4)
were estimated (relative to columns 1 and 2) is in the unit of analysis, which is now at the
application level (not the ad-day level). Thus an application subscript, i, replaces jt in equation
(2). Notably, the Post indicator now indicates whether the application was made after the ban:
This allows the ban to affect application quality via changes in workers' application behavior.
For example, the ban might induce workers to send new, well-matched applications to jobs that
had previously requested the `other' gender. Once again, our most tightly controlled estimate is




26
   Regression-discontinuity plots corresponding to these estimates, and to the other main estimates in this
Section, are provided in Appendix 4.
27
   Notably, the index does not incorporate the match between the job's requested gender and the
worker's gender. It is based only on the types and amounts of skills required by the job and possessed by
the worker.
28
   Job day fixed effects are indicators for every day in a job ad's `life'; their role is to capture the effects of
duration dependence in a recruiting spell in a very flexible way.

                                                        19
in column 4, which indicates that the ad ban improved the quality of a typical application by a
very small but statistically significant amount (0.0168 standard deviations). 29

        In Table 5 we shift our attention from firms' to workers' well-being, and use similar
methods to estimate whether the ban made it harder for a typical worker to find a new job. Our
estimate of the quality of workers' job-finding opportunities is application yield: the probability
that an application results in a call-back. In addition to raising the chances a worker will find a
new match, higher yields should also help workers find jobs with higher wages and better
benefits and amenities, for the simple reason that the worker will have more offers to choose
from. As in Table 4, Table 5 presents pooled estimates that combine all three job types (F, N or
M). This is because one of the main mechanisms via which the gendered ad ban might reduce
call-back rates is by hiding employers' gender preferences from workers. If workers try to
maximize their call-back chances by avoiding jobs that request the `other' gender, the ban could
reduce call-back chances by making it harder for workers to target their applications in this way.

         To see whether this occurred, Table 5 reports the results of local linear regressions
similar in structure to the application quality regressions in Table 4: the unit of observation is
again an application, and the regressor of interest is an indicator for whether the application
was submitted before or after the ban. The only differences are the outcome --which equals
one if the application ever received a call-back from the job to which it was submitted--and the
fact that applicant fixed effects replace job ad fixed effects. 30 Thus we are effectively
comparing the call-back chances of applications submitted by the same worker, before versus
after the ban.

        When applicant fixed effects are controlled for, Table 5 shows a fairly precisely
estimated zero effect of the ban on workers' chances of getting a call-back, per application
submitted. 31 The estimates are almost identical for men, women and both genders combined.
Specifically, for women the estimated coefficient shows a decline in the probability of (ever)
getting a call-back of 0.34 percentage points, on a baseline call-back rate of 12.4 percent. The
95 percent confidence interval for the effect of the ban runs from -1.12 to 0.44 percentage
points. For men, the estimated coefficient shows a decline in the probability of (ever) getting a
call-back of 0.35 percentage points on a baseline call-back rate of 9.8 percent. The 95 percent
confidence interval for the effect of the ban runs from -0.94 to 0.24 percentage points.

        Combining our three indicators of firm and worker well-being, our results in this Section
suggest that the ad ban had little or no detectable effects on firms' application arrival rates and
workers' application yields, and a small positive effect on mean application quality. While these
small or null effects may not be surprising in view of the fact that only one quarter of job ads

29
   Again, the RD graph corresponding to this estimate is provided in Appendix 4.
30
   The sample sizes differ because whether a call-back was received is observed for all applications;
application quality is not always observed.
31
   Again, Appendix 4 presents the associated RD plots.

                                                    20
were directly treated by the ban, they rule out the important possibility that the ban had large
spillover effects on non-treated ads and the workers who applied to them. For example, the
removal of gender requests could have signaled to men that all traditionally female jobs (not
just those whose requests were removed) were now open to men. We do not see any evidence
of such spillovers.

6.2 Effects of the Ban on Directly Treated Jobs, and on the Workers Who Applied to
        Them
        We now turn our attention to the job ads whose gender requests were removed on
March 1, 2019. How did this removal affect the number and quality of applications those job
ads received? How did these changes affect the call-back chances of the workers who chose to
apply to those ads, and were these effects different for men and women? Starting with the
ban's effects on employers, Table 6 replicates the regressions in Tables 4 and 5 for the job ads
that requested men and women only and shows that the ban led to substantial increases in the
number of applications made to those jobs. Specifically, column 2 of panel (a) shows
a .0164/.157 = 10.4 percent increase in the total number of applications to previously-female
jobs, and a .0093/.147 = 6.3 percent increase in the total number of applications to previously-
male jobs.

         Columns 3 and 4 of Table 6's panel (a) disaggregate arrival rates by applicant gender to
shed some additional light on the mechanisms underlying the large changes in applicant gender
mix at formerly gendered jobs documented in Section 4. Interestingly, the large increase in
men's share of applicant pools at formerly-female jobs was not driven solely by a rise in the
number of applications coming from men. Instead, after the ban, women applied to formerly-
female ads at a slower rate. Specifically, male applications to F jobs rose by .0317 per day, while
women's dropped by .0153 per day. The pattern at formerly-male jobs was different, however:
while women's applications to these jobs rose, men ­unlike women--did not retreat from
applying to their `own' jobs after the ban. One possible explanation for this difference is related
to gender differences in ambiguity aversion: when jobs are not clearly gender-stereotyped,
Kuhn, Shen and Zhang (2020) found --loosely speaking-- that women tend to apply only when
they are explicitly invited, while men refrain from applying only when they are explicitly
disinvited. When this is the case, removing an F label from an ad will deter women from
applying, but removing an M label will not deter men. 32 Panel (b) of Table 6 replicates panel (a)
for the mean match quality of applications. On average, the match quality of these applications
(on dimensions other than gender) rose, though most estimates are imprecise (and insignificant




32
  Gee (2018) and Roussille (2021) present evidence of similar ambiguity-averse behavior in other aspects
of the job application process.

                                                   21
in the case of previously-female jobs). A quality increase is consistent with the idea that gender
requests discouraged some otherwise highly qualified candidates from applying to jobs. 33

        In sum, Table 6 shows that employers whose ads were forcibly modified had more
applications to choose from after the ban; if anything, these applications were of higher quality
than before. Further, since these additional applications to F and M jobs did not come at the
expense of non-gendered (N) jobs, our analysis does not identify any harmful effects of the ban
on employers. 34

          Finally, if the ad ban raised the total number of applications to M and F jobs, it seems
reasonable to ask whether it reduced the per-application call-back rates of the workers who
chose to apply to those jobs. Table 7 addresses this issue, showing that the mean call-back rate
fell by .0141/.144 = 9.8 percent in F jobs, and by .0086/.099 = 8.7 percent in M jobs. Thus, as
one might expect, the inflow of applicants to previously gendered jobs loosened the micro-labor
markets there. While this should benefit employers, it does not imply that the ban harmed
workers. This is because ­as we have documented--many of the applications to gendered jobs
after the ban would not have been made before the ban (they were discouraged by employers'
requests for the `other' gender). Because they were never made, these `missing' pre-ban
applications had no chance of getting a call-back. 35

        In sum, Section 6 shows that in the XMRC labor market as a whole, the ad ban had little
or no detectable effects on firms' application arrival rates and workers' application yields, and a
small positive effect on mean application quality. In the F and M jobs whose gender requests
were removed by the ban, application rates increased substantially (by 14.1 and 8.6 percent
respectively), mostly because gender-mismatched workers (who had been discouraged by
employers' gender requests) began to apply in greater numbers. If anything, the match quality
of these applications rose as well, suggesting an overall gain to employers from the ban. While
the increase in applications reduced the chances that an applicant to F and M jobs received a
call-back, this does not imply a reduction in worker well-being because mean call-back rates in
the pre-ban period do not account for the fact that some pre-ban applications to F and M jobs
were discouraged by employers' explicit requests for the `other' gender.




33
   While we estimate a large increase in the quality of men's applications to women's jobs, we emphasize
that this is very imprecisely measured, in part due to the very small number of male applications to
women's jobs before the ban.
34
   The null effect of the ban on applications to N jobs is implied by Table 4's aggregate analysis. Direct
estimates of the ban's effects on total applicant flows to N jobs show a precisely estimated zero effect of -
.0018 (.0014).
35
   Columns (2) and (3) of Table 7 would seem to suggest that women bore the brunt of this loosening of
labor markets, especially in previously-female jobs (which experienced a large influx of male applicants).
This particular result is however not robust to alternative identification approaches (see Appendix 11).

                                                     22
         Finally, Section 6 shed some additional light on the ban's asymmetric effects on gender
mix in F and M jobs. When explicit gender requests were removed from jobs requesting
women, men responded with a large increase in applications while women reduced their
applications. In contrast, when explicit gender requests were removed from jobs requesting
men, women responded with a more modest increase in applications, while men did not stop
applying. Together with the possibility of gender differences in skill specificity (discussed in
Section 5.3), these shifts help make sense of why men gained more access to women's jobs than
vice versa.

                                           7. Robustness
         Appendices 5-11 explore the robustness of our results to a wide variety of specification
changes. In Appendix 5, we assess the sensitivity of our main regression results (Tables 1 and 2)
to the use of a quartic in time to control for time trends. We show that the estimated effects of
the ban on the gender mix of applicant and call-back pools are unchanged if we replace the
quartic by a fifth- or sixth-order polynomial, or by separate quadratics or quartics on either side
of the ban. Appendix 6 addresses the fact that some ads contained statements of gender
preferences in the text of their job descriptions, in addition to the standardized `preferred
gender' field whose removal we study here. As noted, these `embedded' statements in the text
were not removed on March 1, 2019. Consistent with expectations, we show that the effects of
the ban on the gender mix of call-backs to F and M jobs (the jobs that had their gender requests
removed) is 60 to 70 percent smaller in magnitude when an embedded gender request was
present. Conversely, when we look only at the large majority of ads without embedded gender
requests, the effect of the ban is 10-13 percent larger than our main estimates. We view the
latter result as suggestive of what a gender ban would do if it was applied to the entire text of
the job ad.

         To address the concern that our call-back indicator is available for only 62 percent of
applications, Appendix 7 replicates our regression analyses of application behavior (Tables 1, 4
and 5) --which do not require call-back data--on our full sample of ads. The results are nearly
identical to the main analysis. Appendix 8 addresses the same concern by taking advantage of
the fact that we have a second indicator of application success: whether the application was
read by the hiring agent. While being read is not as selective as receiving a call-back, our `read'
indicator is available for essentially all applications. 36 Replicating Table 2 (effects of the ban on
the female share of successful applications) using reads produces very similar results except for
the scale of the coefficients, most likely because reads are more common than call-backs.




36
  We define `reads' as being observed for a job ad if at least one application was read. By this measure,
99.86 percent of applications have valid read information.

                                                    23
         Appendix 9 examines the robustness of our main regression results (the integration of
application and call-back pools and zero or small effects on aggregate firm and worker well-
being) to the width of the estimation windows used: a full year surrounding the ban in Tables 1
and 2, and a 30-day window in Tables 4 and 5. It shows that our results for the gender mix of
application and call-back pools are highly stable to a large variety of application windows,
ranging from 9 to 51 weeks in width. For our well-being results, the massive shifts in recruiting
activity associated with the Spring Festival prevent us from expanding the estimation window
before the ban, so our approach here is to gradually lengthen the post-ban estimation interval
from 15 to 40 days (bringing us to the start of another holiday, the Qingming Festival). For
match quality and call-back rates, these results are also very stable across all window lengths
and very close to our main estimates. For application arrival rates, on the other hand, the
estimated effect of the ban first shifts from zero to negative as the estimation window
lengthens, then recovers back towards zero in longer windows.

         Appendix 10 probes the robustness of the same set of results by estimating the effects
of placebo bans in every possible week preceding the actual ban, and comparing these
estimates to our main results. 37 For our gender mix outcomes, the estimates of the ban's
effects on gender mix in F and M jobs are (a) largest in magnitude on the date of the actual ban,
(b) only present during estimation windows that include the actual ban, and (c) approximately
zero in estimation windows that exclude the actual ban. We see this is additional confirmation
of the ban's causal, integrating effects on call-back pools. For our estimates of aggregate
matching frictions, aside from large, spurious estimates that coincide with major holidays and
April 2018 XMRC site upgrade, our estimates of the effects of placebo bans are very similar to
the small estimated effects of the actual ban.

         Finally, to see if our discontinuity-based results are robust to a fundamentally different
set of identifying assumptions Appendix 11 exploits the fact that our data run back to the start
of 2018. 38 Since China's labor market activity is highly synchronized with holidays based on its
lunar calendar, we compare the 2019 outcomes with 2018 outcomes on the same lunar dates.
Specifically, we construct a full set of week-of-the (lunar) year indicators for 2018 and 2019,
which match equivalent weeks in the lunar calendar. We then conduct an augmented
difference-in-difference analysis, using 2019 as the treated group and 2018 as the control, with
only 2019 receiving treatment on the day of its ban. In addition to the control variables used in
our main analysis, we also include a quartic in week of the year (WOY), interacted with year.
This `augmented' DiD specification allows the pattern of time trends to differ in a smooth



37
   Our analysis cannot be replicated for placebo bans that occur after the actual ban because ads posted
on those dates will not contain the F, N and M labels needed to classify jobs. Our sample window includes
the 2018 lunar equivalent date to the actual ban however.
38
   We also have some data from 2015 and 2016, which we do not use here. Aside from their greater
distance in time, the sample sizes are much smaller, and call-back information was especially scarce in
those years.

                                                   24
fashion between the two years, while still using the week fixed effects to capture high-frequency
variation that is common to the two years. 39

         Relative to our main estimation approach, advantages of this alternative approach
include the fact that the full set of WOY effects relaxes our smoothness assumptions, letting us
capture an arbitrary pattern of high-frequency temporal variation that is common across years.
This allows us to use weekly data for the entire year for all our outcomes, not just the gender-
composition outcomes. Limitations of the alternative approach include a considerably shorter
pre-ban period and lower-quality call-back information. (Most of the 2018 data, including the
period surrounding the ban, is from before a 2018 site upgrade that improved the company's
counts of call-backs.) Most importantly, the alternative approach forces us to rely on a parallel
trends assumption. Specifically, net of parameterized differences in time trends between the
two years, the week fixed effects are assumed to be the same in both years. Because Appendix
11 explores the effects of a fundamentally different source of identification, it replicates all the
regression tables in the paper (1, 2, and 4-7).

         Appendix 11's estimates of the ban's effects on the gender mix of application and call-
back pools are almost identical to our main estimates in Tables 1 and 2. 40 Once again, we
conclude that those estimates are highly robust. Turning to the ban's aggregate effects on
firms, Table A11.3 shows similar patterns to those in Table 4: small and statistically insignificant
effects of the ad ban on application inflows, and a small but statistically significant positive
effect on mean application quality. In contrast to Table 5, however, Table A11.4 shows a
decline in aggregate application yields that is statistically significant for men and all workers
combined (the effect was negative but insignificant in Table 5). While this suggests that the ban
loosened the entire XMRC labor market, we are less confident in this result than our main
estimates, primarily because of the DiD method's reliance on parallel trends assumptions.
Inspection of the 2018 and 2019 trends for call-back yields shows a large pre-ban surge in 2019
that is absent in 2018. While we attempt to capture this by interacting the effects of the Spring
Festival (and following week) with year, it is unclear that this accounts for all the relevant
differences between the two years.

         Turning to the ban's direct effects on the jobs whose gender requests were removed,
Table A11.5 replicates Table 6's analysis of the ban's effects on employers. Aside from the
higher magnitudes in panel (a), associated with the switch to weekly application counts, the
results are very similar to Table 6: Both tables show an increase in total applications to jobs that
previously requested women and men, with the former increase much larger than the latter.


39
   We also allow the three main national holidays to have different effects in each year. For call-back-
related outcomes, we also add a control for XMRC's April 2018 system upgrade.
40
   The only difference of potential interest is that the ban's effect on the female share of applications to N
jobs becomes statistically insignificant. The ban's effects on the female share of call-backs in N jobs is
small and insignificant in both our main and DiD specifications.


                                                     25
Both tables attribute the increase in applications to M jobs solely to additional applications from
women, while the increase in applications to F jobs is the net result of a large increase in
applications from men and a decline in women's applications. Both Tables also show
imprecisely estimated but largely positive effects of the ban on the quality of applications to M
and F jobs. Importantly, all these patterns confirm our understanding of the mechanisms
underlying the ban's asymmetric integrating effects on call-back pools: These effects were
driven by a large surge in men's applications to F jobs, accompanied by a smaller increase in
women's applications to M jobs and by a decline in women's applications to their `own' (F) jobs.

        Table A11.6 replicates Table 7's analysis of call-back yields in F and M jobs, with
somewhat different results. Unlike Table 7, it does not find a disproportionate loosening of
labor markets in the previously gendered jobs, with one exception: the call-back rate of women
who applied to previously male jobs fell after the ban. While this strengthens the argument that
the ban did not adversely affect workers' abilities to find new jobs (at least not
disproportionately in directly affected jobs compared to other jobs), we place less weight on this
estimate than on our main estimates due to its reliance on parallel trends assumptions.

                                         8. Discussion
            For a number of highly plausible reasons, a thoughtful observer could argue that
prohibiting explicit gender requests in job ads could prove to be ineffective or
counterproductive in integrating jobs and workplaces. For example, little or no change in
application behavior might occur; employers could simply ignore any new `gender-mismatched'
applications that are generated; and a ban could restrict employers' good-faith efforts to
diversify their workforces. Despite these and other possibilities, our study shows that an
unexpected, overnight removal of explicit gender requests on a Chinese job board `worked', in
the sense that it raised the representation of gender-atypical workers in pools of successful
applicants. In addition to integrating jobs and workplaces, we find that the ban did not increase
aggregate matching frictions: application arrival rates to firms and aggregate application success
rates for workers appear to have remained unchanged. Mean application match quality appears
to have improved. In the jobs that were directly treated by the ban, application arrival rates and
application match quality improved. While application success rates fell in the directly treated
jobs, this is a direct consequence of the fact that workers were now applying to jobs they had
previously avoided even trying to get.

           While the XMRC ad ban integrated labor markets without apparently harming firms or
workers, it also illustrates some limits of gendered ad bans as policy tools to reduce gender
disparities in labor markets. One such limitation is the striking asymmetry of the ban's effects:
men entered jobs that (previously) requested women at a much greater rate than women
entered men's. If the goal of the ban is primarily to improve women's access to desirable jobs
once reserved for men, this asymmetry may limit its potential. Closely related, --and simply
because explicit gender requests are most frequently used in lower-paying types of work-- the

                                                26
jobs that both women and men entered because of the ban were mostly low-wage positions.
Thus, at least in the short run, banning gendered ads is not an effective way to increase, say,
women's share in senior management positions. Finally, we also show that the historically most
gender-stereotyped job titles on XMRC, such as drivers, electricians, nurses and receptionists--
were not meaningfully integrated by the ban.

           We also note two important limitations of our study, the first of which is the fact that
we do not observe which workers are hired after a gendered ad ban--we only see call-backs. In
this respect our work is complementary with Card, Colella and Lalive (2021) who study the effect
of Austria's 2004 Equal Treatment Act, which also banned explicit gender requests in the hiring
process. While Card et al.'s policy discontinuity is considerably fuzzier than ours, their
administrative data allow them to show that the Act's integrating effect extends to the hiring
stage. A second limitation is the short run nature of our analysis, which does not give workers
time to acquire skills and qualifications that would qualify them for many of the jobs whose
gender requests were removed. For this reason, our estimates could understate the harder-to-
identify longer run integrating effects of a gendered ad ban. In the longer run, a ban might
encourage both men and women to invest in skills that are currently highly gendered, such as
electricians and nurses.

            While our findings in this paper have direct implications for the many countries that
still permit gender requests in job ads, they may also be of interest to countries that banned
such requests long ago, for two specific reasons. First, recall that one of our most surprising
findings is the high receptivity of employers who posted explicitly discriminatory job ads to the
gender-mismatched applications that arrived when that discriminatory content was removed.
Notably, this receptivity took place in a regulatory context where anti-discrimination regulations
affecting other aspects of the recruitment process (such as selection from the applicant pool)
were weak, and were not changed at the time of the ban. This suggests that even the explicit
gender requests we study are in many cases relatively weak employer preferences, which are
perhaps driven less by strong tastes or beliefs about productivity than by unconscious
stereotypes that associate different jobs and tasks with different genders (Bohren, Imas, and
Rosenberg 2018; Carlana 2019). If this is the case, recent attempts to remove subtler (and often
unconscious) signals of gender preferences from job ads ­such as those advocated by Glassdoor
(2021)-- may have significant potential to integrate labor markets.

           Second, the explicit gender requests we study have an interesting parallel in the new
opportunities to micro-target all types of ads that have been created by evolving Internet
technologies. These new technologies appear to have allowed some employers to ensure that
their job ads are seen only by the age- and gender groups they hope to hire (Angwin et al. 2017;
Dwoskin 2018). Interestingly, compared to explicit gender requests, this emerging form of job
ad targeting has the potential to cause even more segregation, because ­in contrast to the
situation we study-- the excluded group is typically not even aware of the job's existence. While

                                                27
such emerging forms of job ad targeting may be harder to regulate than the ads we study, we
hope that some of the methods and lessons of our study may prove useful in studying them as
well.




                                             28
                                         References
Agan, Amanda, Bo Cowgill and Laura Gee 2021 "Salary Disclosure and Hiring: Field Experimental
       Evidence from a Two-Sided Audit Study". Unpublished paper, Rutgers University.
Agan, Amanda and Sonja Starr. Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Discrimination: A Field
       Experiment (with Sonja Starr), Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2018.
Angwin, Julia, Noam Scheiber and Ariana Tobindec. 2017. "Facebook Job Ads Raise Concerns
       About Age Discrimination." New York Times, December 20, 2017.
Ballance, Joshua, Robert Clifford and Daniel Shoag "No more credit score: Employer credit
        check bans and signal substitution", Labour Economics Volume 63, April 2020.
Banfi, Stefano, and Benjamin Villena-Roldan. 2019. "Do High-Wage Jobs Attract more
         Applicants? Directed Search Evidence from the Online Labor Market." Journal of Labor
         Economics, 37(3), 715-746.
Baker, Michael and Kirsten Cornelson. 2018. "Gender Based Occupational Segregation and Sex
        Differences in Sensory, Motor and Spatial Aptitudes." Demography (2018) 55 (5): 1749­
        1775.
Behagel, Luc, Bruno Crepon and Thomas Le Barbanchon. "Unintended Effects of Anonymous
       Résumés" American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2015, 7(3): 1­27
Belot, Michele, Philipp Kircher and Paul Muller. 2018. "How Wage Announcements Affect Job
        Search Behaviour - A Field Experimental Investigation." IZA discussion paper no. 11814
Bielby, W. T., and J. N. Baron. 1984.``A Woman's Place Is with Other Women: Sex Segregation
        within Organizations.'' in Sex Segregation in the Workplace: Trends, Explanations,
        Remedies, B. F. Reskin, ed. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Blau, Francine D., Brummund, Peter and Albert Yung-Hsu Liu. 2013. "Trends in Occupational
        Segregation by Gender 1970-2009: Adjusting for the Impact of Changes in the
        Occupational Coding System." Demography, 50(2), 471-492.
Bohren, J. Aislinn, Alex Imas, and Michael Rosenberg. 2019. "The Dynamics of Discrimination:
           Theory and Evidence." American Economic Review, 109 (10): 3395-3436.
Bos, Marieke, Emily Breza and Andres Liberman. The Labor Market Effects of Credit Market
       Information. The Review of Financial Studies, Volume 31, Issue 6, June 2018, Pages
       2005- 203.
Card, David, Fabrizio Colella, and Rafael Lalive (2021) "Does Stated Gender Preference Lead to
        Workplace Gender Segregation?" unpublished manuscript, UC Berkeley.
Carlana, Michela. "Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers' Gender Bias" Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, Volume 134, Issue 3, August 2019, Pages 1163­1224.




                                               29
Cook, Cody, Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan V Hall, John A List, and Paul Oyer. 2021 "The Gender
       Earnings Gap in the Gig Economy: Evidence from over a Million Rideshare Drivers", The
       Review of Economic Studies, (forthcoming).
Darity, William A. Jr, and Patrick L. Mason, ``Evidence on Discrimination in Employment: Codes
        of Color, Codes of Gender,'' Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (1998), 63­90
Delgado Helleseter, Miguel, Peter Kuhn and Kailing Shen. 2020. "The Age Twist in Employers'
       Gender Requests: Evidence from Four Job Boards", Journal of Human Resources vol.
       55(2): 428-469
Doleac, Jennifer, and Benjamin Hansen (2020). The Unintended Consequences of `Ban the Box':
        Statistical discrimination and employment outcomes when criminal histories are hidden.
        Journal of Labor Economics 38(2): 321-374.
Dwoskin, Elizabeth. "Men (only) at work: Job ads for construction workers and truck drivers on
       Facebook discriminated on gender, ACLU alleges" Washington Post, September 18,
       2018.
Flory, Jeffrey A., Andreas Leibbrandt and John A. List. 2015. "Do Competitive Workplaces Deter
         Female Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Job Entry Decisions." The
         Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 122-155.
Gee, Laura. 2018. "The More You Know: Information Effects on Job Application Rates in a Large
        Field Experiment", Management Science, 65(5), 2077-2094.
Glassdoor Team. 2021. "10 Ways to Remove Gender Bias from Job Descriptions" (April 2).
Goldin, Claudia and Cecilia Rouse. (2000). "Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of `Blind'
        Auditions on Female Musicians" American Economic Review 90(4): 715-41
Ibanez, Marcela and Gerhard Riener. 2018. "Sorting through Affirmative Action: Three Field
        Experiments in Colombia." Journal of Labor Economics, 36(2), 437-478.
Krause, Annabelle, Ulf Rinne and Klaus F Zimmermann. (2012) Anonymous job applications in
        Europe. IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, 1:5
Kuhn, Peter and Kailing Shen. 2013. "Gender Discrimination in Job Ads: Evidence from China."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1), 287-366.
Kuhn, Peter and Kailing Shen. 2015. "Do Employers Prefer Migrant Workers? Evidence from a
       Chinese Job Board." IZA Journal of Labor Economics 4:22.
Kuhn, Peter, Kailing Shen and Shuo Zhang. 2020. "Gender-Targeted Job Ads in the Recruitment
       Process: Evidence from China" Journal of Development Economics 147:102531.
Leibbrandt, A. and John A. List. 2014. "Do women avoid salary negotiations? Evidence from a
       large-scale natural field experiment." Management Science, 61(9), 2016-2024.




                                                30
Leibbrandt, A. and John. A. List. 2019. "Do Equal Employment Opportunity Statements Backfire?
       Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment on Job-Entry Decisions." unpublished paper,
       University of Chicago.
Marinescu, Ioana and Ronald Wolthoff. 2020. "Opening the Black Box of the Matching Function:
       the Power of Words", Journal of Labor Economics 38(2): 535-568.
Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais. 2017. "Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements." American
        Economic Review, 107(12), 3722-3759.
Ningrum PK, T. Pansombut and A. Ueranantasun (2020) "Text mining of online job
       advertisements to identify direct discrimination during job hunting process: A case study
       in Indonesia" PLoS ONE 15(6): e0233746
Hausman, Catherine and David S. Rapson (2018) "Regression Discontinuity in Time:
      Considerations for Empirical Applications" NBER working paper no. 23602.
Roussille, Nina. 2021. The Central Role of The Ask Gap in Gender Pay Inequality, unpublished
        manuscript, UC Berkeley.
Shimer, Robert. 2004 "Search Intensity", unpublished paper, University of Chicago.
Sorensen, Elaine. 1990. "The Crowding Hypothesis and Comparable Worth." Journal of Human
       Resources, 25(1), pp. 55-89.
Walsh, John, Miriam Johnson and Marged Sugarman. 1975. "Help Wanted: Case Studies of
        Classified Ads." Salt Lake City, Utah: Olympus Research Corporation.




                                              31
                                           Figures


Figure 1: Gender Mix of Applications and Call-Backs by Job Type, Before and After the
                                         2019 Ban
a. Female Share of Applications and Call-Backs to Non-Gendered (N) Jobs:




b. Female Share of Applications and Call-Backs to Male (M) Jobs:




                                              32
c. Male Share of Applications and Call-Backs to Female (F) Jobs:




Notes to Figure 1:

The four shaded areas correspond to the weeks covering four major holiday periods: National
Day (October 1-7, 2018), the Spring Festival (February 4-10, 2019), the Qingming Festival (April
5-7) and Labor Day (May 1-4). Holidays have large, negative effects on the total volume of
recruiting and application activity, but do not appear to affect the gender mix of applications
and call-backs. The solid vertical line indicates the start of the gendered-ad ban, March 1, 2019.




                                               33
Figure 2: Gender Mix of Applications and Call-backs by Job Type, Before and After the
                            2019 Ban and the 2018 Pseudo-Ban
a. Female Share of Applications and Call-Backs to Non-Gendered (N) Jobs

                  Applications                                    Call-Backs




b. Female Share of Applications and Call-Backs to Male (M) Jobs

                  Applications                                    Call-Backs




c. Male Share of Applications and Call-Backs to Female (F) Jobs

                  Applications                                    Call-Backs




                                               34
Notes to Figure 2:


       1. Dates on the horizontal axis refer to 2019. Outcomes in 2018 are plotted for the
          same lunar dates, which are 11 calendar days later.
       2. Time series have been adjusted to have the 2019 pre-ban mean in both years.
       3.   The three shaded areas correspond to the weeks containing three major
            holidays: the Spring Festival, the Qingming Festival and Labor Day. In 2019,
            these occurred in February 4-10, April 5-7, and May 1-4 respectively. The
            dashed vertical line indicates the first day of the gendered-ad ban, March 1,
            2019.
       4. Prior to XMRC's website upgrade in April 2018, XMRC reported many fewer call-
          backs than in 2019 (because fewer firms used its internal messaging system). To
          reduce the resulting noise in the time series, we plot all our call-backs in two-
          week bins, in contrast to the weekly bins in Figure 1.




                                               35
    Figure 3: Requests for Male and Female Applicants as a Function of Incumbent
                                  Gender Mix, by Job Title




Notes:

1. Figure shows two binned scatter plots and curves fitted to them. Underlying observations are
job titles.

2. Incumbent femaleness (horizontal axis) is the female share of all the call-backs issued by a job
title in the pre-estimation period (January through August 2018).

3. The square dots in each bin show the share of vacancies requesting men (women) in our main
estimation sample (ads posted between September 2018 and February 2019). The curves are
local polynomial fitted lines of these scatter plots, where the bars are the share of vacancies in
each bin. The right axis is for the scatter plots and the curves. The left axis is for the bars.




                                                36
 Figure 4: Women's and Men's Increased Access to Job Titles, by Incumbent Gender
                                         Mix
a. Job Ads that Initially Requested Men: Pre-Post Ban Changes in Women's Share of Call-backs
by Incumbent Male Share of the Job Title




b. Job Ads that Initially Requested Women: Pre-Post Ban Changes in Men's Share of Call-backs
by the Incumbent Female Share of the Job Title




                                             37
Notes to Figure 4:

1. The horizontal axis shows the male (female) share of call-backs in the pre-estimation period
(between January and August 2018), by job title.

2. The left vertical axis (for the scatter plots and fitted curves) is the change in the female (male)
share of call-backs to the relevant job titles (post ban minus pre-ban) in our main estimation
sample. To fit the curves, we weight the observations by the number of call-backs they
represent in the pre-estimation period to all job types. The vertical axis (for the bars) is the
share of call-backs in each incumbent maleness (femaleness) group.

3. In jobs with incumbent maleness of 0.8 or greater, the increase in women's representation
was 1.87 percentage points, which was not significantly different from zero (p = .129) (from part
(a)).

4. In jobs with incumbent femaleness of 0.8 or greater, the increase in women's representation
was 6.56 percentage points, which was significantly different from zero. (p = .000) (from part
(b).




                                                 38
 Figure 5: Time Trends in Application Arrival Rates, Application Quality, and Call-back
                                            Rates
a. Weekly Flow of Applications per Active Vacancy, by Job's Gender Request (F, N, or M)




              Shaded areas represent major holidays; vertical line is the date of the ban.
b. Average Weekly Application Match Quality, by Job's Gender Request (F, N, or M)




              Shaded areas represent major holidays; vertical line is the date of the ban.

                                                  39
c. Probability an Application Results in a Call-back, by Week Submitted and Applicant Gender




              Shaded areas represent major holidays; vertical line is the date of the ban.




                                                  40
                                                  Tables


            Table 1: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Applications

                                      (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)
Post ban week * Female job       -0.1639***     -0.1631***      -0.1626***      -0.1392***     -0.1388***
                                   (0.0042)       (0.0041)        (0.0041)        (0.0023)       (0.0023)
Post ban week * Male job         0.0447***       0.0464***       0.0465***       0.0348***      0.0350***
                                   (0.0033)       (0.0033)        (0.0033)        (0.0018)       (0.0018)
Post ban week                    0.0048***       0.0166***        -0.0009        0.0053***
                                   (0.0018)       (0.0025)        (0.0021)        (0.0011)
Female job                       0.4906***       0.4902***       0.4898***
                                   (0.0036)       (0.0036)        (0.0036)
Male job                         -0.3532***     -0.3522***      -0.3523***
                                   (0.0036)       (0.0036)        (0.0036)
Quartic in job weeks                                  Y               Y              Y               Y
Quartic in calendar weeks                                             Y              Y
Job ad fixed effects                                                                 Y              Y
Calendar week fixed effects                                                                         Y
Effective # of obs                1,426,896      1,426,896       1,426,896       1,426,896      1,421,850
R2                                  0.193          0.194           0.194           0.647          0.646


           Notes:
              1. All job ads are used here.
              2. All regressions are weighted by the number of applications in each job*week
                  cell, and clustered by firm ID. The numbers of observations used for all
                  specifications are 1,426,896. As a result of fixed effects specifications, as
                  singleton observations were dropped, the effective numbers of observations are
                  smaller in column (5).
              3. The dependent variable is the share of applications from female applicants; its
                  weighted mean is 80.2%, 41.2%, 8.6% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs,
                  respectively. The estimated constant term of 0.4090 in column 1 gives the raw,
                  pre-ban female share of applications in N jobs. Thus, the raw female share of
                  applications in male jobs pre-ban is 0.4090 - 0.3532 = 5.58%. The raw male share
                  of applications in female jobs pre-ban is 1 - (0.4090 + 0.4906) = 10.04%.




                                                     41
        Table 2: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Call-backs

                                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)
Post ban week * Female job    -0.1269***     -0.1263***     -0.1254***    -0.1039*** -0.1037***
                                (0.0079)       (0.0079)       (0.0079)      (0.0062)   (0.0059)
Post ban week * Male job       0.0275***      0.0282***      0.0284***     0.0246*** 0.0247***
                                (0.0064)       (0.0064)       (0.0064)      (0.0048)   (0.0046)
Post ban week                    0.0037       0.0152***        0.0034        0.0049
                                (0.0043)       (0.0052)       (0.0054)      (0.0040)
Female job                     0.4847***      0.4845***      0.4837***
                                (0.0057)       (0.0057)       (0.0057)
Male job                      -0.3997***     -0.3987***     -0.3988***
                                (0.0070)       (0.0071)       (0.0071)
Quartic in job weeks                               Y              Y            Y            Y
Quartic in calendar weeks                                         Y            Y
Job ad fixed effects                                                           Y           Y
Calendar week fixed effects                                                                Y
Effective # of obs              214,489       214,489        214,489       214,489      196,850
R2                               0.219         0.219          0.220         0.691        0.667
     Notes:
        1. Only job ads with a positive number of call-backs are used here.
        2. All regressions are weighted by the number of call-backs in each job*week cell,
            and clustered by firm ID. The numbers of observations used for all specifications
            are 214,489. As a result of fixed effects specifications, singleton observations
            were dropped and the effective numbers of observations are smaller in column
            (5).
        3. The dependent variable is the share of call-backs from female applicants at each
            job*week cell; its weighted mean is 85.7%, 45.0% and 6.7% for female, non-
            gendered, and male jobs, respectively. The estimated constant term of 0.4474 in
            column 1 gives the raw, pre-ban female share of applications in N jobs. Thus,
            the raw female share of call-backs in male jobs pre-ban is 0.4474 - 0.3997 =
            4.77%. The raw male share of call-backs in female jobs pre-ban is 1 - (0.4474 +
            0.4847) = 6.79%.




                                               42
     Table 3: Characteristics of the Jobs and Workplaces Women and Men Entered
                                       Because of the Ban
 a. Incumbent Male Share of the Job Titles Women Gained Access to Because of the Ban

              (1)                                               (2)                              (3)
       All M Job Titles                   M Titles Women Entered (were Called
                                                                                               (1)-(2)
(Opened to Women by the Ban)1                 Back to) because of the ban2
            0.878                                             0.677                            0.201
        1. The mean incumbent male share of all job titles among M jobs (jobs requesting men).

        2. The mean incumbent male share of all job titles, weighted by their contribution to women's
        increased share in call-backs to M jobs (See Appendix 3).


 b. Incumbent Female Share of the F Jobs Men Gained Access to Because of the Ban

              (1)                                               (2)                              (3)
       All F Job Titles                  F jobs Men Entered (were Called Back to)
                                                                                               (1)-(2)
 (Opened to Men by the Ban)1                       because of the ban2
            0.785                                              0.734                             .051
        1. The mean incumbent female share of all job titles among F jobs (jobs requesting women).
        2. The mean incumbent female share of all job titles, weighted by their contribution to men's
        increased share in call-backs to F jobs (See Appendix 3).


 c. Incumbent Gender Mix of the Job Titles, Positions, Workplaces and Firms Entered by Women
 and Men because of the Ban

                                                                         UNIT
                                          Job Titles        Positions      Workplaces         Firms
  Incumbent Male share of units
                                            0.677            0.813               0.610        0.579
  entered by Women
  Incumbent Female share of
                                            0.734            0.855               0.576        0.540
  units entered by Men

        1. Positions are firm x job title cells; workplaces are firm x job location cells.
        2. Incumbent Male and Female Shares are calculated from all the call-backs issued by a unit
        (Position, Workplace, etc.) during the pre-estimation period only (January - August 2018). The
        mean incumbent female share of all call-backs on XMRC during the pre-estimation period is
        0.501.
        3. The incumbent gender mix of the units (e.g. job titles) that were entered is the product of
        the unit's prevalence (among M or F jobs) before the ban (), and the change in the incumbent
        male or female share of call-backs between the pre- and post-ban periods ().

                                                       43
 d. Mean Log (Wages) of the Job Titles Entered by Women and Men

                                                                  Titles Entered because         Difference
                                                   All Titles1
                                                                         of the Ban2              (2) ­ (1)
Mean log (wage) in:                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)

Job Ads Requesting Men (M jobs)                      8.738                 8.621                    -0.117
Job Ads Requesting Women (F jobs)                    8.634                 8.524                    -0.110
Jobs Ads with no Gender request (N jobs)             8.858                    --                      --
All Jobs                                             8.826                    --                      --


           1. The log (wage) of an individual job title is the number-of-vacancies weighted average of the
           log of the posted wage for all job ads in the pre-estimation sample for that title. The mean log
           (wage) for job ads requesting men is the average of the log (wage) of all M jobs in the
           estimation sample. Mean log (wages) for other job types are defined analogously.
           2. The mean log (wage) of `entered' titles is the mean across all job titles, weighted by their
           contribution to men's (women's) increased share in call-backs to F (M) jobs (See Appendix 3).




                                                      44
             Table 4: Aggregate Effects of the Ad Ban on Employer Well-Being:
                                     Local Linear Regressions

                                            (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)
                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                          Arrivals       Arrivals   Quality   Quality
         Post ban                         0.0011         0.0017   0.0218*** 0.0168***
                                         (0.0013)       (0.0013)   (0.0059)  (0.0052)
         Day-of-week fixed effects           Y              Y          Y         Y
         Quartic in job days                 Y              Y          Y         Y
         Job ad fixed effects                               Y                    Y
         # of obs                        3,494,575     3,494,575 439,173     439,173
         R2                                0.021          0.360     0.005     0.610


Notes:

         1. Observations are ad-day cells in columns 1 and 2, and applications in columns 3
            and 4. Sample is restricted to days within 15 days of the ad ban.
         2. All specifications include a linear trend, interacted with Post Ban. Days from the
            ban (t) is defined as the date of the application minus the date of the gendered
            ad ban. Job days are the number of days elapsed since the job received its first
            application. All regressions are clustered by firm ID.
         3. Application arrivals are the number of applications received per vacancy in each
            job*calendar day cell. The average daily number of applications received is .143.
         4. Match quality is normalized to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one
            among all applications in our data. The average normalized match quality for
            the applications in the current estimation sample is .008.




                                                  45
                        Table 5: Aggregate Effects of the Ad Ban on Jobseekers:
                                 Local Linear Regressions for Call-Back Yields


                                (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
                                                                Applications from:
                                        All                          Women                        Men
Post ban                  -0.0060***          -0.0035         -0.0054       -0.0034     -0.0056**     -0.0035
                            (0.0022)          (0.0026)        (0.0033)      (0.0040)     (0.0025)     (0.0030)
Day-of-week fixed effects       Y                 Y               Y             Y            Y            Y
Quartic in job days             Y                 Y               Y             Y            Y            Y
Applicant fixed effects                           Y                             Y                         Y
Effective # of obs          637,711           637,711         270,994       270,994      366,717      366,717
R 2
                             0.001             0.133           0.001          0.130       0.001        0.132

     Notes:
              1.Observations are applications that were made within 15 days of the ban. `Post ban' means the
              application was made after the ban. The dependent variable equals one if the application ever
              received a call-back.
              2. All specifications include a linear trend and its interaction with the Post Ban dummy.
              3. All regressions are clustered by firm ID.
              4. The average call-back probability is 0.124 and 0.098 for applications from women and men,
              respectively, and 0.109 overall.




                                                         46
      Table 6: Effects of the Ad Ban on Employers who Posted Gendered Job Ads:
                                     Local Linear Regressions



a. Effects on the Daily Application Arrival Rate:

                                               (1)         (2)           (3)      (4)
                                                          Applications from:
                                               All         All       Women        Men
        To Ads that Requested Women:
       Post ban                      0.0151*** 0.0164*** -0.0153*** 0.0317***
                                      (0.0037)  (0.0037)   (0.0032)  (0.0016)
       Job Ad Fixed Effects?                        Y          Y         Y
       # of obs                       405,249   405,249    405,249   405,249
       R2                              0.023     0.319      0.307     0.205
        To Ads that Requested Men:
       Post ban                            0.0088**      0.0093**   0.0102***   -0.0009
                                           (0.0038)      (0.0038)    (0.0010)   (0.0036)
       Job Ad Fixed Effects?                                 Y           Y          Y
       # of obs                             439,775      439,775     439,775    439,775
       R2                                    0.013         0.411      0.214      0.415


b. Effects on the Mean Match Quality of Applications:


                                               (1)         (2)           (3)      (4)
                                                          Applications from:
                                               All         All       Women        Men
        To Ads that Requested Women:
       Post ban                              0.0073       0.0185     0.0264     0.1036*
                                            (0.0163)     (0.0153)   (0.0165)    (0.0560)
       Job Ad Fixed Effects?                                 Y          Y           Y
       # of obs                             51,672        51,672     44,029      11,106
       R2                                   0.007         0.551      0.565       0.709
        To Ads that Requested Men:
       Post ban                             0.0294*      0.0260*     0.0236     0.0301**
                                            (0.0153)     (0.0141)   (0.0658)    (0.0149)
       Job Ad Fixed Effects?                                 Y          Y           Y
       # of obs                             56,293        56,293     5,619       52,455
       R2                                   0.003         0.574      0.752        0.578




                                                    47
Notes:

         1. Sample is restricted to days within 15 days of the ad ban.
         2. All specifications include a linear trend, interacted with Post Ban. Days from the
            ban (t) is defined as the date of the application minus the date of the gendered
            ad ban. All regressions include day-of-week fixed effects and a quartic in job
            days (the number of days elapsed since the job received its first application). All
            regressions are clustered by firm ID.
         3. In panel (a), observations are ad-day cells, and the dependent variable is the
            number of applications received per vacancy at each job*calendar day cell.
            Column 3 (4) only counts applications from women (men). The average daily
            number of applications received is 0.159 and 0.149 in ads requesting women
            and men respectively.
         4. In panel (b), observations are applications, and the dependent variable is the
            application's match quality, normalized to a mean of zero and standard
            deviation of one among all applications in our data. The average normalized
            match quality for the applications in the current estimation sample is -0.050 and
            0.089 in ads requesting women and men respectively.




                                                 48
      Table 7: Effects of the Ad Ban on Workers who Applied to Gendered Job Ads:
                 Local Linear Regressions for the Call-Back Rate per Application


                                                          Applications from:
                                                  All          Women               Men
                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)
          Post ban                             -0.0008          0.0003           -0.0017
                                               (0.0027)        (0.0042)          (0.0031)
          Post ban * Female job              -0.0141***      -0.0112**           -0.0076
                                               (0.0045)        (0.0051)          (0.0085)
          Post ban * Male job                 -0.0086**       -0.0172*           -0.0048
                                               (0.0040)        (0.0102)          (0.0043)
          Day-of-week fixed effects                Y               Y                 Y
          Quartic in job days                      Y               Y                 Y
          Applicant fixed effects                  Y               Y                 Y
          Effective # of obs                   637,711         270,994           366,717
          R2                                    0.133           0.131             0.132

Notes: 1. Observations are applications that were made within 15 days of the ban. `Post ban' means the
       application was made after the ban. The dependent variable equals one if the application ever
       received a call-back.
       2. All specifications include a linear trend, and its interaction with the Post Ban dummy.
       3. All regressions are clustered by firm ID. All columns include controls for Female Job and Male
       Jobs.
       4. The average call-back probabilities in female and male jobs were 0.144 and 0.099 respectively.




                                                  49
What Happens When Employers Can No Longer Discriminate in Job Ads?


                       Peter Kuhn and Kailing Shen



               Appendix--For online publication

                              July 24, 2021
                       Appendix 1--Gendered Ad Bans in Selected Countries 1


1.1 The Decline of Gendered Job Ads in United States, Austria, and China


        Information on legislation and advertising practices in these three countries is available from other
research articles. The dates refer to the period during which explicit gender requests in job ads declined
dramatically, which in most cases includes the date of related legislation.


United States (1968-1973)
          A 1973 U.S. Supreme Court decision (Pittsburgh Press Co. v Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations)
declared that sex-segregated advertising was illegal, and that newspapers could not publish ads seeking
applicants of a specific gender. Available evidence suggests, however, that explicit gender requests were
already being abandoned by newspapers before that date, perhaps due to public pressure. In particular, Walsh
et al.'s (1975) study of help wanted ads in San Francisco and Salt Lake City showed that such ads declined
dramatically between 1968 and 1972. Still, 15 percent of job ads continued to designate sex in San Francisco in
1972, and 33 percent did so in Salt Lake City.




Austria (2004-2008)
        In the early 2000s, the European Union published a number of directives that prohibited discrimination
based on gender, ethnicity, religion, or disability in all EU member countries. These directives resulted in anti-
discriminatory changes to labor laws in a number of countries, which included prohibitions of explicitly gendered
job ads. In Austria's case, these laws took the form of the Austrian Equal Treatment Act (AETA), which became
effective on July 1, 2004. Card, Colella and Lalive (2021) demonstrate that stated gender preferences declined
precipitously during the three subsequent years, and were essentially absent by 2008.




China (2016-2019)


         Appendices 2 and 3 in Kuhn, Shen and Zhang (2020) provide information on legislation and
implementation of gendered ad bans in China. Essentially, China stipulated that job boards could be fined for
posting job ads containing explicit gender requests in 2016. As in some other countries (such as Austria and
Ireland, for example) enforcement was not immediate. While the large, national job boards eliminated most
gendered ads quite early, XMRC was not ordered to do so until March 2019.




1
    This appendix was prepared with the energetic and capable assistance of Alice Liu and Billy Troutman.

                                                          1
1.2 The Decline of Gendered Job Ads-- Other English-Speaking Countries


       To provide additional background for the current paper, we collected information on gendered job ads
and associated legislation in these countries using a two-step process:
    1. We identified one or two major newspapers in the country were that were active in 1960 and for several
       decades after. We then examined the classified job ads starting in 1960 to identify a period during
       which the prevalence of explicit gender requests declined dramatically.
    2. We then searched news articles and other sources around that period to identify changes in public
       policy ­especially anti-discrimination legislation-- that may have accounted for this sharp decline.
        Our analysis was limited to English-speaking countries due to language barriers.
        Unless otherwise stated, the source for most of our newspapers analysis is newspapers.com, which is a
database of newspapers in the English language, some dating a few centuries back. Once again, the dates refer
to the period during which explicit gender requests in job ads declined dramatically, which in most cases
includes the date of related legislation.


Canada (1971-1978)
        Since Canadian labor law is primarily under provincial jurisdiction, our newspaper analysis focused on
the Financial Post and Vancouver Sun, prominent newspapers in Canada's two largest English-speaking
provinces: Ontario and British Columbia.
         Despite the passage of the Ontario Human Rights Code in 1962, job ads in the Financial Post contained
large numbers of explicit gender requests between 1960 and 1970. In 1971, there was a significant decline in
the prevalence of job ads containing gender requests; these were completely gone by February 5th, 1972. This
was ten years after Ontario's Human Rights Code was passed, and five years before the Canadian Human Rights
Act (affecting federal workers) was passed in 1977.
        Between 1960 and 1973, job ads in the Vancouver Sun were separated into men's and women's
sections. This practice ended in 1974, although explicit gender requests still persisted within individual ads. In
1977, editors of the newspaper began issuing a warning regarding discrimination in employment ads and telling
applicants to disregard explicit requests and treat them as if they are requesting both genders. Explicit gender
requests were completely absent from the April 7th, 1978 issue.
        The 1974 disappearance of separate men's and women's sections could be related to the passage of the
BC Human Rights Code in 1973; the 1977 change may be related to the Canadian Human Rights Act, though this
Act only affected workers under federal jurisdiction.


United Kingdom (1972-1975)
       Our newspaper analysis for the U.K. was based on job ads in The Guardian. Explicit gender requests
were common in those ads between 1960 and 1974. A steep decline in such ads was observed by April 1975,
and no examples of gender requests were found in April 1976.
        This drop in discriminatory ads was likely due to the passage of the UK's Sex Discrimination Act of 1975,
which was introduced to prevent discrimination on the basis of gender. The primary stated goal of the Act was
to bring about gender equality.


                                                         2
New Zealand (1977-1980)
       Our analysis of job ads in New Zealand used two newspapers, The Press and the Manawatu Evening
Standard. 2 From 1965 to 1975, both papers' employment sections appear were saturated with gendered job
ads. The Press exhibited many fewer of these ads by 1977, and the Evening Standard by 1978. By 1980,
gendered ads were rare in The Press and practically nonexistent in the Evening Standard.
        The disappearance of New Zealand's gendered job ads appears to be driven by New Zealand's Human
Rights Commission Act of 1977, which created a commission to receive and mediate complaints of
discrimination on bases that included marital status, sex, religion, and ethical beliefs. Gendered ads had already
disappeared when New Zealand's 1993 Human Rights Act was passed.


Ireland (1977-1981)
        Our analysis of job ads in Ireland used two newspapers, The Irish Independent and The Evening Herald
(The Herald after 2013). 3 Between 1960 and 1976, both papers' job ads were saturated with explicit requests
for males and females.
         By July of 1977, both papers had notices at the top of their employment sections regarding the
Employment Equality Act, a 1977 law which made it illegal for employers to discriminate based on gender or
marital status. The notices told readers and employers that all jobs under the jurisdiction of the law ("domestics
wanted" ads were an exception) were open to both males and females, regardless of whether they expressed
preferences for a specific gender. This did not appear to have any immediate effect, as both papers were still
filled with gender explicit requests.
        By June 1978, the volume of explicit gender requests had diminished substantially, and the wording of
ads had become more gender neutral. For example, ads for "bar men" and "bar maids" were replaced by ads
for "bar person". By 1982, we did not encounter a single explicit gender request in either newspaper.
        In all, it appears that the job advertising changes in Ireland were driven by the 1977 Employment
Equality Act, but full compliance took roughly 4 to 5 years afterwards.


Australia (1983-1985)
        Our newspaper analysis was based on The Sydney Morning Herald. Between 1960 and 1983, its job ads
were separated into "Men and Boys" & "Women and Girls" sections. In the June 4th, 1983 issue, employment
ads were no longer separated by gender. Keywords like "man" and "woman" were also largely absent from the
job ads after that date. Newspapers from 1984 and 1985 showed a similar pattern.
          The timing of this change coincides with Australia's Sex Discrimination Act of 1984. This law made it
illegal to discriminate against people because of their sex, intersex status, gender identity, sexual orientation,
marital or relationship status, pregnancy or potential pregnancy status, and family responsibilities. The law also
protects against sexual harassment, and covers most areas of public life, not just employment.




2
    Access was via scanned copies provided by librarians in New Zealand.
3
    Access was via Irish Newspaper Archives, an online database of Irish newspapers.

                                                               3
                                         Works Cited in Appendix 1


Delgado Helleseter, Miguel, Peter Kuhn and Kailing Shen. 2020. "The Age Twist in Employers' Gender Requests:
       Evidence from Four Job Boards", Journal of Human Resources vol. 55(2): 428-469
Kuhn, Peter, Kailing Shen and Shuo Zhang. 2020. "Gender-Targeted Job Ads in the Recruitment Process:
       Evidence from China" Journal of Development Economics 147:102531.
Pittsburgh Press Co. vs Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations et al., U.S. Supreme Court decision argued
        March 20, 1973, decided on June 21, 1973.




                                                      4
                       Appendix 2: Sample Design and Descriptive Statistics
      To construct our main analysis sample, we started with the universe of applications that were made on
XMRC between January 1, 2018 and October 25, 2019, and the corresponding ads.
We then retain only:
    ·   Job ads that received at least one application both before and after the ad ban (March 1, 2019)
    ·   Applications to those ads that were made between August 31 2018 and August 29, 2019. This gives us a
        sample of 52 complete weeks (26 before and 26 after the ban), in which the first post-ban week begins
        on Friday March 1 2019--the first day of the ban.
In sum, we start with a wide window (almost two years) to make sure we capture all the job ads that `straddled'
the ban. We then retained only the ads that actually straddled the ban (received at least one application before
and after it). Finally, our analysis sample comprises all applications to those ads that occurred during a one-year
window surrounding the ban.

        Table A2.1 shows the mean characteristics of the 166,725 job ads in our main analysis sample, and the
61,960 job ads for which we observe call-back information (our call-back sample). In both cases, the means are
presented separately for jobs requesting women, jobs requesting men, and jobs with no explicit gender request
(F, M, and N jobs respectively). Table A1.1 documents some noteworthy and perhaps surprising differences
between these three types of jobs. One of these is the fact that both M and F jobs advertise lower wages than N
jobs: At 5,794 yuan per month, M jobs pay 6.1 percent less than N jobs; at 4,432 yuan per month, F jobs pay
28.1 percent less. This appears to be a common feature of gender requests on a number of different job boards
(Delgado Helleseter et al., 2020), and is consistent with the idea that firms abstain from gender typing in the
most skilled jobs because it is more important to identify the single best candidate for those jobs (Kuhn and
Shen, 2013).
       Table A2.1 also shows that jobs requesting men and women have different education and experience
requirements: jobs requesting men ask for more experience but less education. In part, this is because ads for
women are highly focused on young, single new labor market entrants (who tend to be highly educated in China
(Delgado et al. 2020).
         Table A2.2 shows the mean characteristics of the 3.1 million applications in our main analysis sample,
and the 1.9 million applications for which we observe call-back information (our call-back sample). In both
cases, the means are presented separately for applications made by women and by men. Part (a) of this table
shows the characteristics of the applicant. Part (b) shows the characteristics of the match between the
applicant's characteristics and job's requirements (for example, do the applicant's age and experience fall into
the ranges requested in the ad?).
        Finally, to allow us to compare changes on XMRC around the ban with changes in 2018, we also create a
DiD sample. To do so, we replicated our main estimation sample ­which comprises applications that were made
between September 2018 and August 2019-- on two different periods: January ­ August 2018 and January-
August 2019. The latter period contains the date on which the 2019 ban occurred, and the former contains the
date on which it would have occurred in 2018. Unfortunately, these two periods cannot be designed to exactly
mimic our main analysis sample because we have no XMRC data from 2017. While this restricts the length of
the pre-ban period in both years to just two months, it allows us to compare trends in our main outcomes
between 2018 and 2019 on both sides of the ban date. We use this sample in Appendix 11 to conduct a

                                                         5
difference-in-difference analysis of the ban's effect ­which uses equivalent days or weeks from 2018 as controls
for 2019-- as a robustness check of our main results. Notably, since important events affecting China's labor
market ­especially the Spring Festival-- are determined by the lunar calendar, this new DiD sample requires us
to line up days and weeks between 2018 and 2019 to that they represent the same days and weeks relative to
the start of the Spring Festival in both years.




                                                       6
Table A2.1: Sample Means (Job Postings)

                                                Full sample                      Call-back sample
         Job Ad Characteristic
                                     Female   None     Male      All    Female   None     Male       All
    Education requirement (years)    13.04    13.59    11.81   13.30    13.08    13.40    11.60     13.13
    Require technical school         0.214    0.103    0.156   0.123    0.218    0.117    0.171     0.137
    Experience requirement (years)   0.832    1.281    1.616   1.271    0.828    1.156    1.518     1.157
    Require new graduates?           0.029    0.020    0.020   0.021    0.030    0.021    0.018     0.021
    Age requirement?                 0.662    0.442    0.684   0.498    0.684    0.484    0.710     0.540
    Age required (mean)              28.11    29.72    31.50   29.78    28.09    29.43    31.30     29.51
    Explicit offered wages?          0.839    0.744    0.765   0.757    0.858    0.797    0.797     0.805
    Wage offered (Yuan)              4,432    6,168    5,794   5,897    4,457    5,816    5,628     5,596
    Bonus offered?                   0.167    0.211    0.104   0.193    0.175    0.253    0.109     0.224
    Bonus offered (Yuan)             6,701    8,443    7,729   8,219    6,704    8,409    7,658     8,182
    Commission offered?              0.173    0.225    0.112   0.205    0.181    0.264    0.117     0.234
    Explicit vacancy numbers?        0.969    0.949    0.956   0.952    0.971    0.952    0.960     0.956
    Number of vacancies              2.026    2.548    2.323   2.458    2.139    2.735    2.368     2.607
    Firm size stated?                0.998    0.999    0.998   0.998    0.999    0.999    0.998     0.999
    Number of workers in the firm     347      800      607     724      307      521      451       483
    Firm ownership
       State Owned Enterprises       0.018    0.041    0.046   0.039    0.012    0.021     0.028    0.021
       Stock market listed           0.023    0.058    0.044   0.052    0.020    0.038     0.038    0.035
       Private shared                0.662    0.611    0.575   0.612    0.675    0.661     0.605    0.656
       Private                       0.134    0.129    0.116   0.128    0.141    0.138     0.113    0.135
       Taiwan/HK/Macau               0.061    0.045    0.080   0.051    0.059    0.046     0.087    0.053
       FDI from US or European       0.012    0.015    0.021   0.015    0.011    0.009     0.018    0.011
       Other FDI                     0.017    0.017    0.025   0.018    0.016    0.017     0.027    0.018
       Joint venture with US or      0.007    0.009    0.012   0.009    0.007    0.007     0.013    0.008
       other Joint venture           0.017    0.026    0.036   0.026    0.015    0.021     0.035    0.022
       Foreign Representative        0.011    0.010    0.010   0.010    0.009    0.007     0.008    0.008
       NGO                           0.003    0.003    0.002   0.003    0.002    0.003     0.002    0.002
       Missing                       0.035    0.037    0.032   0.036    0.031    0.033     0.027    0.032
    Average # of applications
                                     40.17    40.40    45.29   40.99    48.24    47.12     53.84    48.12
      received per job ad
    # of job postings                13,596   88,518   14,611 116,725   8,416    45,780    7,764    61,960
    % of job postings                 11.65    75.83    12.52 100.00    13.58     73.89    12.53     100




                                                       7
Table A2.2: Sample Means (Applications)

a. Applicants' Characteristics
                                                   Full sample                Call-back sample
                                            Females Males          All   Females Males         All
                Age                          29.20    31.56      30.59    29.13     31.38    30.41
                Married?                     0.448    0.487      0.471    0.456     0.476    0.468
                Education                    14.98    14.45      14.67    14.86     14.29    14.54
                Technical school?            0.081    0.117      0.102    0.091     0.131    0.114
                Experience (years)            8.06    10.30       9.38     8.09     10.22     9.30
                New graduates?               0.001    0.000      0.000    0.001     0.000    0.000
                Local hukou                  0.355    0.269      0.305    0.343     0.253    0.292
                Fujian hukou                 0.817    0.748      0.776    0.806     0.727    0.761
                Short sighted?               0.344    0.297      0.317    0.337     0.285    0.308
                Valid height?                0.905    0.960      0.937    0.907     0.961    0.937
                Height                       160.7    171.9      167.5    160.6     171.8    167.1
                Any photos?                  0.436    0.395      0.412    0.423     0.379    0.398
                # of photos                  1.002    1.003      1.002    1.002     1.003    1.003
                Valid current wage?          0.750    0.782      0.769    0.758     0.789    0.775
                Current wage                 5,657    7,150      6,549    5,444     6,741    6,192
                Valid intended wage?         0.652    0.622      0.635    0.659     0.625    0.640
                Intended wage                5,922    7,565      6,869    5,687     7,100    6,470
                Current status?
                   Employed, want to stay    0.078    0.066      0.071    0.081    0.069    0.074
                   Employed, will move if    0.026    0.033      0.030    0.024    0.031    0.028
                       offered better
                   Employed, want to move    0.182    0.204      0.195    0.166    0.180    0.174
                   Unemployed                0.714    0.696      0.703    0.729    0.720    0.724
                Chinese resume
                   Complete                  0.545    0.489      0.512    0.525    0.464    0.490
                   Mostly complete           0.451    0.506      0.483    0.472    0.531    0.505
                   Incomplete                0.004    0.005      0.004    0.004    0.005    0.004
                English resume
                   Complete                  0.050    0.040      0.044    0.046    0.038    0.041
                   Mostly complete           0.016    0.016      0.016    0.015    0.015    0.015
                   Incomplete                0.934    0.944      0.940    0.939    0.947    0.944
                Education info complete?     0.998    0.998      0.998    0.998    0.998    0.998
                Experience info complete?    0.969    0.973      0.972    0.970    0.974    0.972




                                                       8
b. Characteristics of the Match between the Applicant and the Job


                                                          Full sample             Call-back sample
                                                Females     Males       All   Females Males        All
                 Current wage match offered?
                    Related data missing        0.384     0.390     0.387      0.344     0.343    0.344
                    Current wage lower          0.202     0.224     0.215      0.211     0.238    0.226
                    Current wage similar        0.278     0.239     0.255      0.300     0.261    0.278
                    Current wage higher         0.136     0.147     0.143      0.144     0.159    0.152
                 Intended wage match
                    Related data missing        0.463     0.514     0.493      0.429     0.479    0.457
                    Intended wage lower         0.152     0.160     0.157      0.160     0.172    0.167
                    Intended wage similar       0.248     0.193     0.216      0.266     0.209    0.233
                    Intended wage higher        0.138     0.133     0.135      0.146     0.141    0.143
                 Age match required?
                    Younger than required       0.036     0.033     0.034      0.038     0.035    0.036
                    Age proper                  0.903     0.888     0.894      0.895     0.880    0.887
                    Older than required         0.061     0.079     0.071      0.067     0.085    0.077
                 Education match required?
                    Less educated than
                                                0.126     0.135     0.131      0.122     0.126    0.124
                       required
                    Education proper            0.525     0.523     0.524      0.509     0.509    0.509
                    More educated than          0.350     0.342     0.345      0.370     0.365    0.367
                    Technical school educated   0.022     0.026     0.024      0.026     0.029    0.028
                    and required
                 Experience match required?
                    Less experienced than
                                                0.037     0.032     0.034      0.034     0.029    0.031
                       required
                    Experience proper           0.311     0.237     0.268      0.305     0.233    0.264
                    More experience than        0.652     0.732     0.699      0.662     0.738    0.705
                    required
                 Gender match preferred?
                    Gender mismatch             0.029     0.039     0.035      0.028     0.048    0.039
                    To F jobs                   0.225     0.039     0.116      0.257     0.048    0.138
                    To N jobs                   0.746     0.747     0.746      0.715     0.725    0.721
                    To M jobs                   0.029     0.214     0.138      0.028     0.227    0.141
                 # of applications            1,290,206 1,840,111 3,130,317    839,101 1,100,834 1,939,935
                 % of applications              41.22     58.78      100       43.25     56.75     100


Note: Each panel of the table reports the extent to which applicant characteristic X matches the ad's request for
characteristic X. For example, in the full sample 90.3 percent of applications from women were in the age range requested
by the job ad. 3.6 percent of female applicants were younger than requested and 6.1 percent were older than requested.




                                                             9
               Appendix 3: Which Job Titles Account for the Ban's Main Effects?
    Our main empirical findings in this paper are that (a) removing explicit requests for men from job ads raises
women's share in call-backs to those ads; and (b) removing explicit requests for women raises men's call-back
share by a substantially larger amount. In Sections A3.1 and A3.2 of this Appendix we use a simple shift-share
approach to identify which specific job titles account for most of these effects. To put these `impacted' job titles
in context, Section A3.3 uses data from before our estimation sample to identify the historically most male-and
female-dominated job titles on XMRC, and discusses why these extremely male and female job titles were not
integrated by the ban. Section A3.4 describes how we modify our shift-share analysis to calculate the wages
associated with these impacted titles. Section A3.5 explores the extent to which title-specific skills might help
account for the asymmetry in the ban's effects on men versus women.

A3.1 Women's Increased Access to M jobs--Which job titles contributed most?
     In this Section our goal is to identify the exact job titles that accounted for women's increased
representation in M jobs. To illustrate our approach, consider all the call-backs to job ads that requested men in
the pre-ban period (M ads), and categorize them by their job titles, T. Let   be the share of call-backs with title
T among call-backs to M ads; thus   measures the prevalence of title T among jobs requesting men. Let   be
the change in the female share of call-backs in each of these job titles (within the M jobs) between the pre- and
post-ban periods. Then the overall change in the female share of call-backs to M jobs is given by  =      ,
and title T's contribution to this change is just     . Thus, a title's contribution depends both on its prevalence
among M jobs, and on the increase in women's representation it experienced.

     Table A3.1 lists the twenty job titles that made the largest contributions to the increased representation of
women in jobs that previously requested men. Together, these 20 titles accounted for 1.434 percentage points
(just under half) of the 3.038 percentage point increase in the share of women called back to M job ads in our
data. 4 To measure of how stereotypically male these job titles were, column 4 takes advantage of the fact that
we have access to call-back data from an eight-month period that precedes our estimation sample (January -
August 2018), and uses this data to estimate every job title's incumbent gender mix. 5 Under this definition,
notice that job ads that request men can occur in job titles that are stereotypically male or female, and that, say,
a stereotypically female job title could be predominantly male in some individual firms.

    According to column 4 of Table A3.1, only 13 of the twenty titles that contributed most to women's
increased representation in M jobs had an incumbent male share that was above the overall share of call-backs
that went to men (.499). The most important of these were three warehouse management titles plus "general



4
  Because of sampling differences and regression controls, this 3.038 percentage point estimate in these Appendix
calculations differs slightly from our main, regression- adjusted estimate of 2.46 + 0.49 = 3.05 percentage points (Table 2,
column 4). We use raw means to perform the decompositions in this Appendix to maximize simplicity and transparency.
5
  Our estimates of a job title's historical gender mix combine all three job types (F, N, and M together). Calculating
incumbent gender mix from pre-estimation sample data ensures that pre-post ban changes in the gender mix of call-backs
in our estimation sample are not affected by any dynamic statistical processes, such as mean reversion.

                                                             10
labor". In these job titles, the ad ban reduced gender-stereotyping because it brought more women into job
titles in which women were historically underrepresented. Somewhat more surprisingly, the ad ban also had a
positive effect on women's representation in some job titles where women were modestly or highly over-
represented: manager's assistants and procurement specialists, respectively. Within these more-female titles,
the ad ban raised women's success rate in the subset of job ads that had previously requested men. This change
works to increase gender stereotyping at the job title level (making stereotypically female titles more female),
but its effects must be weighed against the effect of removing requests for women in these female titles.

     Taken together, all the 20 job titles listed in Table A3.1 had a (contribution-weighted) incumbent male share
of .660, which is higher than the pre-ban mean male share of call-backs across all ads in our data (.499), but not
`extremely' male. Finally, going beyond the top 20 contributing titles, the contribution-weighted mean
incumbent male share of all the job titles that account for the women's increased representation in jobs that
previously requested men was very similar at 0.677. Thus, the gendered ad ban increased women's access to
types of work (job titles) that historically were more male than average, but not dramatically so.




                                                        11
Table A3.1: Job Titles Accounting for Women's Increased Representation in M jobs

                                                                 Contribution to women's
                                                                                               Incumbent male
                                                                increased call-back share in
          Job Title (T)              Translation                                                   share2
                                                                      M jobs (  )1
                                                                    (percentage points)
              (1)                     (2)                                   (3)                      (4)
 T1                       Warehouse management staff                       0.251                   0.852*
 T2                       Manager assistant                                0.201                   0.356
 T3                       Warehouse management staff                       0.129                   0.874*
 T4                       Trader                                           0.083                   0.967*
 T5                       Procurement specialist                           0.078                   0.395
 T6                       General labor                                    0.072                   0.853*
                          E-commerce warehouse
 T7                       management staff, picker,                        0.058                   0.966*
                          packer
 T8                       Marketing specialist                             0.055                   0.684*
 T9                       Civil construction worker                        0.051                   1.000*
T10                       Warehouse management staff                       0.046                   0.861*
T11                       Administrative chief                             0.045                   0.302
T12                       Client-side developer                            0.043                   0.830*
T13                       Engineer assistant                               0.043                   0.635*
T14                       Administration specialist                        0.043                   0.134
T15                       Administration assistant                         0.043                   0.078
T16                       Auditing specialist (taxation)                   0.043                   0.237
T17                       Financial manager                                0.042                   0.488
T18                       Graphic design                                   0.038                   0.559*
T19                       Event implementation                             0.037                   0.630*
T20     Java                  Java engineer                                0.036                   0.920*
Top 20 titles, combined (T1 to T20)3                                      1.434                    0.660*
All contributing job titles (TOTAL)3                                      3.038                    0.677*
Contribution of the top twenty titles [(T1 to T5)/TOTAL]                  47.2%
* Incumbent male share exceeds the sample mean (.499).




                                                           12
Notes to Table A3.1:

1. The prevalence of each title,   is given by the title's share in male-requesting ads in the pre-ban portion of our main
estimation sample. The increase in women's representation in each title,   is the change in women's share of call-backs
from male-requesting ads between the pre- and post-ban periods.

2. The incumbent male shares are calculated from our pre-estimation sample only (January ­ August 2018). Incumbent
male shares are men's share in all call-backs to each job title (regardless of the gender requested) during that period

3. Incumbent male shares for the top 20 and all contributing titles are weighted by their relative contributions (    ).




                                                             13
A3.2 Men's Increased Access to F jobs--which job titles contributed most?
    Turning now to the much larger effects of removing requests for women on the gender mix of call-backs,
Table A3.2 lists the twenty job titles making the largest contribution to the increased representation of men in
female-requesting jobs. Together, these 20 titles accounted for 3.572 percentage points (or about 37 percent) of
the 9.608 percentage point increase in the share of men called back to formerly F job ads in our data. 6 In
addition, Table A3.2 shows that all these titles except one ­warehouse management staff-- had an incumbent
female share that was above the mean female share of .501. Thus, considerably more than was the case for
women, the ban opened up a long list of highly female job titles to men.

     Taken together, the 20 job titles listed in Table A3.2 had a (contribution-weighted) incumbent female share
of .736, which is considerably higher than the mean female call-back share of .501. Finally, going beyond these
20 most important titles, the contribution-weighted mean incumbent female share of the job titles that account
for the men's increased representation in F jobs was almost identical at .734.




6
 As was the case for M jobs, the 9.608 percentage point impact used in these Appendix calculations differs slightly from our
main, regression- adjusted estimate of (-0.1039 + 0.49 =) 9.9 percentage points (from Table 2, column 4).

                                                            14
Table A3.2: Job Titles Accounting for Men's Increased Representation in F jobs

                                                                   Contribution to men's
                                                                                               Incumbent
                                                                     increased call-back
          Job Title (T)                     Translation                                      female share2
                                                                   share in F jobs (    )1
                                                                     (percentage points)
                  (1)                           (2)                           (3)                 (4)
   T1                        Manager assistant                              0.414               0.644*
   T2                        Warehouse management staff                     0.290               0.148
   T3                        Administration specialist                      0.266               0.866*
   T4                        Procurement officer                            0.242               0.588*
   T5                        Accountant                                     0.241               0.887*
   T6                        Office clerk                                   0.216               0.940*
   T7                        Financial accountant                           0.197               0.889*
   T8                        HR administrative specialist                   0.174               0.922*
   T9                        International trade sales staff                0.173               0.753*
   T10                       Chief accountant                               0.144               0.865*
   T11                       Kindergarten cashier                           0.142               0.957*
   T12                       Operation assistant                            0.141               0.409
   T13                       Business assistant                             0.139               0.822*
   T14                       HR assistant                                   0.129               0.912*
   T15                       Customer service specialist                    0.119               0.788*
   T16                       Sales assistant                                0.115               0.746*
   T17                       Customer service                               0.110               0.677*
   T18                       Procurement officer                            0.109               0.591*
   T19                       Warehouse management clerk                     0.107               0.925*
   T20                          Financial assistant                        0.104                0.916*
  Top 20 titles, combined (T1 to T20)3                                     3.572                0.736*
  All contributing job titles (TOTAL)3                                     9.608                0.734*
  Contribution of the top 20 titles [(T1 to T20)/TOTAL]                    37.2%
* Incumbent female share exceeds sample average (.501).




                                                          15
Notes to Table A3.2:

1. The prevalence of each title,   is given by the title's share in female-requesting ads in the pre-ban portion of our main
estimation sample. The increase in men's representation in each title,   is the change in men's share of call-backs from
female-requesting ads between the pre- and post-ban periods.

2. The incumbent female shares are calculated from our pre-estimation sample only (January ­ August 2018). Incumbent
female shares are women's share in all call-backs to each job title (regardless of the gender requested) during that period.

3. Incumbent female shares for the top 20 and all contributing titles are weighted by their relative contributions (    ).




                                                              16
A3.3 Which Job Titles were the Most Male- and Female Dominated before the Ban?
         As a point of reference for the job titles identified in Sections A3.1 and A3.2 (where the ad ban had its
largest effects), this Section again draws on historical call-back data to identify the job titles that were the most
male- and female-dominated on XMRC prior to our estimation period. Turning first to male-dominated job
titles, Appendix Table A3.3a lists the 20 largest job titles that never called back a woman during our pre-
estimation period. Thus for example, none of the 330 call-backs issued to the title "driver for the manager"
went to women. Related, Table A3.3b lists the 20 most-male job titles that called back at least one woman. To
illustrate, 99.66 percent of the 1480 call-backs to the title `driver' went to men. Notably, only one of the 40 job
titles that appear in Table A3.3 (civil construction worker) appears in Table A3.1, which shows the 20 titles
accounting for most of the increase in women's representation in jobs that requested men. We conclude that
the gendered ad ban did not integrate the most-male jobs on XMRC. Tables A3.4a and A3.4b perform the same
exercise for extremely female jobs, with patterns that are only slightly less extreme. None of the 40 job titles
listed here appear in Table A3.2--the job titles accounting for most of men's increased representation in F jobs
due to the ban. Thus, the gendered ad ban did not integrate the most-female jobs on XMRC either.

         Closer inspection of Table A3.3's list of intensely-male job titles reveals that two broader types of work
seem to dominate here. One is a long list of trades (plumber, welder, electrician) and production jobs (master
mold fitter, fitter, CNC operator) that would seem to require occupation- or industry-specific training. The other
­even more dominant--is driving. For example, none of the 330 + 286 + 143 + 135 = 914 call-backs to the
following job titles went to women: driver for the manager, driver for chairperson, driver for president, and
sales driver. In addition, by far the largest job title among extremely male titles is simply "driver". Thus, a
combination of occupation or industry-specific training requirements and a lack of female interest in driving jobs
could explain why women didn't access these extremely male jobs. 7

         Inspection of Table A3.4's list of intensely-female jobs titles also reveals one dominant type of work: by
far the largest single title is "administration and receptionist" and the words administration, reception, and clerk
appear in a substantial number of titles. While none of Table A3.4's 40 extremely female jobs appear in Table
A3.2 (the 20 titles accounting for most of men's increased representation in F jobs) the following Section shows
that men did make substantial inroads into other job titles that were more than 80 percent female. This ­
together with the notion that many office tasks are not obviously specific to an occupation or industry--may
help explain why the ban raised men's access to women's jobs considerably more than the converse.




7
 Cook et al. (2021) suggest that a desire to be located closer to home and higher concerns for (or risks to) personal safety
make driving for Uber less attractive to women than for men. Other factors could be the expectation of hostile reception
by incumbent male workers, or very strong gender norms against having women in driving jobs.

                                                             17
Table A3.3: Job Titles with the Highest Historical Male Call-Back Shares


                                         a) 100% of call-backs went to men
                                                                                               Number of       Share of Call-
         Job Title (T)                                   Translation                           Call-Backs      Backs Issued
                                                                                                Issued           to Men
   1                              Driver for the manager                                            330               1
   2                              Driver for chair person                                           286               1
   3                              Injection molding technician                                      228               1
   4                              Assembly fitter                                                   181               1
   5                              Production section chief                                          156               1
   6                              Driver for president                                              143               1
   7                              Sales driver                                                      135               1
   8     CNC                      Programmer for computer numerical control machine                 125               1
   9                              Civil construction worker                                         119               1
   10                             Mechanic electrician                                              113               1
   11                             Workshop supervisor                                               97                1
   12                             Network management staff                                          96                1
   13                             Machine repair                                                    92                1
   14                             Chief of warehouse                                                78                1
   15    CNC                      Operator of computer numerical control machine                    75                1
   16    CNC                      CNC operator                                                      75                1
   17                             Plumber                                                           75                1
   18                             construction project supervisor                                   75                1
   19                             Decoration builder                                                72                1
   20                             Injection supervisor                                              72                1

Note: Statistics refer to all the call-backs that occurred during our pre-estimation sample (January ­ August 2018). Panel (a)
lists the twenty largest job titles (by call-backs) that sent all their call-backs to men.




                                                              18
Table A3.3 (continued)

                                     b) At least one woman received a call-back
                                                                                                               Share of
                                                                                             Number of
                                                                                                              Call-Backs
            Job Title (T)                                 Translation                        Call-Backs
                                                                                                              Issued to
                                                                                              Issued
                                                                                                                 Men
      1                              Driver for administration tasks                             469             .9979
      2                              Driver                                                     1480             .9966
      3                              Injection molding team leader                               170             .9941
      4                              Network management staff                                    169             .9941
      5                              Truck driver                                                334             .994
      6                              production CEO                                              164             .9939
      7                              Welder                                                      146             .9932
      8                              Electrician                                                 270             .9926
      9                              Equipment Engineer                                          267             .9925
     10                              Mold fitter                                                 126             .9921
     11                              Production manager                                          222             .991
     12                              Delivery driver                                             393             .9898
     13                              Security                                                    362             .989
     14                              Fitter                                                       87             .9885
     15     CNC                      CNC operator                                                 77             .987
     16                              Master mold fitter                                           74             .9865
     17                              production sector manager                                   142             .9859
     18                              Mold design                                                  67             .9851
     19                              Equipment technician                                         66             .9848
     20                              Mechanical R&D engineer                                      63             .9841

Note: Statistics refer to all the call-backs that occurred during our pre-estimation sample (January ­ August 2018). Panel (b)
lists the twenty job titles with the highest male shares that were strictly less than 100 percent.




                                                              19
Table A3.4: Job Titles with the Highest Historical Female Call-Back Shares

                                       a) 100% of call-backs went to women
                                                                                              Number of        Share of Call-
         Job Title (T)                                       Translation                      Call-Backs       Backs Issued
                                                                                               Issued           to Females
  1                                        Nurse                                                   61                1
  2                                        HR & receptionist                                       57                1
  3                                        Front desk, administrative assistant                    40                1
  4                                        Childcare teacher                                       40                1
  5                                        Typing clerk                                            39                1
  6                                        Admin, front desk, HR assistant                         37                1
  7                                        HR, admin and cashier                                   35                1
  8                                        Department Clerk                                        31                1
  9                                        Sales admin assistant                                   31                1
                                           Financial assistant, accounting assistant,
  10                                                                                               28                1
                                           cashier
  11                                       Data management clerk                                   26                1
  12                                       Financial accountant assistant                          24                1
  13                                       Childcare teacher                                       24                1
  14                                       HR payroll admin specialist                             24                1
  15                                       Cashier clerk                                           24                1
  16                                       Admin specialist and front desk                         23                1
                                           Online sales & customer service for make-up
  17                                                                                               23                1
                                           products
                                           International conference business customer
  18                                                                                               23                1
                                           service
  19                                       Procurement assistant                                   23                1
  20                                       Onsite consultant                                       22                1



Note: Statistics refer to all the call-backs that occurred during our pre-estimation sample (January ­ August 2018). Panel (a)
lists the twenty largest job titles (by call-backs) that sent all their call-backs to women.




                                                               20
Table A3.4 (continued)


                                       b) At least one call-back went to men
                                                                                              Number of        Share of Call-
         Job Title (T)                     Translation                                        Call-Backs       Backs Issued
                                                                                               Issued           to Females
  1                                        Receptionist and clerk                                 397              .9950
  2                                        Cashier & HR                                            91              .9890
  3                                        Administration, receptionist, and clerk                 85              .9882
  4                                        Financial admin                                         68              .9853
  5                                        HR, administration clerk                               123              .9837
  6                                        Administration and receptionist                       1031              .9825
                                           Mom-Baby online sales customer service
  7                                                                                                48              .9792
                                             specialist
  8                                        Production statistic                                    46              .9783
  9                                        Still model                                             44              .9773
  10                                       English teacher for primary school                      86              .9767
  11                                       Production statistic clerk                              42              .9762
  12                                       Business assistant, merchandiser                        82              .9756
  13                                       Finance & HR                                            39              .9744
  14                                       Assistant clerk                                         78              .9744
  15                                       Financial accountant, business                          38              .9737
  16                                       Accountant                                              75              .9733
  17                                       Internal clerk                                          73              .9726
  18                                       Office clerk, documentary handler, secretary            36              .9722
  19                                       International trade document clerk                      71              .9718
  20                                       Customer representative                                 35              .9714



Note: Statistics refer to all the call-backs that occurred during our pre-estimation sample (January ­ August 2018). Panel (b)
lists the twenty job titles with the highest female shares that were strictly less than 100 percent.




                                                              21
A3.4 Calculating Mean Posted Wages of the Job Titles Women and Men Accessed because of the Ban
        To characterize the wage levels of the job titles workers gained access to, we first calculate the
mean log (advertised) wage of every job title using data from the pre-estimation sample. This is done
separately for F and M jobs (  and   ). Letting, for example, MT be the share of male-requesting
ads in the estimation sample with title T we can then express the (historical) mean wages of all M jobs
in the estimation sample as      . To calculate the wages of the M jobs that women entered
after the ban, we normalize each title's contribution to women's increased representation in M jobs
(    from Appendix 3.1) by the total contribution of all M titles (     ) to obtain a new set
                      
of weights,   =           
                             . The mean wage of all the job titles women entered because of the ban is
                     
then given by      . A parallel procedure yields the mean log wage of the F titles that men
accessed as a result of the ban.




                                                    22
A3.5 Concentration of Job Titles-- Can Skill Specificity Help Explain Men's Greater Access to
       Historically Female Job Titles?
        In Section A3.3 we suggested that skills or certifications that are specific to an industry or
occupation might help explain why women made fewer inroads into men's jobs after the gendered ad
ban. In this Section we explore this hypothesis in one additional way, by using job titles themselves as
indicators of distinct skills or skill bundles that are needed to perform a job well. If titles represent
required skill bundles that differentiate jobs from one another, then the number of distinct titles
among the most gendered jobs on XMRC would provide a rough indicator of the extent to which
specific skills or certifications are needed to enter those jobs.

         To assess this hypothesis (and inspired by Figures 4.a and 4.b), we defined highly male jobs as
ads that requested men during our sample period, in titles with a historical male call-back share of at
least 80 percent. We did the same for highly female jobs, then listed the 20 most common highly-male
and highly-female job titles among the vacancies in our estimation sample. The results are presented
in Tables A3.5 and A3.6. Overall, we find considerable support for the skill-specificity hypothesis: 23,
34 and 50 percent of the vacancies requesting women were in the 5, 10 and 20 most common job
titles, compared to 14, 23 and 33 percent of the vacancies requesting men.




                                                    23
Table A3.5 Ads Requesting Men with High Incumbent Male Shares: Titles with the Most Vacancies

                                                                   Number of      Share of    Cumulative Share
         Job Title (T)                     Translation
                                                                   Vacancies     Vacancies      of Vacancies
   1                         Security                                 544           3.72            3.72
   2                         General labor                            468           3.20            6.92
   3                         Warehouse management staff               447           3.06            9.98
   4                         Construction worker                      343           2.35           12.33
   5                         Welder                                   302           2.07           14.39
   6                         Electrician                              288           1.97           16.36
   7                         Warehouse management staff               283           1.94           18.30
   8                         Driver                                   273           1.87           20.16
   9                         Project manager                          234           1.60           21.76
  10                         Assembly fitter                          209           1.43           23.19
  11                         Security                                 200           1.37           24.56
  12                         Electronic engineer                      192           1.31           25.88
  13                         Technician                               168           1.15           27.02
  14                         Sales engineer                           162           1.11           28.13
  15                         Mechanic engineer                        143           0.98           29.11
  16                         Injection molding technician             126           0.86           29.97
  17                         Injection molding team leader            125           0.85           30.83
  18                         Operator                                 124           0.85           31.68
  19                         Civil construction worker                107           0.73           32.41
  20                         Mold fitter                              106           0.73           33.13


Notes:

1. Sample is job ads that requested men in the estimation sample period, with job titles that with an incumbent
male share of at least 80 percent (calculated from the pre-estimation sample). There are altogether 14,620
vacancies here.
2. Calculations reflect the fact that job ads may have multiple vacancies.




                                                         24
Table A3.6 Ads Requesting Women with High Incumbent Female Shares: Titles with the Most Vacancies

                                                                   Number of     Share of    Cumulative Share
         Job Title (T)                      Translation
                                                                   Vacancies    Vacancies      of Vacancies
   1                         Office clerk                             542          6.12           6.12
   2                         Accountant                               451          5.09           11.21
   3                         Cashier                                  416          4.70           15.91
   4                         Administration and receptionist          346          3.91           19.81
   5                         HR assistant                             279          3.15           22.96
   6                         HR administrative specialist             248          2.80           25.76
   7                         Finance                                  203          2.29           28.05
   8                         Administration assistant                 183          2.07           30.12
   9                         Administration specialist                173          1.95           32.07
  10                         Chief accountant                         157          1.77           33.85
  11                         Administrative clerk                     155          1.75           35.59
  12                         HR administrative                        150          1.69           37.29
  13                         Receptionist and clerk                   150          1.69           38.98
  14                         Financial assistant                      144          1.63           40.61
  15                         Nurse                                    141          1.59           42.20
  16                         International trader                     137          1.55           43.75
  17                         Business assistant                       132          1.49           45.24
  18                         Cashier                                  129          1.46           46.69
  19                         Front desk                               129          1.46           48.15
  20                         Baby sitter                              121          1.37           49.51

Notes:

1. Sample is job ads that requested women in the estimation sample period, with job titles that with an
incumbent female share of at least 80 percent (calculated from the pre-estimation sample). There are altogether
8,858 vacancies here.
2. Calculations reflect the fact that job ads may have multiple vacancies.




                                                          25
Reference for Appendix 3:

Cook, Cody, Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan V Hall, John A List, and Paul Oyer. 2021 "The Gender Earnings
       Gap in the Gig Economy: Evidence from over a Million Rideshare Drivers", The Review of Economic
       Studies, (forthcoming).




                                                  26
                             Appendix 4: Local Linear Regression Plots

        The figures in this Appendix graph the main results of the local linear regression analyses of aggregate
matching frictions in Tables 4 and 5. Specifically, they display the regressions estimated in columns 2 and 4 of
Table 4 and columns 4 and 6 of Table 5. These regressions are our most tightly controlled estimates of the effect
of the ban on the size and quality of firms' applicant pools, and on workers' call-back chances, pooling all three
job types (F, N, and M) together. The results are discussed in the text of the paper.

Figure A4.1: Daily Flow of Applications per Active Vacancy, Local Linear Regressions




   Notes:
        1. The vertical line separates the pre and post gendered-ad ban periods, that is just before March
           1, 2019.
        2. Time series are adjusted for day-of-week and ad fixed effects, plus a quartic in the age of the job ad.
        3. Figure is based on the local linear regression coefficients in column 2 of Table 4, where the post-ban
           effect is 0.0017 (0.0013).




                                                        27
Figure A4.2: Daily Average Match Quality Scores, Local Linear Regressions




   Notes:
      1. Sample includes all applications to ads that have a matching score (98% of applications).
      2. The vertical line separates the pre and post gendered-ad ban periods, that is just before March
          1, 2019.
      3. Time series are adjusted for day-of-week and ad fixed effects, plus a quartic in the age of the job
          ad.
      4. Local Linear Regression coefficients correspond to column 4 of Table 4, where the post-ban
          coefficient is 0.0168*** (0.0052).




                                                      28
Figure A4.3: Call-Back Chances per Application by Day of Submission, Local Linear Regressions




   Notes:
      1. The vertical line separates the pre and post gendered-ad ban periods, that is just before March
          1, 2019.
      2. Time series are adjusted for day-of-week and worker fixed effects, plus a quartic in age of the job
          ad.
      3. Figure is based on the local linear regression coefficients in columns 4 and 6 of Table 5, which
          are:
               For female workers: Post-ban effect = -0.0034 (0.0040)
               For male workers: Post-ban effect = -0.0035(0.0030).




                                                      29
               Appendix 5: Using Other Polynomials to Absorb the Time Trend
         Our main analysis of the ban's effects on the gender mix of applications and call-backs (Tables 1 and 2)
used a single quartic in weeks to model the time trends in these outcomes during the one-year period
surrounding the ban. In this Appendix we explore the sensitivity of those results to other functional forms.
Table A5.1 focuses on the female share of applications, and replicates column 4 of Table 1 (reproduced in
column 1 here) four different ways. Columns 2 and 3 replace the quartic by a fifth- and sixth order polynomials
respectively. Column 4 estimates separate quadratics on either side of the ban, column 5 estimates separate
quartics on either side. Table A5.2 repeats this entire analysis for the female share of call-backs, rather than
applications. In all cases, the ban's estimated effects on the gender mix of applications and call-backs to
previously gendered jobs (F and M) are essentially unchanged. The ban's small, positive effect on the female
share of applications to N jobs (in Table 1) becomes a small negative effect in some specifications. The ban's
(null) effect on the gender mix of call-backs to N jobs is, however, confirmed in all cases.



Table A5.1: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Applications

                                         (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                      5th-order      6th-order      Separate      Separate
                                      Quartic in
                                                    polynomial     polynomial      quadratics     quartics
                                      calendar
                                                    in calendar    in calendar    before and    before and
                                       weeks
                                                       weeks          weeks         after ban     after ban
     Post ban week * Female job      -0.1392***     -0.1390***     -0.1390***     -0.1390***    -0.1389***
                                       (0.0023)       (0.0023)       (0.0023)       (0.0023)      (0.0023)
     Post ban week * Male job        0.0348***       0.0349***      0.0349***      0.0349***     0.0350***
                                       (0.0018)       (0.0018)       (0.0018)       (0.0018)      (0.0018)
     Post ban week                   0.0053***       -0.0026**      -0.0029**        0.0000      -0.0050**
                                       (0.0011)       (0.0012)       (0.0012)       (0.0012)      (0.0020)
     Quartic in job weeks                  Y              Y              Y               Y            Y
     Job ad fixed effects                  Y              Y              Y               Y            Y
     Effective # of obs               1,426,896      1,426,896      1,426,896      1,426,896     1,426,896
     R2                                 0.647           0.647          0.647          0.647         0.647
   Note: Column 1 reproduces column 4 of Table 1. The remaining columns change only the modeling of
   the calendar time trend, as described.




                                                        30
Table A5.2: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Call-Backs

                                        (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)
                                                    5 -order
                                                     th
                                                                   6 -order
                                                                   th
                                                                                 Separate      Separate
                                     Quartic in
                                                  polynomial     polynomial     quadratics     quartics
                                     calendar
                                                  in calendar    in calendar   before and    before and
                                      weeks
                                                     weeks           weeks       after ban     after ban
     Post ban week * Female job     -0.1039***    -0.1039***     -0.1037***    -0.1038***    -0.1037***
                                      (0.0062)      (0.0062)       (0.0061)      (0.0061)      (0.0061)
     Post ban week * Male job       0.0246***      0.0246***      0.0247***     0.0247***     0.0248***
                                      (0.0048)      (0.0048)       (0.0048)      (0.0048)      (0.0048)
     Post ban week                     0.0049        0.0032         -0.0014       0.0002        -0.0035
                                      (0.0040)      (0.0043)       (0.0043)      (0.0042)      (0.0071)
     Quartic in job weeks                 Y             Y               Y             Y            Y
     Job ad fixed effects                 Y             Y               Y             Y            Y
     Effective # of obs               214,489       214,489        214,489       214,489       214,489
     R2                                0.691         0.691           0.691         0.691         0.691
   Note: Column 1 reproduces column 4 of Table 2. The remaining columns change only the modeling of
   the calendar time trend, as described.




                                                      31
       Appendix 6: Comparing Ads with and without `Embedded' Gender Requests
        In this Appendix, we use the fact that some of the ads in our data have gender requests that are
`embedded' in the text of their job descriptions. Specifically, among the 116,725 job ads, 3,529 or 3.023 percent
had an embedded gender request. These embedded requests were evenly split between requests for men and
women (1.505 percent and 1.518 percent respectively.) Unlike the gender preference fields whose removal we
study in this paper, these embedded requests were not removed by XMRC's employees overnight on March 1,
2019.8 Thus, ads that contained embedded requests essentially received a smaller dose of treatment, since
some but not all of their explicit gender preference statements were removed by the ban. If so, then our main
estimates in the paper may understate the effects of longer-term effects of the ban, since XMRC was directed to
remove all forms of gender requests from ads that were newly posted after March 1, 2019.

        To test this idea, Tables A6.1 and A6.2 add two interaction terms to Tables 1 and 2: Post ban x Female
job x Embedded, and Post ban x Male job x Embedded, where "Embedded" means the ad's text also contained
an explicit gender request. In this specification, the Post ban x Female and Post ban x Male coefficients show
the effect of the ban in ads that had no embedded gender requests. These are fully treated ads (because all the
gender requesting information was removed), which provide a better estimate of the longer-run effects of the
ban. The new interaction terms tell us how much this effect is attenuated when only some of the gender-
requesting information is removed. To simplify the discussion of the results, we focus on the ban's effects on M
and F jobs relative to N jobs, using the most saturated specification of both Tables (column 5).

        According to Table A6.1, the ban raised the female share of applications to M jobs that did not contain
any embedded gender requests by 3.84 percentage points. Consistent with the idea that these jobs were more
intensely treated, this effect is about ten percent larger than the ban's effects in all M job ads combined (3.50
percentage points, from Table 1). More dramatically, the ban's effect on the female share of applications to M
jobs that contained an embedded gender request (that was not removed by the ban) was only 3.84 ­ 2.29 = 1.55
percentage points. As Table A6.1 indicates, this 2.29 percentage point (or 60 percent) reduction in the ban's
causal effect is highly statistically significant.

        Table A6.1 also indicates that the ban reduced the female share of applications to F jobs that did not
contain any embedded gender requests by 15.06 percentage points. Consistent with the idea that these jobs
were more intensely treated, this effect is about nine percent larger than the ban's effects in F job ads combined
(13.88 percentage points, also from Table 1). More dramatically, the ban's effect on the female share of
applications to F jobs that contained an embedded gender request (that was not removed by the ban) was a
reduction of only 15.06 ­ 8.09 = 6.97 percentage points. As Table A6.1 indicates, this 8.09 percentage point (or
54 percent) reduction in the magnitude of the ban's effect is highly statistically significant.

        Table A6.2 replicates Table A6.2 for call-backs instead of applications, showing very similar patterns.
Compared to our main estimates (that combine ads with and without embedded requests) the ban's effects on
ads without embedded requests are 11 to 13 percent greater in magnitude. In F jobs, the ban's effects on the

8
 XMRC was, however, directed to inspect the text of new ads posted after March 1, and to request the removal of any
discriminatory content. By construction, these new ads do not appear in our estimation sample.

                                                          32
female share of call-backs is about 61 percent smaller when an embedded request is present in the ad. In M
jobs, the magnitude of the ban's effect is reduced by 74 percent when an embedded request is present,
compared to when one is not present.

        Taken together, the results in this Appendix strongly confirm the hypothesis that job seekers respond to
the content of job ads when deciding where to send their applications: The gender mix of the workers who
apply to an ad changes much more dramatically when all the gender-relevant information is reduced from the
ad, compared to when only some of that information is removed. In addition, the results suggest that a more
complete ban on gendered content in job ads would have an integrating effect that is between 9 and 13 percent
greater than the partial ban we study here.




                                                       33
Table A6.1: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Applications, Accounting for Embedded
Gender Requests


                                         (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)
Post ban * Female job *Embedded      0.0973***      0.0962***       0.0968***        0.0808***      0.0809***
                                      (0.0082)       (0.0081)        (0.0081)         (0.0051)       (0.0051)
Post ban * Male job *Embedded       -0.0271***     -0.0298***      -0.0289***       -0.0232***     -0.0229***
                                      (0.0076)       (0.0077)        (0.0077)         (0.0044)       (0.0044)
Post ban week * Female job          -0.1750***     -0.1741***      -0.1736***       -0.1510***     -0.1506***
                                      (0.0044)       (0.0044)        (0.0044)         (0.0025)       (0.0025)
Post ban week * Male job             0.0483***      0.0503***       0.0504***        0.0382***      0.0384***
                                      (0.0034)       (0.0035)        (0.0035)         (0.0019)       (0.0019)
Post ban week                        0.0048***      0.0167***        -0.0010         0.0053***
                                      (0.0018)       (0.0025)        (0.0021)         (0.0011)
Female job                           0.4864***      0.4858***       0.4854***
                                      (0.0037)       (0.0037)        (0.0037)
Male job                            -0.3509***     -0.3500***      -0.3499***
                                      (0.0036)       (0.0036)        (0.0036)
Quartic in job weeks                                     Y               Y               Y              Y
Quartic in calendar weeks                                                Y               Y
Job ad fixed effects                                                                     Y              Y
Calendar week fixed effects                                                                             Y
Effective # of obs                   1,426,896      1,426,896       1,426,896        1,426,896      1,421,850
R2                                     0.194          0.195           0.195            0.647          0.646


   Notes:
      1. All regressions also include controls for Embedded, Embedded * Male Job, and Embedded *
          Female Job.
      2. All regressions are weighted by the number of applications in each job*week cell, and clustered
          by firm ID. The numbers of observations used for all specifications are 1,426,896. As a result of
          fixed effects specifications, as singleton observations were dropped, the effective numbers of
          observations are smaller in column (5).
      3. The dependent variable is the share of applications from female applicants; its weighted mean is
          80.2%, 41.2%, 8.6% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs, respectively. The estimated
          constant term of 0.4090 in column 1 gives the raw, pre-ban female share of applications in N
          jobs. Thus, the raw female share of applications in male jobs pre-ban is 0.4090 - 0.3509 = 5.81%.
          The raw male share of applications in female jobs pre-ban is 1 - (0.4090 + 0.4864) = 10.46%.




                                                     34
Table A6.2: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Call-Backs, Accounting for Embedded Gender
Requests


                                        (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)        (5)
   Post ban * Female job *Embedded 0.0803***           0.0786***       0.0784***     0.0699*** 0.0703***
                                     (0.0169)           (0.0171)        (0.0171)      (0.0126)   (0.0121)
   Post ban * Male job *Embedded    -0.0249**          -0.0265**       -0.0264**      -0.0203*  -0.0206*
                                     (0.0115)           (0.0115)        (0.0117)      (0.0113)   (0.0109)
   Post ban week * Female job      -0.1379***         -0.1370***      -0.1361***    -0.1152*** -0.1151***
                                     (0.0081)           (0.0080)        (0.0080)      (0.0066)   (0.0063)
   Post ban week * Male job         0.0308***          0.0318***       0.0319***     0.0276*** 0.0278***
                                     (0.0066)           (0.0066)        (0.0066)      (0.0051)   (0.0049)
   Post ban week                      0.0037           0.0153***         0.0033        0.0049
                                     (0.0043)           (0.0052)        (0.0054)      (0.0040)
   Female job                       0.4840***          0.4835***       0.4827***
                                     (0.0057)           (0.0057)        (0.0058)
   Male job                        -0.3996***         -0.3987***      -0.3987***
                                     (0.0071)           (0.0071)        (0.0071)
   Quartic in job weeks                                     Y               Y            Y            Y
   Quartic in calendar weeks                                                Y            Y
   Job ad fixed effects                                                                  Y            Y
   Calendar week fixed effects                                                                        Y
   Effective obs                     214,489            214,489        214,489       214,489       196,850
   R 2
                                      0.219              0.220          0.220         0.691         0.667
   Notes:
      1. All regressions also include controls for Embedded, Embedded * Male Job, and Embedded *
          Female Job.
      2. Only job ads with a positive number of call-backs are used here.
      3. All regressions are weighted by the number of call-backs in each job*week cell, and clustered by
          firm ID. The numbers of observations used for all specifications are 202,607. As a result of fixed
          effects specifications, singleton observations were dropped and the effective numbers of
          observations are smaller in column (5).
      4. The dependent variable is the share of call-backs from female applicants at each job*week cell;
          its weighted mean is 85.7%, 45.0% and 6.7% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs,
          respectively. The estimated constant term of 0.4474 in column 1 gives the raw, pre-ban female
          share of applications in N jobs. Thus, the raw female share of call-backs in male jobs pre-ban is
          0.4474 -0.3996 = 4.78%. The raw male share of call-backs in female jobs pre-ban is 1 - (0.4474 +
          0.4840) = 6.86%.




                                                      35
                      Appendix 7: Robustness to using the Call-Back Sample
        As noted, the outcomes in this paper that refer to call-backs can only be estimated on the sub-samples
of ads and applications for which call-backs are observed (the call-back sample). Appendix 1 has already shown
that the observed characteristics of the call-back sample are very similar to the full sample. In this Appendix we
provide additional evidence on the representativeness of the call-back sample by replicating the main parts of
our analysis that do not require call-back data on the call-back sample. These analyses study the ban's effects
on the female share of applications (Table 1); and on application arrivals and quality (Tables 4 and 6)

         Our main findings are as follows. Table A7.1 replicates Table 1 (female share of applications) on the call-
back sample only. The results are almost identical. Table A7.2 replicates Table 4 (aggregate application arrival
rates and quality) on the call-back sample only. The main results are very similar: zero aggregate effect on
arrival rates, and an increase in quality. Finally, Table A7.3 replicates Table 6 (application arrivals and quality in F
and M jobs) on the call-back sample only. Again, the main results are similar. For arrival rates we again see
more men applying to F jobs, more women applying to M jobs, women reducing their applications to F jobs; and
men not reducing their applications to M jobs. One difference is that the total increase in applications to M jobs
loses statistical significance. For quality, all but one of the post-ban coefficients is positive but our power is low:
most coefficients are statistically insignificant.




                                                          36
Table A7.1: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Applications, Call-Back Sample only


                                       (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)
  Post ban week * Female job      -0.1625***     -0.1619***      -0.1612***      -0.1387***     -0.1383***
                                    (0.0053)       (0.0052)        (0.0052)        (0.0028)       (0.0028)
  Post ban week * Male job        0.0459***       0.0472***       0.0473***       0.0342***      0.0345***
                                    (0.0041)       (0.0042)        (0.0041)        (0.0022)       (0.0022)
  Post ban week                      0.0026       0.0169***        -0.0025        0.0047***
                                    (0.0023)       (0.0032)        (0.0026)        (0.0014)
  Female job                      0.4751***       0.4743***       0.4738***
                                    (0.0044)       (0.0043)        (0.0044)
  Male job                        -0.3725***     -0.3713***      -0.3714***
                                    (0.0043)       (0.0043)        (0.0043)
  Quartic in job weeks                                 Y               Y              Y                 Y
  Quartic in calendar weeks                                            Y              Y
  Job ad fixed effects                                                                Y              Y
  Calendar week fixed effects                                                                        Y
  Effective # of obs                851,759        851,759         851,759         851,759        850,232
  R2                                 0.215          0.216           0.216           0.656          0.656


   Notes:

       1. This Table replicates Table 1 on the sub-sample of job ads for which call-backs are observed.
       2. All regressions are weighted by the number of applications in each job*week cell, and clustered
          by firm ID. The numbers of observations used for all specifications are 851,759. As a result of
          fixed effects specifications, as singleton observations were dropped, the effective numbers of
          observations are smaller in column (5).
       3. The dependent variable is the share of applications from female applicants; its weighted mean is
          80.4%, 42.9%, 8.5% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs, respectively. The estimated
          constant term of 0.4276 in column 1 gives the raw, pre-ban female share of applications in N
          jobs. Thus, the raw female share of applications in male jobs pre-ban is 0.4276 - 0.3725 = 5.51%.
          The raw male share of applications in female jobs pre-ban is 1 - (0.4276 + 0.4751) = 9.73%.




                                                      37
Table A7.2: Aggregate Effects of the Ad Ban on Employer Well-being: Call-back Sample Only


                                                     (1)            (2)        (3)          (4)
                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                                   Arrivals       Arrivals   Quality      Quality
                 Post ban                         -0.0026        -0.0020   0.0189**     0.0215***
                                                  (0.0018)       (0.0018)   (0.0076)     (0.0067)
                 Day-of-week fixed effects            Y              Y          Y            Y
                 Quartic in job days                  Y              Y          Y            Y
                 Job ad fixed effects                                Y                       Y
                 # of obs                        1,868,265      1,868,265 257,151        257,151
                 R2                                0.020           0.352     0.007        0.599


Notes:

         5. This table replicates Table 4 on the sub-sample of job ads for which call-backs are observed.
         6. Observations are ad-day cells in columns 1 and 2, and applications in columns 3 and 4. Sample is
            restricted to days within 15 days of the ad ban.
         7. All specifications include a linear trend, interacted with Post Ban. Days from the ban (t) is
            defined as the date of the application minus the date of the gendered ad ban. Job days are the
            number of days elapsed since the job received its first application. All regressions are clustered
            by firm ID.
         8. Application arrivals are the number of applications received per vacancy in each job*calendar
            day cell. The average daily number of applications received is .154.
         9. Match quality is normalized to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one among all
            applications in our data. The average normalized match quality for the applications in the
            current estimation sample is -.007.




                                                           38
Table A7.3: Effects of the Ad Ban on Employers who Posted Gendered Job Ads: Call-Back Sample Only

a. Effects on the Daily Application Arrival Rate:
                                                      (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)
                                                                Applications from:
                                                      All        All       Women       Men
                To Ads that Requested Women:
               Post ban                      0.0139*** 0.0143*** -0.0203*** 0.0346***
                                              (0.0049)  (0.0049)   (0.0043)  (0.0021)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                        Y          Y         Y
               # of obs                       252,484   252,484    252,484   252,484
               R2                              0.023     0.319      0.305     0.215
                To Ads that Requested Men:
               Post ban                              0.0065     0.0082    0.0106***   -0.0023
                                                    (0.0055)   (0.0054)    (0.0014)   (0.0051)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                               Y           Y          Y
               # of obs                             235,249    235,249     235,249    235,249
               R2                                    0.013      0.392       0.215      0.395


b. Effects on the Mean Match Quality of Applications:
                                                      (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)
                                                                Applications from:
                                                      All        All       Women       Men
                To Ads that Requested Women:
               Post ban                              0.0040     0.0265    0.0369*     0.1225*
                                                    (0.0195)   (0.0180)   (0.0190)    (0.0674)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                               Y          Y           Y
               # of obs                             36,211      36,211     31,098      7,670
               R2                                   0.008       0.542      0.555       0.696
                To Ads that Requested Men:
               Post ban                              0.0167     0.0217    -0.0056      0.0263
                                                    (0.0201)   (0.0183)   (0.0899)    (0.0192)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                               Y          Y           Y
               # of obs                             33,647      33,647     3,375       31,425
               R2                                   0.004       0.565      0.735       0.569




                                                         39
Notes:

         5. This table replicates Table 6 on the sub-sample of job ads for which call-backs are observed.
         6. Sample is restricted to days within 15 days of the ad ban.
         7. All specifications include a linear trend, interacted with Post Ban. Days from the ban (t) is
            defined as the date of the application minus the date of the gendered ad ban. All regressions
            include day-of-week fixed effects and a quartic in job days (the number of days elapsed since the
            job received its first application). All regressions are clustered by firm ID.
         8. In panel (a), observations are ad-day cells, and the dependent variable is the number of
            applications received per vacancy at each job*calendar day cell. The average daily number of
            applications received is 0.180 and 0.168 in ads requesting women and men respectively.
         9. In panel (b), observations are applications, and the dependent variable is the application's match
            quality, normalized to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one among all applications in
            our data. The average normalized match quality for the applications in the current estimation
            sample is -0.038, and 0.095 in ads requesting women and men respectively.




                                                        40
               Appendix 8: Using Application Reads to Measure Jobseekers' Success
         As noted, our primary measure of an application's success in this paper --whether it received a call-
back--is only observed for 62 percent of applications. In this Appendix we provide additional evidence of our
results' robustness by measuring the success of an application by whether it was read by the employer's HR
agent. While not as selective as receiving a call-back, this indicator of success is observed for essentially al of the
applications (99.86 percent) in our data. 9 Accordingly, this Appendix replicates our estimates of the ban's
effects on women's share of call-backs (Table 2) using our indicator for whether the application was read as our
measure of applicant success. Aside from a difference in scale (the main coefficients are about 25 to 30 percent
larger in magnitude) the results are highly similar.




9
    We define reads are being observed for an ad if at least one application was read.

                                                               41
Table A8.1: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Reads

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)        (5)
      Post ban week * Female job     -0.1538***     -0.1534***     -0.1531***     -0.1327*** -0.1323***
                                       (0.0041)       (0.0041)       (0.0041)       (0.0025)   (0.0025)
      Post ban week * Male job        0.0406***      0.0424***      0.0425***      0.0317*** 0.0320***
                                       (0.0034)       (0.0034)       (0.0034)       (0.0019)   (0.0019)
      Post ban week                   0.0074***      0.0182***        0.0013       0.0077***
                                       (0.0020)       (0.0025)       (0.0024)       (0.0013)
      Female job                      0.4898***      0.4894***      0.4892***
                                       (0.0036)       (0.0036)       (0.0036)
      Male job                       -0.3596***     -0.3590***     -0.3590***
                                       (0.0036)       (0.0036)       (0.0036)
      Quartic in job weeks                                Y              Y             Y            Y
      Quartic in calendar weeks                                          Y             Y
      Job ad fixed effects                                                             Y            Y
      Calendar week fixed effects                                                                   Y
      Effective # of obs              1,136,908      1,136,908      1,136,908     1,136,908     1,129,833
      R2                                0.201          0.202          0.202         0.652         0.651
   Notes:
      1. This Table replicates Table 2, replacing call-backs by whether an application was read as an
          indicator of success. Reads are observed for a larger sample of ads (1,136,908) compared to
          call-backs (851,759).
      2. All regressions are weighted by the number of call-backs in each job*week cell, and clustered by
          firm ID. The numbers of observations used for all specifications are 1,136,908. As a result of fixed
          effects specifications, singleton observations were dropped and the effective numbers of
          observations are smaller in column (5).
      3. The dependent variable is the share of reads from female applicants in each job*week cell; its
          weighted mean is 81.2%, 41.9% and 8.5% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs, respectively.
          The estimated constant term of 0.4147 in column 1 gives the raw, pre-ban female share of reads
          in N jobs. Thus, the raw female share of reads in male jobs pre-ban is 0.4147 -0.3596 = 5.51%.
          The raw male share of reads in female jobs pre-ban is 1 - (0.4147 + 0.4898) = 9.55%.




                                                       42
              Appendix 9: Robustness to the Length of the Estimation Window
9.1 Gender Mix of Applicant and Call-back Pools

        In Appendix 9.1 we explore the sensitivity of our results for the gender composition of applicant and
call-back pools (Tables 1 and 2) to the length of the estimation window, which was one year surrounding the
ban. To allow for a larger number of alternative windows despite the absence of data from 2018, all our
alternative estimation windows put the ban one third of the way between the start and end of the window. For
example, if the data window is 30 weeks, then it covers 10 weeks before the ban date and 20 weeks after the
ban date. The window lengths used in Appendix 9.1 range from 9 weeks to 51 weeks, each of which covers the
pre-ban period for one third of its duration and the post-ban period for two thirds of its duration. At the bottom
of each figure, we also report the results from our main specification, which used a 52-week window, half of
which is before the ban.

         Figure A9.1 shows that ­despite this wide range of estimation windows-- all of our alternative estimates
of the ban's effects on the female share of applications to jobs that previously requested men (M jobs) are very
close to Table 1's estimate of -.1392. The same is true for the other two coefficients of interest in Table 1.
Similarly, Figure A9.2 shows that our estimates of the main parameters in Table 2 are remarkably insensitive to
the estimation window length that is used. Given the clear visual message of Figure 1 in the paper, this
robustness is perhaps not surprising.




                                                       43
Figure A9.1 Effects of the Ban on the Female Share of Applications: Robustness to Estimation Window Length




   Notes:

       1. The vertical axis shows the various data windows used. In each of the first 15 windows, the length of
          the data window after the actual gender ad ban is twice the length of the data window before the
          ban date. Only job ads that received applications both pre and post the gendered ad ban date within
          each data window are used.
       2. The horizontal axis shows the estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals.
       3. The regression specification of column 4 in Table 1 is used.




                                                      44
Figure A9.2 Effects of the Ban on the Female Share of Call-Backs: Robustness to Estimation Window Length




   Notes:

       1. The vertical axis shows the various data windows used. In each of the first 15 windows, the length of
          the data window after the actual gender ad ban is twice the length of the data window before the
          ban date. Only job ads that have received applications both pre and post the gendered ad ban date
          within each data window are used.
       2. The horizontal axis shows the estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals.
       3. The regression specification of column 4 of Table 2 is used.




                                                      45
9.2 Employer and Worker Well-Being

         In Appendix 9.2 we explore the sensitivity of our results for our two measures of employer well-being--
application arrival rates and application match quality, and our measure of worker well-being --application yield-
- to the length of the estimation window. In our main analysis this window was the 30 days surrounding the
ban. Since the massive shifts in recruiting activity associated with the Spring Festival prevent us from expanding
this estimation window before the ban, our approach here is simply to explore how the results change as we
gradually lengthen the post-ban interval. Specifically, we add one day at a time to the post-ban interval till we
reach April 19, 2019 (40 days after the ban). This is just before the steep decline in recruiting activity that
precedes the Qingming Festival. In all cases we limit our attention to the effects of the ban on aggregate effects
of the ban (in Tables 4 and 5).

        For application arrival rates, the estimated effect of the ban first shifts from zero to negative as the
estimation window lengthens, then recovers back towards zero in longer windows. For application quality and
application yield the results are very stable across all window lengths and very close to our main estimates.




                                                       46
Figure A9.3 Effects of the Ban on the Daily Flow of Applications: Robustness to Estimation Window Length




   Notes:

       1. All the specifications here use the same data window as the main estimation sample. That is, only
          job ads that received applications both before and after the gendered ad ban date, and between
          2018/8/31 to 2019/8/29 are used.
       2. The vertical axis shows the various estimation windows, all of which start on 2019/2/14, 15 days
          before the gendered ad ban.
       3. The horizontal axis shows the estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals.
       4. The regression specification of Table 4, column 2 is used.




                                                      47
Figure A9.4 Effects of the Ban on Mean Application Quality: Robustness to Estimation Window Length




Notes:

         1. All the specifications here use the same data window as the main estimation sample. That is, only
            job ads that received applications both before and after the gendered ad ban date, and between
            2018/8/31 to 2019/8/29 are used.
         2. The vertical axis shows the various estimation windows, all of which start on 2019/2/14, 15 days
            before the gendered ad ban.
         3. The horizontal axis shows the estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals.
         4. The regression specification of Table 4, column 4 is used.




                                                       48
Figure A9.5 Effects of the Ban on the Probability an Application Yields a Call-Back: Robustness to Estimation
Window Length




Notes:


         1. This figure replicates the coefficient estimates in columns (2), (4) and (6) of Table 5 for 25 different
            estimation windows. Each window adds one day to the original 30-day window.
         2. All the specifications here use the same data window as the main estimation sample. That is, only
            job ads that received applications both before and after the gendered ad ban date and between
            2018/8/31 to 2019/8/29 are used.
         3. The vertical axis shows the various estimation windows, all of which start on 2019/2/14, 15 days
            before the gendered ad ban.
         4. The horizontal axis shows the estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals.




                                                          49
                                           Appendix 10: Placebo Bans
10.1 Gender Mix of Applicant and Call-back Pools
        To further confirm that our main estimates of the ban's effects on the composition of applicant and call-
back pools are not a spurious result of random temporal variation in these outcomes, this Section replicates
Tables 1 and 2 71 times, in each case assuming the ban occurred in a different week ranging from March 2, 2018
through July 5, 2019. This is the largest number of placebo ban weeks for which our data allow us to construct a
24-week window surrounding each placebo ban, comprising eight weeks before the ban and 16 weeks
afterwards. 10 The goal is to see if estimates that use the actual ban (or a week close to it) are noticeably
different from other weeks further away from the ban.

        Our results are summarized in Figures A10.1 and A10.2, where the horizontal axis corresponds to the
date of the placebo ban. The vertical axis shows coefficient estimates for the ban's effect, from the specification
in column 4 of Tables 1 or 2. The solid black vertical line shows the actual ban date, and light blue vertical lines
indicate that the estimation window included the actual ban. The dashed black vertical line indicates the week
that contained the 2018 lunar equivalent of the actual ban. Three coefficient estimates are reported for each
placebo ban date: 3 (the effects of the ban on non-gendered (N) jobs), and 1 and 2 (the effects of the ban on
F and M jobs, relative to N jobs) as described in equation 1 of the paper.

        Figures A10.1 and A10.2 show that our estimates of 1 and 2 are (a) larger in magnitude on the date of
the actual ban than on any other date, (b) larger in estimation windows that include the actual ban than other
windows, and (c) hover around zero in estimation windows that exclude the actual ban. We see this as strong,
additional confirmation of a causal effect of the actual ban.




10
   In all cases we also restrict our sample to job ads that received applications both before and after the actual ban date. As
in our main estimation sample, this ensures that all ads have a known, pre-ban gender request (F, N or M).

                                                              50
Figure A10.1 Effects of Placebo Ad Bans on the Female Share of Applications




Figure A10.2 Effects of Placebo Ad Bans on the Female Share of Call-Backs




   Notes to Figures A10.1 and A10.2:
       1. The horizontal axis shows the date of the placebo ban; the vertical axis reports estimated
          coefficients. Regressions use the specification in column 4 of Tables 1 and 2.
       2. The solid black vertical line shows the actual ban date; the dashed black vertical line shows its 2018
          lunar equivalent (March 12). The blue vertical lines indicate that the estimation window included
          the actual ban.

                                                       51
10.2 Employer and Worker Well-Being
         In this Section we replicate our estimates of the ban's effects on our two measures of employer well-
being--application arrival rates and application match quality--and on our estimate of well-being --application
yield-- for placebo ban dates ranging from March 2, 2018 through July 5, 2019. In all cases (as in Tables 4-7) the
estimation window is the 30 days surrounding each placebo ban date. 11 As in Appendix 9.2, we restrict our
attention to the ban's effects on aggregate matching frictions.

         Our results for firm well-being are summarized in Figures A10.3 and A10.4. These estimates use the
specification in columns 2 and 4 of Table 4. Our results for worker well-being (application yield) are summarized
in Figure A10.5; these use the specification in column 2 of Table 5. As in Figures A10.1 and A10.2, the horizontal
axis in all these figures shows the date of the placebo ban, and the vertical axis shows coefficient estimates for
the ban's effect. The solid black vertical line shows the actual ban (March 1, 2019); the five solid blue vertical
lines correspond to estimation windows that include the actual ban. The dashed black vertical line shows the
2018 lunar equivalent of the actual ban. The blue shaded areas show major holidays. Finally, the dashed blue-
green vertical line indicates the XMRC site upgrade on April 20 2018, which causes a temporary decline in the
level of recruiting activity.

        Apart from some large, spurious estimates that coincide with major holidays and April 2018 XMRC site
upgrade, Figures A10.3 - A10.5 show that our (mostly small or zero) estimated effects of the actual ban on firms'
and workers' well-being are very similar to effects that would be estimated from a randomly selected placebo
ban at other (non-holiday) times. Interestingly, this also applies to match quality, which is the only measure of
matching frictions that was significantly affected by the ban in our main estimates. In consequence, we view our
positive estimate of the ban's effects on match quality with less confidence than our other estimates of
aggregate matching frictions, even though the positive effect is robust to estimation window length (Appendix 9)
and to a different identification strategy in Appendix 11.




11
  To construct estimation samples for these placebo regressions, we started with the 24-week window for each placebo
ban from Appendix A10.1, then kept only ads or applications that were made within the narrower 30-day window. As in all
our analyses, we use only job ads that received applications both before and after the actual ban date, to ensure that each
ad have a known, pre-ban gender request (F, N or M).

                                                            52
Figure A10.3 Effects of Placebo Ad Bans on the Daily Flow of Applications




Figure A10.4 Effects of Placebo Ad Bans on the Quality of Applications Received




                                                       53
Notes to Figures A10.3 and A10.4:

       1. The horizontal axis corresponds to the date of the placebo ban; the vertical axis corresponds to the
          estimated coefficients. All estimation samples use the 30 days surrounding each placebo ban; these
          samples were constructed from the 24-week windows used in Figures A10.1 and A10.2. To ensure
          that all ads have a gender label, we include only ads that received applications both before and after
          the actual ban date. The regression specification is from columns 2 and 4 of Table 4.
       2. The solid black vertical line shows the actual ban (March 1, 2019); the five solid blue vertical lines
          correspond to estimation windows that include the actual ban. The dashed black vertical line shows
          the 2018 lunar equivalent of the actual ban.
       3. The blue shaded areas correspond to the weeks covering four major holiday periods: National Day
          (October 1-7, 2018), the Spring Festival (February 4-10, 2019), the Qingming Festival (April 5-7,2019)
          and the Labor Day (May 1-4, 2019). The dashed blue-green vertical line corresponds to the XMRC
          site upgrade on April 20 2018.




                                                      54
Figure A10.5 Effects of Placebo Ad Bans on the Probability an Application Yields a Call-Back


a. Applications from All




b. Applications from Women




                                                       55
c. Applications from Men




Notes to Figure A10.5:

       1. These figures replicate columns (2), (4) and (6) from Table 5 for placebo ban dates between March
          2018 and July 2019.
       2. The horizontal axis corresponds to the date of the placebo ban; the vertical axis corresponds to the
          estimated coefficients. All estimation samples use the 30 days surrounding each placebo ban; these
          samples were constructed from the 24-week data windows used in Figures A10.1 and A10.2. To
          ensure that all ads have a gender label, we include only ads that received applications both before
          and after the actual ban date.
       3. The solid black vertical line shows the actual ban (March 1, 2019); the five solid blue vertical lines
          correspond to estimation windows that include the actual ban. The dashed black vertical line shows
          the 2019 lunar equivalent of the actual ban.
       4. The blue shaded areas correspond to the weeks covering four major holiday periods: National Day
          (October 1-7, 2018), the Spring Festival (February 4-10, 2019), the Qingming Festival (April 5-7,2019)
          and the Labor Day (May 1-4, 2019). The dashed blue-green vertical line corresponds to the XMRC
          site upgrade on April 20 2018.




                                                      56
                          Appendix 11: Difference-in-Difference Analysis
         In this Appendix, we replace our single-year, discontinuity-based identification approach by a difference-
in difference approach that uses 2018 as a control for 2019. This approach allows us to include richer controls
for time trends, including week-of-the-year (WOY) fixed effects, thus relaxing the smoothness assumptions
needed to identify the discontinuity-based estimates. The cost is that we now require a parallel trends
assumption: Specifically, net of parameterized differences in time trends between the two years, we assume
that both years a common set of WOY fixed effects. Other costs include a shorter pre-ban period (since we have
no data from 2017) and a noisier measure of call-backs (because some of the data pre-date a 2018 site upgrade
that increased the reporting of call-backs).

        Since this approach compares the `same' weeks in 2018 and 2019, and important events in China are
determined by the lunar calendar, the way we line up weeks between 2018 and 2019 requires some discussion.
In 2019, Chinese New Year occurred on February 5. The ad ban happened 24 days later, on Friday March 1. In
2018 Chinese New Year occurred on February 16. Thus, relative to the Chinese lunar calendar, a comparable ad
ban in 2018 would have occurred 24 days after that, on Monday, March 12. Thus, to construct equivalent whole
weeks around the ban (or `pseudo-ban') in both years, we define the first post-ban week in both years as the
seven days right after the ban (March 1-7 2019 and March 12-18 2018). Other whole weeks are constructed
accordingly, up to six months after the ban, and as far as our data allow (10 weeks) before the ban.




                                                        57
11.1 Gender Mix of Applicant and Call-back Pools
        In this Section we explore the robustness of our main results for the gender mix of applicant and call-
back pools by replicating Tables 1 and 2 using our alternative, difference-in-difference approach that essentially
uses 2018 as a `control year' for 2019. Using the two-year DiD sample described in Appendix 2, columns 1 and 2
of Tables 11.1 and 11.2 replicate columns 1 and 2 of Tables 1 and 2, except that we add a fixed effect for all
observations from 2019 (to allow for differences in outcome levels between the two years). 12 Only the weeks
after the actual ban date, on March 1, 2019 are designated as treated by the ban. Columns 3 and 4 replicate
columns 3 and 4 of Tables 1 and 2, replacing the quartic in calendar weeks by the following controls for time
trends: (a) a full set of WOY fixed effects (to allow for an arbitrary, non-smooth, seasonal pattern that is
common to both years), (b) a quartic in calendar weeks interacted with 2019 (to let lower-frequency and secular
trends differ in a smooth way between the two years), and (c) dummies for the Spring Festival period interacted
with year (to let the Spring Festival have a different effect in the two years). 13 Notice that replicating column 5
of Tables 1 and 2 is unnecessary since the calendar week fixed effects added in column 5 of Tables 1 and 2 are
replaced by our WOY fixed effects.

         Notably, the estimates in Tables A11.1 and A11.2 are almost identical to their counterparts in Tables 1
and 2. The only difference of potential interest involves the effect of the ban on the female share of applicants
to N jobs (the Post ban week *2019 coefficient): This effect is now statistically insignificant (it was small, positive
and statistically significant in Table 1). The ban's effects on the female share of call-backs in N jobs is small and
insignificant in both our main and DiD specifications. Once again, we conclude that our main estimates of the
ban's effects on the gender composition on application and call-back pools are highly robust.




12
  All regressions in Appendix 11 also contain dummies that capture XMRC's system transition during 2018.
13
  Among other reasons, the Spring Festival's labor market effects may differ between years because it occurs on different
days of the week. For example, in 2018 it was Saturday ­ Wednesday and in 2019 from Tuesday ­ Sunday.

                                                            58
Table A11.1: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Applications, DiD Approach

                                                            (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)
              Post ban week * Female job *2019         -0.1383***    -0.1391*** -0.1383*** -0.1343***
                                                         (0.0056)      (0.0056)   (0.0056)   (0.0026)
              Post ban week * Male job *2019           0.0486***      0.0486***  0.0490*** 0.0359***
                                                         (0.0055)      (0.0055)   (0.0055)   (0.0020)
              Post ban week *2019                        -0.0007        0.0018   -0.0071**    0.0025
                                                         (0.0020)      (0.0026)   (0.0034)   (0.0023)
              Female job                               0.4741***      0.4742***  0.4734***
                                                         (0.0034)      (0.0034)   (0.0034)
              Male job                                 -0.3546***    -0.3545*** -0.3547***
                                                         (0.0032)      (0.0032)   (0.0032)
              Quartic in job weeks                                         Y          Y          Y
              Time trends                                                             Y          Y
              Job ad fixed effects                                                               Y
              Effective # of obs                        1,805,320     1,805,320 1,805,320 1,805,320
              R2                                          0.201         0.201      0.202      0.658
Notes:
         1. All specifications include a dummy for 2019 and dummies to capture XMRC's system transition during 2018.
         2. Time Trends include (lunar) calendar week fixed effects; a quartic in calendar weeks interacted with a dummy
             for 2019; plus interactions of 2019 with the Spring Festival week, and with the following week.
         3. The dependent variable is the share of applications from female applicants; in 2018, its weighted mean is 89.0%,
             42.1%, 6.7% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs, respectively; in 2019, its weighted mean is 78.8%, 41.3%,
             9.3% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs, respectively.




                                                            59
Table A11.2: Effects of the Gendered Ad Ban on the Female Share of Call-Backs, DiD Approach

                                                            (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)
             Post ban week * Female job *2019          -0.0967***    -0.0969***    -0.0974*** -0.1006***
                                                         (0.0101)      (0.0101)      (0.0101)   (0.0075)
             Post ban week * Male job *2019            0.0388***      0.0389***     0.0392*** 0.0311***
                                                         (0.0086)      (0.0086)      (0.0086)   (0.0064)
             Post ban week *2019                         -0.0073       -0.0041       -0.0011    -0.0026
                                                         (0.0048)      (0.0059)      (0.0159)   (0.0139)
             Female job                                0.4629***      0.4625***     0.4630***
                                                         (0.0063)      (0.0063)      (0.0063)
             Male job                                  -0.4106***    -0.4106***    -0.4102***
                                                         (0.0055)      (0.0055)      (0.0055)
             Quartic in job weeks                                          Y             Y          Y
             Time trends                                                                 Y          Y
             Job ad fixed effects                                                                   Y
             Effective # of obs                          215,587       215,587       215,587    215,587
             R2                                           0.216         0.217         0.217      0.709
Notes:
         1. All specifications include a dummy for 2019 and dummies to capture XMRC's system transition during 2018.
         2. Time Trends include (lunar) calendar week fixed effects; a quartic in calendar weeks interacted with a dummy
             for 2019; plus interactions of 2019 with the Spring Festival week, and with the following week.
         3. The dependent variable is the share of call-backs to female applicants; in 2018, its weighted mean is 91.6%,
             45.9%, 5.1% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs, respectively; in 2019, its weighted mean is 84.9%, 45.3%,
             7.0% for female, non-gendered, and male jobs, respectively.




                                                            60
11.2 Employer and Worker Well-Being
         In this Section we use our DiD estimation approach to estimate the ban's effects on firm and worker
well-being (Tables 4-7 in our main analysis). A noteworthy benefit of the DiD approach for these outcomes in
particular is that we can now abandon the short, 30-day estimation windows in Tables 4-7 and instead use
weekly data for two comparable periods: January ­ August 2018 and January-August 2019. This longer
estimation period allows us to use week-of-the-(lunar)-year fixed effects to capture an arbitrary, high-frequency
time trend that is common to the two years.

         Focusing first on the aggregate effects of the ban on employers, Table A11.3 replicates Table 4 of the
paper using the same set of time trends controls as Tables A11.1 and A11.2 (which include week-of-the-year
fixed effects). Consistent with Table 4, column 2 of Table A11.3 shows a statistically insignificant effect of the ad
ban on the daily flow of applications per vacancy on XMRC. 14 Also consistent with Table 4 we find a small but
statistically significant increase in the mean match quality of applications. Table A11.4 replicates Table 5, which
estimates the ban's aggregate effects on workers. Here, the small, insignificant declines in call-back yields
become slightly larger and are now statistically significant (though not for women). While this suggests that the
ban loosened the entire XMRC labor market, we are less confident in this result than our main estimates,
primarily because of DiD method's reliance on parallel trends assumptions. Inspection of the 2018 and 2019
trends for call-back yields shows a large pre-ban surge in 2019 that is absent in 2018. While we attempt to
capture this by interacting the effects of the Spring Festival (and following week) with year, it is unclear that this
accounts for all the relevant differences between the two years.

        Turning now to the ban's effects on the jobs whose gender requests were removed, Table A11.5
replicates Table 6. Aside from the higher magnitudes in panel (a), associated with the switch from daily to
weekly application counts, the results are very similar. Both Tables show an increase in total applications to
jobs that previously requested women and men, with the former increase much larger than the latter. Both
tables attribute the increase in applications to men's jobs solely to additional applications from women, while
the increase in applications to women's jobs is the net result of a large increase in applications from men and a
decline in women's applications. Both Tables also show imprecisely estimated but largely positive effects of the
ban on the quality of applications to M and F jobs. Finally, Table A11.6 replicates Table 7, with somewhat
different results. Unlike Table 7, it does not find a disproportionate loosening of labor markets in the previously
gendered jobs, with one exception: the call-back rate of women who applied to previously male jobs fell after
the ban. Again, because of the need to rely on parallel trends assumptions, we place less weight on this
estimate than on our main estimates.




14
  Both the coefficient and standard error are larger, reflecting the fact that the dependent variable is now applications
received per week, rather than per day.

                                                             61
Table A11.3: Aggregate Effects of the Ad Ban on Employers: DiD Approach


                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)
                                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                                  Application Application Application Application
                                                    Arrivals    Arrivals    Quality     Quality
                 Post ban                          -0.0024      0.0162     -0.0076     0.0094**
                                                   (0.0134)    (0.0145)    (0.0067)    (0.0037)
                 Quartic in job age                    Y           Y           Y           Y
                 Job ad fixed effects                              Y                       Y
                 # of obs                         4,122,080 4,122,080 3,891,632 3,891,632
                 R2                                  0.056       0.453      0.003        0.494


Notes:

         1. This table replicates Table 4 using a Difference-in-Difference approach, treating weeks from 2018
         as a control group for 2019.
         2. In columns 1 and 2, observations are ad-week cells, and the dependent variable is the number of
         applications received per vacancy in each cell. Post ban means the week was after the actual ban.
         The average weekly number of applications received is 0.83.
         3. In columns 3 and 4, observations are applications, and the dependent variable is the application's
         match quality, normalized to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one among all applications in
         our data. Post ban means the application was submitted after the actual ban. The average
         normalized match quality for the applications in the current estimation sample is -0.01 (s.d. 0.99).
         4. All specifications include a quartic in job age and a dummy for 2019. Time trends are modelled with
         (lunar) calendar week fixed effects; a quartic in time interacted with 2019; plus dummies for the Spring
         Festival week and the week following it, both interacted with 2019.
         5. All regressions are clustered by firm ID.




                                                              62
Table A11.4: Aggregate Effects of the Ad Ban on Jobseekers: DiD Approach for Application Yield

                                        (1)             (2)   (3)         (4)   (5)       (6)
                                                            Applications from:
                                              All                 Women              Men
         Post ban                   -0.0056** -0.0056** -0.0070** -0.0051 -0.0043* -0.0061**
                                     (0.0023)     (0.0024) (0.0032) (0.0035) (0.0025) (0.0027)
         Quartic in job weeks            Y            Y        Y           Y     Y         Y
         Applicant fixed effects                      Y                    Y               Y
         Effective # of obs         3,986,179 3,986,179 1,668,960 1,668,960 2,317,219 2,317,219
         R2                           0.018        0.129    0.021       0.134  0.016     0.123

Notes:
         1. This table replicates Table 5 using a Difference-in-Difference approach, treating weeks from 2018 as a
         control group for 2019.
         2. Observations are applications. Post ban means the application was made after the actual ban. The
         dependent variable equals one if the application ever received a call-back. The average call-back
         probability is 0.100 and 0.082 for applications from women and men respectively, and 0.089 overall.
         3. All specifications include a quartic in job weeks and a dummy for 2019. Time trends are modelled
         with lunar calendar week fixed effects; a quartic in time interacted with 2019; plus dummies for the
         Spring Festival week and the week following it, both interacted with 2019.
         4. All regressions are clustered by firm ID.




                                                              63
Table A11.5: Effects of the Ad Ban on Employers who Posted Gendered Job Ads: DiD Approach

a. Effects on the Weekly Application Arrival Rate:

                                                       (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)
                                                                 Applications from:
                                                       All        All       Women       Men
                To Ads that Requested Women:
               Post ban                      0.1525*** 0.1761*** -0.1152*** 0.2913***
                                              (0.0388)  (0.0415)   (0.0374)  (0.0138)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                        Y          Y         Y
               # of obs                       425,656   425,656    425,656   425,656
               R2                              0.071     0.425      0.421     0.307
                To Ads that Requested Men:
               Post ban                               0.0469    0.0670*    0.1039***   -0.0369
                                                     (0.0377)   (0.0407)    (0.0088)   (0.0393)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                                Y           Y          Y
               # of obs                              509,644    509,644     509,644    509,644
               R2                                     0.041      0.462       0.363      0.459


b. Effects on the Mean Match Quality of Applications:

                                                       (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)
                                                                 Applications from:
                                                       All        All       Women       Men
                To Ads that Requested Women:
               Post ban                              -0.0164     0.0147    0.0279**     0.0528
                                                     (0.0182)   (0.0106)   (0.0112)    (0.0362)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                                Y          Y           Y
               # of obs                              426,100    426,100    356,223      69,877
               R2                                     0.004      0.448       0.453      0.568
                To Ads that Requested Men:
               Post ban                              -0.0021     0.0016     0.0454      0.0000
                                                     (0.0166)   (0.0107)   (0.0386)    (0.0112)
               Job Ad Fixed Effects?                                Y          Y           Y
               # of obs                              511,557    511,557     41,065     470,492
               R2                                     0.003      0.424      0.634       0.422




                                                          64
Notes:

1. This table replicates Table 6 using a Difference-in-Difference approach, treating weeks from 2018 as a
control group for 2019.
2. In panel (a), observations are ad-week cells, and the dependent variable is the number of applications
received per vacancy in each job*week cell. Post ban means the week was after the actual ban. Column 3
(4) only counts applications from women (men). The average weekly number of applications received is 0.96
and 0.86 in ads requesting women and men respectively.
3. In panel (b), observations are applications, and the dependent variable is the application's match quality,
normalized to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one among all applications in our data. Post ban
means the application was submitted after the actual ban. The average normalized match quality for the
applications in the current estimation sample is -0.06 (s.d. 0.98) and 0.07 (s.d. 0.96) in ads requesting
women and men respectively. Please check numbers.

4. All specifications include a quartic in job age and a dummy for 2019. Time trends are modelled with
(lunar) calendar week fixed effects; a quartic in time interacted with 2019; plus dummies for the Spring
Festival week and the week following it, both interacted with 2019.
5. All regressions are clustered by firm ID.




                                                        65
Table A11.6: Effects of the Ad Ban on Workers who Applied to Gendered Job Ads: DiD Approach for Application
Yield


                                                               Applications from:
                                                       All          Women              Men
                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)
                   Post ban                        -0.0059**        -0.0052         -0.0066**
                                                    (0.0025)        (0.0037)         (0.0028)
                   Post ban * Female job            -0.0015          0.0047          -0.0073
                                                    (0.0044)        (0.0047)         (0.0071)
                   Post ban * Male job               0.0021       -0.0121**           0.0048
                                                    (0.0036)        (0.0058)         (0.0038)
                   Day-of-week fixed effects            Y               Y                Y
                   Quartic in job weeks                 Y               Y                Y
                   Applicant fixed effects              Y               Y                Y
                   Effective # of obs              3,986,179      1,668,960         2,317,219
                   R2                                0.129           0.135            0.123

Notes:

1. This Table replicates Table 7 using a Difference-in-Difference approach, treating weeks from 2018 as a
control group for 2019.
2. Observations are applications. Post ban means the application was made after the actual ban. The
dependent variable equals one if the application ever received a call-back. The average call-back probability
is 0.100 and 0.082 for applications from women and men respectively, and 0.089 overall.
3. All specifications include a quartic in job weeks, applicant fixed effects, and a dummy for 2019. Time
trends are modelled with lunar calendar week fixed effects; a quartic in time interacted with 2019; plus
dummies for the Spring Festival week and the week following it, both interacted with 2019.
4. All regressions are clustered by firm ID.




                                                        66
