                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     "UNUSUAL, UNSTABLE, COMPLICATED, UNRELIABLE AND TEMPORARY"
          REINTERPRETING THE EBB AND FLOW OF GLOBALIZATION

                                       Michael D. Bordo
                                      Catherine R. Schenk

                                      Working Paper 29114
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29114


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2021




For helpful comments, we thank Harold James, Chris Meissner, and Robert McCauley. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Michael D. Bordo and Catherine R. Schenk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
"Unusual, Unstable, Complicated, Unreliable and Temporary" Reinterpreting the Ebb and
Flow of Globalization
Michael D. Bordo and Catherine R. Schenk
NBER Working Paper No. 29114
July 2021
JEL No. F02,F33,N10

                                          ABSTRACT

In 1919, John Maynard Keynes wrote his famous tract The Economic Consequences of the Peace.
In that work, he anticipated the collapse of the first era of globalization that began in the mid-
nineteenth century. He admonished the short-sighted assumption that these years of relative peace
and prosperity for many was a permanent norm, interrupted only briefly by the Great War. The
diplomatic failures, lapses in leadership, and promotion of narrow interests and vision outlined by
Keynes underpinned his prediction of a backslash of economic nationalism, trade protectionism,
and recession.

The paper revisits the turning points in the evolution of the global economic system since 1919
by focusing primarily on the evolution of the international monetary system and policy
cooperation/coordination. We identify three disruptions and examine how each prompted a
change in the underlying ideology about how the international monetary system should organize:
World War I, Bretton Woods, 1970s Great Inflation and Managed Floating. Each turning point
was characterized by different forms and institutions of cooperation, how rules (either explicit or
implicit) were designed and implemented, and the crucial importance of the historical context.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Catherine R. Schenk
Faculty of History, George Street
Oxford OX1 2RL
United Kingdom
catherine.schenk@history.ox.ac.uk
`Unusual, Unstable, Complicated, Unreliable and Temporary' Reinterpreting the Ebb and Flow
of Globalization 1


    "The power to become habituated to his surroundings is a marked characteristic of mankind.
    Very few of us realize with conviction the intensely unusual, unstable, complicated,
    unreliable, temporary nature of the economic organization by which Western Europe has
    lived for the last half century. We assume some of the most peculiar and temporary of our
    late advantages as natural, permanent, and to be depended on, and we lay our plans
    accordingly." (Keynes 1919)

    Introduction

The opening sentences of Keynes' influential 1919 cri de Coeur, The Economic Consequences of

the Peace, anticipated the collapse of the structures of the international economy that had

prevailed from the later 19th century. Unprecedented flows of people, goods and capital to a

wide geographical area during the first era of globalisation had created expectations of growth

and emphasized the importance of open international economic relations for creating that

growth and opportunity. Keynes admonished the short-sighted assumption that these years of

relative peace and economic prosperity for many was a permanent norm, interrupted only

briefly by the Great War. He foresaw in the Versailles Treaty the suspension of globalisation as

more prolonged or even perhaps permanent. Keynes was writing at the defining moment of

the 20th century, in the middle of what came to be viewed by some as a 30-year war. The

diplomatic failures, lapses in leadership and promotion of narrow interests and vision outlined




1
    For helpful comments we thank Harold James, Chris Meissner and Robert McCauley.


                                                                                                   2
by Keynes in the Economic Consequences of the Peace underpinned his predictions of a

backlash of economic nationalism, trade protectionism and recession.

  This paper revisits the turning points in the evolution of the global economic system in the

century since 1919 by focussing on the evolution of the international monetary system and

policy cooperation/coordination. While there is but a fleeting reference to the international

monetary system in Keynes' 1919 treatise, this focus is justified by how Keynes interacted with

the ensuing efforts to restore the pre-war system that he criticises in Consequences of the

Peace. This includes his 1925 sequel, The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill and his

direct role in the design of the post-1945 international monetary system. We identify three

disruptions and examine how each prompted changes in the underlying ideology about how the

international monetary system should be organised. Each turning point was characterised by

different forms and motivation of cooperation, how rules (either implicit or explicit) were

designed and implemented, and the crucial importance of the historical context. Finally, the

paper explores how the dominant interpretations of the past shaped policy reactions in the

present and concludes with some lessons for today.


Turning Point I: World War I and the End of the First Era of Globalization


Keynes started The Economic Consequences of the Peace with a description of how the world

before 1914 marked the apogee of the first era of globalization..

"What an extraordinary episode... the internationalization of which was nearly complete in
practice ... The inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed,
the various products of the whole earth, in such quantity as he might see fit, and reasonably
expect their early delivery upon his doorstep; he could at the same moment and by the same
means adventure his wealth in the natural resources and new enterprises of any quarter of the
world, and share , without exertion or even trouble, in their respective fruits and advantages ;


                                                                                                  3
... But, most important of all, he regarded this state of affairs as normal, certain, and
permanent, except in the direction of further improvement, and any deviation from it as
aberrant, scandalous, and avoidable.." (pages 4-5)




  In retrospect, Keynes' 1919 description of the gold standard era as `unusual, unstable,

complicated, unreliable and temporary' seems remarkably perceptive. The system worked best

for countries (like Britain) at its core and it was supported by the geographic breadth of the

British empire and by the persistence of Britain's open trade policy despite rising protectionism

in Europe and the North America. Already by the end of the 19th century restrictions on trade

and migration were undermining the key sources of economic prosperity of the `golden age' of

the first globalization. This retreat from globalization was accompanied by rising political and

strategic hostility in Europe that brought an abrupt end to this period of relative global

prosperity. In 1914 the first era of globalization crashed to a close with World War I and then

the Great Depression but many of the seeds of its destruction were planted beforehand. In

turn, globalization may have contributed to the wave of nationalism that led to World War I

and even the second part of the Thirty Years war (Temin 1989). O'Rourke and Williamson

(1999) argued that the process of globalization planted the seeds of its own destruction (see

also James 2002) through the convergence of prices and wages that challenged incumbents.

  By the end of the century, the era of mass migration gave way to a wave of restrictions on

the movement of people. The May 1882 US Chinese Exclusion Act was the culmination of

decades of social and political lobbying against Chinese immigrants, in particular. Soon

afterwards, the US Immigration Act of August 1882 introduced the concept of `inadmissible



                                                                                                   4
aliens' who were deemed to undermine the living standards of previous, mainly white, settlers.

At the end of 1901, Australia, with a much shorter history of immigration than the US, passed

its own Immigration Restriction Act aimed at stopping non-white immigration. 2 The political

and social limits to globalization through migration had therefore already been reached in the

decades before 1914. The most potent symbol of the era of mass migration, the Statue of

Liberty in New York harbour, was finally completed in 1886, four years after the immigration

back-lash made it into the US law book. Emma Lazarus' poem referring to the `huddled masses'

coming to the US (written in 1886 after the Immigration Act) was added in 1901. In many ways

the Statue of Liberty marked a symbolic end of an era rather than a celebration of the enduring

spirit of migration building the American state.

      Financial globalization also experienced a backlash. Open capital accounts were associated

with private investment booms and busts leading to financial crises (both currency and banking

crises). Capital flowed from the capital rich countries of Western Europe to the capital scarce

countries across the Atlantic in North and South America or to former colonies, mainly in

Australasia or Eastern Europe. But many lacked the institutional development to fully convert

the new funds into productive investments and hence the capital inflow fueled asset price

booms (Bordo and Meissner 2017). In the absence of central banks (e.g. in the US, Canada,

Australia) or in the case of countries which had them but were unable to adhere to the gold

standard (in Southern Europe, Latin America) currency crises and banking panics could lead to

severe economic distress and sovereign debt crises. Moreover, under the classical gold

standard, the world price level went through long swings of deflation and inflation reflecting


2
    Other countries introduced similar restrictions after 1919.


                                                                                                   5
the growth of the real economy relative to the glacially slow growing world gold stock. Gold

shortages (deflation) would ultimately, via the Commodity Theory of Money, lead to technical

innovation in gold mining and new discoveries (Bordo 1981, Rockoff 1984). But the timing of

these events were adventitious (Keynes 1925) rather than synchronized with the needs of the

global economy. In the US and elsewhere the Great Deflation of 1873 to 1896 led to a populist

outcry against gold and in favor of free silver and bimetallism (Eichengreen 2018).

  The first era of globalization and the gold standard that underpinned it, were clearly complex

and unstable and already appeared temporary to Keynes by 1919. But this was a view that did

not gain traction among policy-makers. They sought to return to the relatively rapid growth of

the mid-late 19th century by recreating the stable exchange rates and gold anchor after 1919.

There was less public or political enthusiasm, however, for the free trade, open capital markets

and migration that had been fundamental to the early successes of this era.

  The eruption of the First World War in 1914 confirmed the end of the first era of

globalization. Virtually all countries left the gold standard de jure or de facto once Britain

suspended convertibility of sterling to gold after the financial crisis in 1914 (Roberts 2013). The

British and other belligerents sold most of their outstanding investments in the US (and other

emerging countries) to pay for the war (Silber 2007). Both exchange controls and capital

controls were widely imposed (Eichengreen 1992). Free trade turned into managed trade and

tariffs were raised further (e.g. the Fordney McCumber Act in the US in 1922). Free long-

distance migration all but ceased. Moreover, the balance of economic power was permanently

shifted from the UK to the US as leading global creditor, which posed huge political challenges

for an American population distant from the hostilities that had ravaged Europe and living in a



                                                                                                  6
country built on a sense of individual and national ambition above internationalism. As Keynes

emphasized, the potential to restore what appeared to be `normal' conditions of open trade

and payments after the war was further hampered by the way the war was financed through

the accumulation of debt among allied nations that depended on reparations from the

defeated powers to be repaid.

  The interwar gold standard was a deliberately constructed system arising from a series of

international congresses after 1919 (Lausanne 1920, Genoa 1922, Tripartite Agreement 1936).

The need for cooperation was increasingly recognized as the German economy floundered, the

Bolshevik Revolution brought a violent end to the Russian empire and war debts strained the

global financial system. The ambitious League of Nations provided a bureaucratic locus for

gathering intelligence, identifying problems and seeking cooperative solutions, but the lack of

engagement by the US administration was a major handicap to its effectiveness in promoting

international cooperation despite the passionate efforts of many of the bureaucrats (Clavin

2013). Schisms within the League led to the creation of the Bank for International Settlements

in 1931 as an alternative venue for European central bank cooperation (Toniolo 2009).

Nevertheless, there were some lasting legacies, including new central banks in a range of

emerging market economies in South America and Australasia, which were set up based on the

British (Niemeier) or US (Kemmerer) models to help to manage the international monetary

system (Singleton 2011). The bureaucrats and researchers also formed a cohort that re-

emerged in the post-1945 era to rebuild international economic relations (e.g. Jean Monnet,

Jacques Pollak, Robert Triffin) and left an intellectual legacy that Pauly (1996) argued

foreshadowed the Bretton Woods institutions.



                                                                                                  7
  Holding large gold reserves was out of reach for most countries. In the pre-war period, this

challenge had been partly overcome by the use of sterling as the dominant global currency and

trust in the ability of the Bank of England to sustain the gold value of the pound. After 1919,

this could no longer be assumed. The interwar system formally accepted the use of sterling and

the dollar (and to a lesser extent the franc) as foreign exchange reserves in a gold exchange

standard, but faith in the ability of the Bank of England to protect the parity was ephemeral.

The new US Federal Reserve made a short-lived effort to promote the dollar as the key

international currency (Eichengreen and Flandreau, 2009) after successfully returning to the

gold standard in 1919 at the pre-war parity, but sterling remained the main currency of

settlement and unit of account for international trade.

    In the end, the interwar gold exchange standard also proved "unstable, temporary and

unreliable". Nominal exchange rate pegs that did not reflect underlying economic realities or

relative price competitiveness and became caught in the turmoil of the tangle of war debts and

reparations. Thus France returned to gold at an undervalued parity with a central bank law that

sterilized gold flows (Moure, 1996), while Britain returned to sterling at a rate that Keynes

considered damagingly overvalued (Keynes, 1925). The weakness of the British economy (and

therefore sterling) and the inability to resolve the war debts-reparations tangle created by the

Treaty of Versailles brought the unstable and fragile system crashing down in 1931.This time

even Britain abandoned free trade and the world lurched into economic nationalism. For

Britain, the concept of nationalism extended to the Empire, which sustained global trade for

many developing economies through imperial preference. But the depression in agricultural

prices and protectionism elsewhere created a downward spiral of trade that left no country



                                                                                                   8
untouched (Kindleberger 1975; Albers 2020; de Bromhead et al). The unresolved peace

settlement of 1919 was exposed, as economic nationalism fed into political populism and

renewed conflict in 1939. Within months of the onset of World War II, the next phase of

international economic cooperation was underway in bilateral negotiations between Britain

and the US over the next post-war settlement.



The Second Turning Point: World War II and the Bretton Woods System

The complex multilateral structures of the League of Nations and the technocratic turn in

economic diplomacy found their echoes in the planning for a postwar international economic

system. Both the US and UK sought to establish more powerful collective institutions that

would have the financial as well as bureaucratic resources to govern a refreshed multilateral

global economy. By this time, the predictions in Keynes' 1919 treatise seemed to have come

true, except for his claim that Britain would remain immune and separate from the devastating

impact on the European continent (p. xx). The prevalence of unemployment, political

extremism and nationalism that characterised the 1930s were the main targets for postwar

planners (Arndt, 1944). In West European states these imperatives led to elaborate welfare

states that required substantial public funding and taxation and strengthened the nation state

(Milward, 1999). On both sides of the Atlantic there was also a commitment to integrate

Germany back into the European economy to ensure a more sustained recovery for both

Germany and its European trading partners.

  What followed was a high point of international economic cooperation designed to overcome

the failures of the inter-war period. The Cold War circumscribed the extent of this cooperation,



                                                                                                 9
but also made it more urgent among the capitalist western powers, first as a defence against

creeping communism and then later as evidence of the success of the capitalist system vis-à-vis

the communist system of the Eastern Bloc. As in the classic gold standard era, most participants

of the international monetary system from 1950-1970 experienced rising incomes, economic

growth, and a rapid increase in international trade, particularly in manufactures. But, like

Keynes' verdict on the 19th century globalisation, this era of relative exchange rate stability also

proved "unusual, unstable, complicated, unreliable and temporary". These characteristics arose

from flaws in the structure of the international monetary system designed for an imagined

restoration of the global order that did not in the end emerge after 1945.

     There were three main points of general consensus among planners for the post-war. First,

ambitious plans were made for a carefully managed global monetary system by planners who

still assumed that stable exchange rates for convertible currencies were needed to allow the

maximum gains from multilateral trade. The second area of consensus was in the faith in freer

trade to promote growth and employment as well as sustaining a more lasting peace. 3 Finally,

after the financial crises of the 1930s there was distrust of short term capital flows as

destabilising influences that would undermine stable exchange rates. These areas of consensus

were recognised in particular by Keynes and reflected in his early writings on the organisation

of the international monetary system such as The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill

(1925).

     The design of the Bretton Woods system was heavily influenced by interpretations of the

causes of the Great Depression of the 1930s (Gardner, 1956, Steil 2013). The main lessons for


3
    Although Keynes (1933) had been quite protectionist.


                                                                                                  10
the international monetary system were that unstable exchange rates were damaging,

competitive devaluations and `hot money' had to be prevented, and the system should be freed

from the depressive effect of "Golden Fetters" (Nurkse 1944, Eichengreen 1992, Albers 2020). .

  The lessons from Versailles meant that even before the US joined the Second World War, the

WWI system of war debts was avoided between the US and the Allied powers as part of the

expression of common commitment to freer trade after the war. Thus the avoidance of debts in

return for support from the US was enshrined in formal agreements with Britain (Atlantic

Charter 1941, Mutual Aid Agreement 1942). Nevertheless, British war debts to the Empire and

Commonwealth still featured as defining elements in the post-war settlement since they

increased Britain's overseas liabilities well beyond their ability to repay them in foreign

exchange or to supply goods to redeem them through trade (Schenk 2010, Pressnell 1987).

These so-called Sterling Balances became a symbol of the decline of Britain's postwar

international economic position and the focus of multilateral cooperation after the War.

  The design of the international system aimed to ensure the freer flow of goods while using

exchange controls to prevent "hot money" movements in short term capital. It was also crucial

that Europe was united economically (if not politically) through freer trade. The US did not

advocate free trade, but a `freer' trade regime that eliminated discrimination (against the US)

and bilateralism. The British imperial preference system was gradually eroded in the 1950s,

setting the stage for constitutional decolonisation in the decade that followed (Schenk 2010).

Meanwhile, Keynes' ideas of fiscal dominance and demand management policies fitted well

with the moral and political imperative of Western governments to deliver welfare states, full

employment and prosperity to their populations.



                                                                                                  11
   The contrast between the British (Keynes) and American (White) plans for the post-war

institutional structure emphasise each nation's priorities, but they also had many similarities

(Gardner 1945, Pressnell 1987, Horsefield 1969). Among the most fundamental areas of

agreement was that the international monetary system required a formalised, inclusive

institutional structure that would reflect the US predominance as the world's largest creditor.

Despite the failure of the League of Nations to sustain international economic cooperation in

the inter-war period, the faith in formal multilateral economic institutions was imbedded in the

wartime planning for peace. Both plans aimed to avoid the economic nationalism that had

plagued the 1930s by providing short term finance for short term balance of payments

problems. Keynes devised a much larger pool of liquidity with more symmetric treatment of

surplus and deficit countries to benefit countries like the UK, which would emerge from the war

substantially weakened. White, in contrast, proposed a more limited contributory fund with the

US dominating its governance as the world's largest creditor and able to apply pressure on

deficit countries to correct their domestic economies. Both plans also had mechanisms to deal

with the debts to the Empire and Commonwealth that the UK had built up during the war,

although in the end both governments insisted that the sterling balances be treated separately

(Schenk 2010: 40-42). Ultimately White's vision dominated as a more politically manageable

solution, especially for an American population exhausted and frustrated by the European wars

(Steil, 2014).

   The framework was hammered out in a series of meetings that increased in size between

1942 and 1944. This triumph of economic diplomacy ultimately brought representatives of 44

countries together at Bretton Woods New Hampshire in July 1944. The process was in stark



                                                                                                  12
contrast to the 1919 economic settlement described by Keynes, which took place after the

cessation of hostilities, where only four major powers were represented, the Americans were

underprepared and the details were delegated to a reparations commission that took two more

years to set the amount, by which time the reparations were inextricably intertwined with the

ability of the victorious powers to repay war debts. It was also in stark contrast to the

restoration of the interwar gold exchange standard, which (despite several summits) lapsed

into ad hoc, politically inspired choices of currency pegs to gold. A key goal of the post war

period was therefore to create a framework for cooperation and coordination underpinned by

credible rules to ensure a lasting and prosperous peace (Giovannini 1993).

  Nevertheless, the system designed at Bretton Woods never operated as planned (Gardner

1956). The task of reconstruction after the war was delegated to an International Bank for

Reconstruction and Development. This had the advantage of insulating the key international

monetary institution, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) from the burdens of post-war

reconstruction but also left the financing of this crucial transition period largely in limbo. There

was an open and rolling deadline for countries to adhere to the convertibility at pegged

exchange rates, which was required to restore multilateral trade and payments. This ended up

lasting for twelve years in the case of Western Europe. Secondly, the IMF was the framework

for the multilateral payments system, designed to support the more liberal, non-discriminatory

trade system announced in the 1941 Atlantic Charter. But completion of the International Trade

Organisation foundered on the waning enthusiasm for international compromise by 1946 and

the realities of the challenges of post-war national recovery. The ITO was never ratified.




                                                                                                  13
  The 1946 Anglo-American Loan Agreement was Keynes' final intervention in global political

economy. The negotiations in Washington exhausted him and the outcome was a

disappointment. In echoes of his verdict on Versailles, in May 1945 Keynes identified three

options for Britain after the war: `Starvation Corner', `Temptation' or `Justice'. The first would

see Britain retreat into austerity and repudiate its debts, the second would add to the debt by

borrowing from the US. `Justice' would entail cancelling a quarter of Britain's wartime debt,

funding half, a grant from the US to reimburse British expenditure before the Lend-Lease Act

had become operable and a smaller US loan on generous terms (Pressnell 1987). Neither the

Bank of England nor the UK Labour government wanted publicly to be seen to be considering

repudiating its wartime debts, while the Americans sought some cancellation as a condition of

the loan. Keynes continued to seek a `Justice' solution, albeit reduced in scale, including

cancellation of a proportion of Britain's wartime debt in return for making sterling more

convertible and a large US loan but he did not find support from London (Schenk 2010: 47-53;

Skidelsky 20xx). After 3 months of negotiations led by Keynes, Sir Edward Bridges arrived in

Washington from London to take over. A week later, Britain had fallen into `Temptation' with a

large loan, no settlement of war debts and a commitment to introduce convertibility on current

account within a year.

  Keynes died just over four months later from a heart attack at his home in Sussex aged 63.

He did not live to see the run on the pound in July-August 1947 that prompted the

reintroduction of exchange controls after only a few weeks. The lesson drawn across Western

Europe from the sterling crisis of 1947 was that the convertibility required to adhere to the core

articles of the Fund had to be postponed indefinitely. Instead, regional solutions like the



                                                                                                     14
European Payments Union and the Sterling Area facilitated multilateral payments and the rapid

liberalisation of trade. While this ad hoc system did not align fully with the vision of Bretton

Woods, it did provide the foundations for freer trade for Western Europe, the British Empire

and Commonwealth and North America.

  There followed two decades of sustained economic growth, driven by the reduction in

quotas and tariffs on international trade, the spread of technological innovation from the US,

and Japanese and European technological catching up to the USA. With the help of cooperative

efforts like Marshall Aid, European integration, the IMF and regional payments systems, the

perils of a repeat of Keynes' 1919 scenario seemed to have been avoided. But the international

monetary system was ultimately torpedoed by the failure of the US, at the system's core, to

follow credible, sound financial policies during the 1960s.

  In 1919 Keynes had identified the start of an enduring asymmetry between the US and

Europe and the periodic failure of American leadership commensurate with its economic

power. The pegged exchange rate era from 1959-1971 proved to be "unstable, complicated,

unreliable and temporary" primarily because of the inability of countries to subordinate their

national interests to collective efforts to stabilize exchange rate rates. Thus, there were periodic

adjustments to pegged rates, but they tended to come only after a build-up of market

expectations with disruptive effects. The conflict between national and international interest

was reflected in the persistent dispute between Germany (often with the Netherlands,

Switzerland, France) on one side and the US on other over which side should adjust its policies

to stabilize exchanges (Germany to inflate or the US to deflate). The identification of an

`exorbitant privilege' (Rueff 1967, McCauley 2015) provided by the dollar's dominant place in



                                                                                                   15
foreign exchange reserves seemed to many European observers to allow the US to escape the

constraints of the pegged exchange rate system. This had been foreseen by Keynes in his

proposal for a `neutral' international unit of account (Bancor, with a fixed gold value) in his

1942 International Clearing Union scheme. Ultimately, the US took unilateral action in August

1971 by suspending gold convertibility, threatening tariffs and a retreat to economic

nationalism if other countries did not adjust their exchange rates to take pressure off the dollar

(Bordo 2018).

  But the end of the Bretton Woods system arguably started soon after it began operating as

planned. By 1961, within two years of European states meeting the convertibility terms of the

IMF Articles of Agreement, discussions were already under way for how to reform the system

as it revealed its instability (Triffin 1960). For the international monetary system, the pegged

exchange rate framework based on the dollar that emerged after European countries declared

current account convertibility in late 1958 was faulty and required fresh cooperative efforts to

prop it up. But instead of the IMF, the G10 and the Bank for International Settlements became

the locus of plumbing solutions to the strains caused by the dollar's link to gold, the shifting

balance of economic power between the US, Germany and Japan and the retreat of sterling as

an international currency.

  The most effective solutions came from the G10 central bank governors at the Bank for

International Settlements (BIS). It was here that the Gold Pool was formed in 1962 for G10

central banks to intervene in a coordinated way in the London gold market to sustain the

official dollar price of gold, which was the foundation of the Bretton Woods system. In this

sense, during most of the years of its operation the gold-dollar exchange rate regime did not



                                                                                                   16
function as planned at Bretton Woods. After six years the market finally toppled the Gold Pool

in March 1968 and the fixed gold price was limited to transactions between central banks and

through the IMF while the rest of the world operated with a market-determined gold price for

the dollar. (Toniolo 2005, Bordo et al 2019). The BIS also provided the meeting place for central

bank governors to arrange bilateral currency swaps and multilateral lines of credit to help the

retreat of sterling as an international currency without destroying the international monetary

system as a whole.4 Britain and other European states drew on their quotas at the IMF, but

often as a back-stop to the less conditional support arranged quietly in Basel (Toniolo 2005,

Schenk 2010). In terms of scale, the support in the November 1964 for sterling amounted to

the equivalent of $31.7 billion in 1997 which can be compared to the $40 billion bail-out of

Mexico by the IMF, the BIS, the World Bank and Swaps in that year. From the early 1960s, the

Federal Reserve arranged central bank swap facilities in current values and in the early 1970s

these bilateral swap facilities amounted to the equivalent of over 20 per cent of global foreign

exchange reserves and then declined (McCauley and Schenk 2020, Bordo et al 2015).


    The efforts of the G10 finance ministers to reform the international monetary system in

more permanent ways was much less successful than those of central bankers. They delegated

technical matters to deputies but were still unable to resolve the fundamental problems in the

global system (Solomon 1982, James 1996). Their main contribution was to launch the SDR just

as the pegged exchange rate system fell apart and the inflation took hold. The political

compromises in the design of the SDR meant that it was not as useful as had been hoped and



4
  This cooperation extended well beyond Bretton Woods: the final support arrangement for sterling was launched
in February 1977 (Schenk 2010).


                                                                                                            17
did not relieve the system of its reliance on the US dollar with all the challenges and

asymmetries this imposes (Schenk 2010). Had the US been able to commit to a policy of price

stability during the 1960s, the system could probably have survived longer with these

adaptations (Despres, Kindleberger, Salant, 1966, McKinnon 2015, Bordo 2018). This serves to

highlight the `unstable and complicated' nature of the Bretton Woods compromise, which

relied on reconciling the domestic priorities of the US policy-makers with the needs of the

global economy. Recognising the asymmetry in the global system from the time of the

Versailles Treaty in 1919, when the US had power but failed to provide effective leadership,

Keynes had sought to introduce a more balanced structure that avoided relying so heavily on

the US, but his innovative approach was in the end not feasible in the post-war political and

economic climate.



The Third Turning Point: The 1970s Great Inflation and Managed Floating

The collapse of the Bretton Woods System in 1971-1973 was in part brought about by the U.S.

shift to an inflationary stance in the mid-1960s and neglecting the rules as the center country in

the pegged exchange rate system. The end of the gold anchor in March 1968, realignment of

the DM in 1969 and the float of sterling in 1972 all pulled the system apart. The US

administration's effort to force other countries to adjust to US inflation did not convince the

markets and the new, more flexible pegs set under the Smithsonian Agreement in December

1971 quickly unwound. There is an extensive literature on the Great inflation that followed

through the 1970s (Bordo and Orphanides 2013). Candidates for blame include flawed

monetary policy by central banks trying to manipulate the Phillips curve tradeoff to achieve full



                                                                                                  18
employmentor the accommodation of supply shocks, in particular the six-fold increase in the

price of oil in 1973-74.

   The Great Inflation marked the abandonment of the Keynesian consensus in policy-making

that had spread from the 1950s (Clarke 1990). Keynes, himself, had put little emphasis on

exchange rate policy in The General Theory (1939) but his contribution to the design of the

Bretton Woods system concurred with the assumption that stable or pegged exchange rates

was the most desirable framework. This premise had been fundamental to economic orthodoxy

since the 1850s, but it disappeared quickly in the 1970s. The new orthodoxy of capital account

liberalization was quick to catch hold partly because it merely recognized the status quo, in

which the Eurocurrency market had already risen above the regulatory reach of national

monetary authorities (Schenk 2010b).

   The Keynesian world of pegged exchange rates, capital controls and international

cooperation had disappeared by the 1980s. But the consensus during the 1970s can be

overstated. The US moved resolutely to a managed float, albeit with periods of intense

intervention (e.g. 1975-78) (Bordo et al 2015). But Western Europe drew closer to monetary

union (an irrevocably fixed exchange rate system) among European Community members from

1969. Other countries caught in the middle sought middling strategies, such as retaining a peg

to the dollar or, when that became unstable, to a trade-weighted basket of currencies (Schenk

and Singleton 2011).

   During the 1970s, policy makers were unsuccessful in reducing inflation in part from

following doctrine, later deemed to be flawed (Meltzer 2010) i.e.the Phillips curve and the

belief in cost push forces as the key cause of inflation, to be dealt with by wage and price



                                                                                                19
controls). In the UK, policy-makers followed Nicholas Kaldor's (1971) view that expansionary

money financed fiscal policy could raise the growth rate while inflation could be suppressed by

controls. More fundamentally the Great Inflation persisted so long because of the unwillingness

of monetary authorities to follow the tight monetary (and fiscal) policies needed to break the

back of rising inflationary expectations for fear of the recession and unemployment that would

occur. This led to a ratcheting up in inflation and inflationary expectations as the Federal

Reserve (and other central banks) when facing a rise in inflation tightened and then when the

economy soured, loosened too soon.

  On the international scene, high and variable inflation made exchange rates volatile too. This

reflected Milton Friedman's (1953) view that floating exchange rates only work if they are

accompanied by stable domestic macroeconomic policies. Deliberations at the IMF in the early

1970s to restore the par value system as well as exchange market intervention were doomed to

failure in the face of divergent national economic policies. In 1971, the IMF formed the

Committee of 20 to broaden the discussions on reforming the international monetary system

beyond the G10. Its deliberations became bogged down in technical details and internal

dissention during the collapse of the pegged exchange rate system, but its proposals to

reinvigorate the SDR came to partial fruition (Schenk 2017). In 1974 the valuation of the SDR

valuation was changed from a weight in gold to a basket of 16 currencies (reduced to 5 in 1981)

and with a market interest rate attached to make it more appealing. On the other hand, the

C20's proposal to create a substitution account to help the SDR take over more of a role as a

global reserve currency from the dollar was debated throughout the 1970s but ultimately lost




                                                                                                 20
traction in the early 1980s as the dollar exchange rate strengthened (McCauley and Schenk,

2015).

  The upward spiral in inflation and the downward spiral in the dollar exchange rate ended

with the Volcker shock of October 1979. As chair of the Federal Reserve, Paul Volcker followed

a tight monetarist monetary policy by cutting the monetary base and allowing interest rates to

rise to above 20%. This created serious recession between 1979 and 1982 which led to double

digit unemployment rates and prompted the largest sovereign debt crisis in history among

developing economies, but it did succeed in drastically reducing inflation by the mid-1980s

(Schenk 2017). Similar policies were followed by Margaret Thatcher and Alan Walters in the UK

in 1980 and in Canada and other countries. By the end of the 1980s virtually all advanced

countries had returned to low inflation. These actions ushered in the era of monetarism, which

then spread in amended forms from the US to the rest of the world. During this period, the

success of the credibility of low inflation policies was buttressed by a new paradigm for

monetary policy based on central bank independence (CBI), inflation targeting (IT) and floating

exchange rates.

  Despite Friedman's views that the pursuit of stable rule-like domestic policies obviated the

need for international monetary policy coordination, the G7 continued its efforts to coordinate

fiscal and monetary policies to stabilize exchange rates in the Plaza and Louvre Accords in the

1980s. This attested to the enduring attraction of international monetary cooperation to

stabilize exchange rates. In both cases, the effects were less than was hoped. It proved easier to

talk the dollar down in the Plaza Accord (1985) than to convince markets that it was

undervalued in the Louvre Accord in 1987 (Truman 2016, Schenk 2017). The impact of the G7



                                                                                                  21
pressure on Japan to forego its national economic interest in the pursuit of an appreciation of

the Yen against the dollar prompted a financial crisis that left the Japanese economy in the

doldrums for over a decade.

    The emerging market crises of the 1990s confirmed that the international economic system

imagined by Keynes had disappeared. Where countries persisted with pegged exchange rates in

the 1990s (such as in Russia, East and Southeast Asia, South America) a series of damaging

currency crises ensued as the dollar strengthened on the basis of the Fed following domestic

policy priorities, leaving emerging market currencies overvalued. Their efforts to hold on to

pegged rates with open capital markets failed. By the 2000s (after the Euro finally eliminated

most of the national currencies of the EU), floating or managed floating exchange rates had

spread further (Bordo and Schenk 2017).

   It is important to recognize that the crises of the 1990s and 2000s were mainly through the

capital account due to the liberalization of capital markets rather than Keynesian shocks

through the current account. The inexorable financialization of the global economy made the

Keynesian world of capital controls and international cooperation seem a mere historic relic.

Indeed, the IMF began to see its role as having shifted from financing current account shortfalls

to stemming capital account crises. The 2007-08 financial crisis was fundamentally not an

international monetary issue, although there were substantial global imbalances in the 2000s.



Conclusions:

Keynes' The Economic Consequences of the Peace has resonated with policy-makers and the

public ever since its publication. It continues to be implicitly or explicitly referenced in the



                                                                                                   22
efforts to promote international economic cooperation in the aftermath of crises through the

century. The accuracy of its prediction that an irrational promotion of conflicting national

interests would result in economic disaster for the people of Europe has weighed heavily on

policy-makers ever since. The history of the 20th century demonstrates that international

economic cooperation itself is not unusual, but it does tend to be "unstable, complicated,

unreliable and temporary" because tensions inevitably arise between national and international

objectives. While these interests might correspond in the wake of a crisis or emergency (partly

due to the lessons learned from Keynes' critique of the 1919 settlement) domestic political as

well as economic objectives will ultimately dominate despite the construction of elaborate

international institutions to overcome or to mediate these conflicts.

  An exception is the more functional, but limited form of cooperation evident in the Bank for

International Settlements, particularly in the 1960s when central bankers from the G10

deliberately tried to insulate themselves from political influence by focusing on technical rather

than system cooperation and by restricting the pubic transparency of their deliberations. This is

in marked contrast, for example, to the G10 finance ministers' deliberations in the 1960s to

reform the international monetary system, which were prolonged, expensive and ultimately

unproductive.

  A further theme of Keynes' treatise is the peril of making economic policy without reference

to the underlying economic realities. His book therefore sets out detailed data to demonstrate

the potential for Germany to meet its reparations payments. For him, this use of evidence is

important because it shows how divorced from a rational perspective the settlement had

become. The belief in the power of data-driven economic policy-making was subsequently



                                                                                               23
reflected in the extremely complex structures of the League of Nations with its many technical

committees collecting a bewildering amount of data from its member countries to serve as a

rational basis for policy-making.

  Keynes was critical of all four leaders at Versailles and of their advisors. He identified the

vulnerability of political leaders to extremes of public opinion, particularly the emotional desire

for a punitive peace settlement after such a painful wartime experience and the continuation of

the myth that the debts accumulated during wartime could be repaid. But he gave most space

to criticizing US President Wilson and his advisers, claiming that he was under-prepared and

therefore lacked decisiveness. He was even critical of his physical appearance; his description of

Wilson as being more impressive when he was sitting down rather than standing was a

metaphor for the position of the US in the global system ­ seeming important when at rest, but

not very impressive when it came to taking action. His portrayal of Wilson on the one hand as a

sophisticate in terms of his dress but on the other hand the body beneath this façade `lacking in

fine-ness' might also reflect a view of the US as seeming to have become modern and as

sophisticated as Europeans, but not having fully made this transformation from rougher stock.

cBy 2016, once again in the United Kingdom it seemed that Keynes' observation in 1919 that

"Europe is apart and England is not of her flesh and body'" was emerging as a defining ideology.

   In sum, the pendulum has swung from the gold standard and the first era of globalization,

through the bleak thirty years war and its aftermath, back to the Great Moderation and the

second era of globalization. This pattern has resonance to Keynes' views on international

monetary relations. The gold standard was buttressed by a rule that subsumed internal

(domestic) balance to external balance. That helped foster the first era of globalization.



                                                                                                   24
Tensions from this arrangement became manifest in the nationalist backlash in the first half of

the twentieth century and the shift of focus to the dominance of domestic considerations and

autarky (tariffs and capital controls). Keynes' contribution to the post-1945 era was a rules-

based arrangement to reconcile internal with external balance. With extensive international

cooperation and tinkering it worked for two decades but it broke down primarily because of the

failure of the centre country, the U.S., to follow the basic rule of maintaining price stability. In

subsequent decades after the failure of the advanced countries to follow domestic

macroeconomic policy rules to maintain price and exchange rate stability which created the

Great Inflation, the advanced countries have returned to a rules-based system under floating

exchange rates based on CBI, IT and credibility for low inflation. These features characterised

the Great Moderation, but also allowed a complacency about the governance of international

financial markets that sowed the seeds for the next great global crisis in 2007-08. There is

considerable resonance to the pre 1914 gold standard that fostered the first era of

globalization. Then just like the first era, a backlash emerged against the adverse effects of

trade integration and financial globalization following the GFC. It in turn reflected, failures in

financial regulation, monetary policy, and global imbalances. We are back to viewing the

second era of globalisation as fitting Keynes' description of the first era as "Unusual, Unstable,

Complicated and Temporary". Will the world get back on the track of the pre-crisis era or go in

a similar direction Keynes prophesized in 1919 for the post World War I era? The fourth turning

point in the international system is still incomplete, but following from Keynes, history reminds

us that nostalgia for an earlier period needs to be tempered by a realistic understanding of how




                                                                                                       25
"unstable, temporary, complex and unreliable" were the golden ages of international economic

cooperation.




                                                                                          26
References

Albers, Thilo N.H. (2020) `Currency devaluations and beggar-my-neighbour penalties' Economic

History Review 73(1) 233-257.

Arndt, H.W. (1944), Economic Lessons of the Nineteen Thirties, London: Frank Cass.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2015) The courage to Act: a memoir of a Crisis and its aftermath, New York,

W.W. Norton.

Bordo, Michael, Eric Monnet and Alain Naif (2019) "The Gold Pool (1961-1968) and the Fall of

the Bretton Woods System. Lessons for Central Bank Cooperation" Journal of Economic History

December

Bordo, Michael ( 2018) " the Imbalances of the Bretton Woods System 1965 to 1973 : US

Inflation, The Elephant in the Room" NBER Working Paper 25409. December

Bordo, Michael (2017) "The Second Era of Globalization is Not Yet Over: An Historical

Perspective" NBER Working Paper.

Bordo, Michael and Christopher Meissner (2015) "Growing Up to Stability? Financial

Globalization, Financial Development and Crisis" NBER Working Paper 21710 (June)

Bordo, Michael and Pierre Siklos (2015) "Central bank Credibility: An Historical and Quantitative

Evolution." Chapter 3 in Central Banks at a Crossroads: What Can We learn from History? (eds)

Bordo, Michael, Owen Humpage and Anna Schwartz (2015) Strained Relations: US Foreign

Exchange Operations and Monetary Policy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press

Bordo, Michael and John Landon Lane ( 2013) " Does Expansionary Monetary Policy Cause Asset

Price Booms: Some Historical and Empirical Evidence" NBER Working paper 19585.



                                                                                              27
October .

Bordo, Michael and Athanasios Orphanides (2013) The Great Inflation. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press

Bordo, Michael and Harold James (2002) " The Adam Klug Memorial Lecture: Haberler versus

Nurkse. The Case for Floating Exchange Rates as an Alternate to Bretton Woods" in Arie Arnon

and Warren L. Young (eds) The Open Economy Macromodel: Past, Present and Future. Boston:

Kluwer Academic Publishers pp161-182.

Boughton, James M. (2011) Silent Revolution: the International Monetary Fund 1979-1989,

Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Clavin, Patricia (2013) Securing the World Economy: the reinvention of the League of Nations

1920-1946, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Clarke, Peter (1990) The Keynesian Revolution in the Making, 1924-1936, Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

Davidson, Paul (2009), The Keynes Solution: The Path to Global Economic Prosperity.

Emil Despres, Cahrles Kindleberger and William Salant (1966) "The Dollar and World Liquidity:

A Minority View" Economist 5 (February); 526-29.

Eichengreen (2018) The Populist Temptation: Economic Grievances and Political Reaction in the

Modern Era. New York: Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry (2015) Hall of Mirrors: the Great Depression, the Great Recession, and the

Uses - and misuses - of History, Oxford: Oxford University Press.




                                                                                                28
Barry Eichengreen and Marc Flandreau (2009) "The Rise and Fall of the Dollar (Or When Did the

Dollar replace Sterling as the Leading Reserve Currency?" European Review of Economic History

Vol 13, number 3 :377-414

Eichengreen, Barry and Timothy Hatton (1988) "interwar unemployment in International

perspective: An Overview" in Barry Eichengreen and Timothy Hatton (eds) Interwar

Unemployment in International Perspective. NATO ASI Series (Series D: Behavioral and Social

Sciences) Vol43. Springer; Dordrecht.

Eichengreen, Barry (1992). Golden Fetters. New York: Oxford University Press.

Fogleman, Aaron S. (1998) `From slaves, convicts and servants to free passengers: the

transformation of immigration in the era of the American revolution' Journal of American

History, 85(1), pp. 43-78.

Friedman, Milton (1953) "The Case for Floating Exchange rates `in Milton Friedman. Essays in

Positive Economics. Chicago; University of Chicago Press pp 461-494.

Gardner, Richard N. (1956) Sterling-Dollar Diplomacy, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Giovannini, Alberto (1993) "Bretton Woods and its Precursors: Rules versus discretion in the

History of international monetary Regimes' in Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds) A

Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform.

Chicago; University of Chicago Press.

Goldberg, Linda, Craig Kennedy and Jason Miu (2011), `Central bank dollar swap lines and

overseas dollar funding costs' Economic Policy Review, May, pp. 3-20.




                                                                                               29
Goodhart, Charles (2011) The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: A History of the Early

Years. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Horsefield, J. Keith (1969) The international Monetary Fund 1945-1965: twenty years of

international monetary cooperation, Washington, International Monetary Fund.

International Monetary Fund (2012) The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows ­ an

Institutional View, November 14. https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf

(accessed 9 October 2019).

Irwin, Douglas (2012) Trade Policy Disasters: Lessons from the 1930s. Cambridge : MIT Press

James, Harold (1996) International Monetary Cooperation since Bretton Woods, Washington:

International Monetary Fund.

James, Harold (2001) The End of Globalization: Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge:

Harvard University Press

Kaldor, Nicholas (1971) "Conflicts in National Economic Objectives" Economic Journal Vol 81

Number 321 (March): 1-16.

Keynes, John Maynard 1944) Proposals for an International Clearing Union

John Maynard Keynes (1933) " National Self Sufficiency" Dublin: Educational company of

Ireland

Keynes, John Maynard (1930), A Treatise on Money. London: MacMillan

Keynes, John Maynard (1925) The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill. London MacMillan

Keynes, John Maynard (1919) The Economic Consequences of the Peace. London MacMillan




                                                                                              30
Kindleberger, Charles (1975) The World in Depression 1929-1939. Berkeley: University of

California Press

McCauley, Robert N. and Schenk, Catherine R. (2020) `Central Bank Swaps Then and Now:

swaps and dollar liquidity in the 1960s' BIS Working Paper, 851.

McCauley, Robert N. and Schenk, Catherine R. (2015) `Reforming the International Monetary

System in the 1970s and 2000s: would an SDR substitution account have worked?',

International Finance, 18(2), 2015, pp. 187-206.

McCauley, Robert N. (2016) `Does the Dollar Confer an Exorbitant Privilege?' Journal of

International Money and Finance 57, pp 1-14.

McKinnon, Ronald (2015) The Unloved Dollar Standard. New York: Oxford University press

Meltzer, Allan (2010), A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 2. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press

Milward, Alan (1999) The European Rescue of the Nation State Routledge. Berkeley: University

of California Press

Nurkse, Ragnar (1944) International Currency Experience. League of Nations

Moure, Kenneth (1996) `Undervaluing the Franc Poincare', Economic History Review, 49(1).

Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash Qureshi and

Dennis Reinhardt (2010) Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls, IMF Staff Position Note, February

19. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/spn/2010/spn1004.pdf (accessed 9 October 2019)

Pauly, Louis W. (1996) `The League of Nations and the Foreshadowing of the International

Monetary Fund' Essays in International Finance, 201, December.




                                                                                             31
Pressnell, L.S. (1987) External Economic Policy Since the War Vol. 1: the Post-War Financial

Settlement, London: HMSO.

Roberts, Richard (2013), Saving the City: The Great Financial Crisis of 1914. Oxford: Oxford

University Press

Rockoff, Hugh (1984) "Some Evidence on the Real Price of Gold, Its Costs of Production and

Commodity Prices "in A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard" (eds) Michael D Bordo

and Anna J Schwartz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Rueff, Jacques (1967) "Increase the Price of Gold" in Lawrence H. Officer and Thomas D. Willett

(eds) The International Monetary System: problems and Proposals. (ed), Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

Prentice Hall.

Schenk, Catherine R. (2019) , `International Monetary Cooperation since the Global Financial

Crisis' in C.R. Schenk and M. Klein, IMF's Work on Encouraging International Policy Cooperation,

International Monetary Fund, BP/19-01/06.

Schenk, Catherine R. (2017) `Coordination failures during and after Bretton Woods', in M.

Qureshi, A. Ghosh ed., From Great Depression to Great Recession: The Elusive Quest for

International Policy Cooperation, Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Schenk, Catherine R. (2014) `Summer in the City: banking scandals of 1974 and the

development of international banking supervision', English Historical Review, 2014, pp. 1129-

1156.




                                                                                                32
Schenk, Catherine R. and John Singleton (2011) " Basket Pegs and Exchange Rate Regime

Change: Australia and New Zealand in the mid-1970s" Australian Economic History Review

51(2) pp 120-149.

Schenk, Catherine R. (2010) The Decline of Sterling: Managing the Retreat of An International

Currency 1945-92. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Skidlesky, Robert (2009) Keynes: The Return of the Master. London: Penguin Press.

Silber, William (2007) When Washington Shut Down Wall Street: The Great Financial Crisis of

1914 and the Origins of America's Monetary Supremacy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Singleton, J. (2011) Central Banking in the Twentieth Century, Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press.

Solomon, Robert (1982) The International Monetary System 1945-1981, New York: Harper and

Row.

Steil, Benn (2013) The Battle of Bretton Woods: John Maynard Keynes, Harry Dexter White, and

the Making of a New World Order, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Taylor, John B (2007) " Housing and Monetary Policy" Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of

Kansas City , Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium: Housing, Housing Finance, and

Monetary Policy. August.

Peter Temin (1989) Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Benn Steil (2018) The Marshall Plan: Dawn of the Cold War. New York: Simon and Schuster

Toniolo, Gianni (2005) Central Bank Cooperation at the Bank for International Settlements,

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                                                                                33
Triffin, Robert (1960) Gold and the Dollar Crisis. New Haven: Yale University Press

Edward Truman (2009)

Wheatley, Jonathan and Peter Garnham (2010) `Brazil in `currency war' alert', Financial Times,

September.




                                                                                             34
