                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TRADE-POLICY DYNAMICS:
                   EVIDENCE FROM 60 YEARS OF U.S.-CHINA TRADE

                                     George A. Alessandria
                                        Shafaat Y. Khan
                                      Armen Khederlarian
                                          Kim J. Ruhl
                                      Joseph B. Steinberg

                                       Working Paper 29122
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29122


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2021




We thank audiences at the virtual international trade and macro seminar, Armenian Economic
Association, SAET meetings, SED, and University of Tokyo for helpful comments. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do
not necessarily represent views of the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, nor those of
the Executive Directors of the World Bank, nor of the governments they represent, nor of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by George A. Alessandria, Shafaat Y. Khan, Armen Khederlarian, Kim J. Ruhl, and
Joseph B. Steinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Trade-Policy Dynamics: Evidence from 60 Years of U.S.-China Trade
George A. Alessandria, Shafaat Y. Khan, Armen Khederlarian, Kim J. Ruhl, and Joseph B.
Steinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 29122
August 2021
JEL No. F1,F14,F62

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the growth of Chinese imports into the United States from autarky during 1950-1970 to
about 15 percent of overall imports in 2008, taking advantage of the rich heterogeneity in trade
policy and trade growth across products during this period. Central to our analysis is an
accounting for the dynamics of trade, trade policy, and trade-policy expectations. We isolate the
lagged effects of past reforms and the current effects of uncertainty about future reforms. We
build a multi-industry, heterogeneous-firm model with a dynamic export participation decision to
estimate a path of trade-policy expectations. We find that being granted Normal Trade Relations
(NTR) status in 1980 was largely a surprise and that, in the early stages, this reform had a high
probability of being reversed. The likelihood of reversal dropped considerably during the mid
1980s, and, despite China's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, changed
little throughout the late 1990s and early 2000s. Thus, although uncertainty depressed trade
substantially following the 1980 liberalization, much of the trade growth that followed China's
WTO accession was a delayed response to previous reforms rather than a response to declining
uncertainty.

George A. Alessandria                           Kim J. Ruhl
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Rochester                         University of Wisconsin-Madison
Harkness 204                                    7444 Social Science Building
Rochester, NY 14627                             1180 Observatory Drive
and NBER                                        Madison, WI 53706
george.alessandria@rochester.edu                and NBER
                                                ruhl2@wisc.edu
Shafaat Y. Khan
World Bank EAP Research Center                  Joseph B. Steinberg
Kuala Lumpur                                    University of Toronto
Malaysia                                        Department of Economics
skhan37@worldbank.org                           150 St George Street
                                                Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7
Armen Khederlarian                              Canada
238 Harkness Hall                               joseph.steinberg@utoronto.ca
University of Rochester
ROCHESTER, NY 14627
United States
akheder2@ur.rochester.edu
1       Introduction
International trade depends on past, present, and future trade policy. An extensive litera-
ture studies the contemporaneous relationship between trade flows and trade policy, often
summarized by a trade elasticity, while largely ignoring the effects of past or potential fu-
ture trade policy.1 One recent strand of literature has focused on the transition from past
reforms, while another has focused on the effect of uncertainty about future policy while
assuming that the effects of past reforms have run their course. In this paper, we reconsider
the interplay between the dynamics of trade policy and trade by studying the growth of
China's exports to the United States from 1971 to 2008, utilizing a new methodology that
disentangles the effects of previous policy from the effects of uncertainty over future policy.
Our approach simultaneously yields estimates of the dynamics of trade-policy expectations
and the dynamics of the trade elasticity.
    China's integration into the world trading system, and the U.S. economy in particular,
is ideally suited to the study of trade-policy dynamics. It started from autarky, as the
United States maintained a complete embargo on Chinese imports from 1950 until 1971.
From this initial no-trade steady state, two potentially unanticipated trade liberalizations
occurred in 1971 and 1980. The first granted Non-Normalized Trade Relations (NNTR)
status to China, allowing Chinese exporters to enter the U.S. market for the first time, albeit
at relatively high tariff rates. The second granted Normal Trade Relations (NTR) status,
allowing these exporters to trade at substantially lower Most-Favored-Nation (MFN) tariffs.
These two liberalizations were large, minimizing measurement concerns, and heterogeneous
across sectors, providing the cross-industry variation that is key to our identification of the
trade response. Moreover, beyond a limited set of goods (primarily textiles), the changes in
tariffs were exogenous, having been determined outside of U.S.-China trade relations; NNTR
tariffs were applied to other communist countries and MFN tariffs are applied to all WTO
members. The duration of these liberalizations was also uncertain, because the program
to transition communist countries from NNTR to NTR rates was new in the mid-1970s
    1
      The relationship between trade and trade policy is often summarized by the trade elasticity. It is
generally measured in the cross section and identified by the effect of cross-country differences in current
tariffs on cross-country differences in trade. Hillberry and Hummels (2013) provide an overview of the
empirical estimates of trade elasticities with a limited discussion of the dynamics of the trade elasticity.

                                                     1
and required the United States to renew China's NTR status annually. When China joined
the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, the United States eliminated this renewal
process, reducing uncertainty about U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods going forward.2 The
renewal process applied to all products, although the effect of non-renewal was heterogeneous
across industries, owing to differences in the gap between NNTR and NTR tariffs. In total,
these reforms propelled China from the United States' smallest trading partner to its largest
(see Figure 1).
   The key challenge in assessing the sources of China's trade integration is disentangling the
effects of past policy and uncertainty about future policy. The low initial trade volumes, the
scale of the reforms, and the uncertainty about the persistence of the reforms likely created
a long transition that may have lasted the entire sample period. These transition dynamics
make determining the impact of expected future trade policy difficult, including during the
well-studied period leading up to China's accession to the WTO. The effects of future trade
policy can only be measured by viewing trade growth through the lens of a model in which
firms make intertemporal decisions about whether to start or stop exporting. The observed
path of tariffs alone provides very little information about agents' expectations about trade
policy during this transition.
   We find the transition from the initial liberalizations was long lived and that uncertainty
about their duration played an important role in shaping China's export growth. However,
trade-policy uncertainty (TPU) was primarily important in the years following the 1980
liberalization and was only of minor importance in the years surrounding WTO accession. We
estimate that the probability of a reversal of the 1980 liberalization was an order of magnitude
larger in the 1980s than in the 1990s. Our results suggest much of the trade growth that
occurred following WTO accession was a delayed response to the previous liberalizations.
   We study the path of China-U.S. trade integration using U.S. import data from 1974
to 2008. We show that initial conditions, measured by initial trade flows or trade policies,
exert a long-lasting effect on trade flows. One way of summarizing the effect of these initial
conditions is to estimate a short- and long-run trade elasticity and speed of adjustment using
   2
     The imposition of tariffs on Chinese imports to the United States in January 2018--and those that
followed--suggests the uncertainty was not eliminated. Exactly how much uncertainty about U.S. policy
decreased after China joined the WTO is a primary focus of this paper.

                                                  2
an error-correction model. We find that, generally, trade adjusts slowly to changes in tariffs,
but China's response to U.S. trade policy is particularly slow compared with the average
exporter to the United States. Our calibrated model attributes this gradualness, in part,
to the very low initial trade volumes, relatively high trade elasticities when moving from
near autarky, and relatively high initial uncertainty about future policy. China's integration
is not unusually slow or particularly large relative to other communist/former communist
countries that started near autarky or large liberalizations such as the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
   We also reconsider the evidence that WTO access reduced tariff risk and increased trade.
Following Handley and Lim~
                         ao (2017) and Pierce and Schott (2016), we zero in on goods in
which there was a large gap between MFN tariffs and the higher NNTR tariffs that would
apply if NTR status was revoked, which we refer to as the NNTR gap. Theory predicts
that a high likelihood of losing NTR status would depress imports of these "high-gap" goods
relative to other goods, and that a reduction in this likelihood would cause relatively fast
growth in imports of high-gap goods. Like these studies, we find that imports of high-gap
goods grew faster than imports of low-gap goods between the early 1990s and late 2000s,
suggesting that WTO accession reduced the probability of losing NTR status. We extend
this analysis to start in 1974, when China had just begun to export to the United States, and
find that imports of high-gap goods were depressed substantially more during the 1970s and
1980s than during the 1990s. In fact, we find that the difference in trade between high-gap
and low-gap goods was largest before the 1980 liberalization, when losing NTR status was
not at risk because this status had not yet been attained. During this period, the NNTR
gap measures current applied tariffs--and, of course, the size of the initial move away from
autarky--rather than potential tariff increases that could materialize in the future. Thus,
this empirical approach cannot disentangle the role of past or present tariffs from future
tariffs. We use these estimates, however, to discipline our quantitative model.
   We build a model of China and the United States to study how the timing of the reforms
and expectations about future trade policy shaped the transition path from the complete
embargo before 1971 to the period after WTO accession. The model is a multi-industry
version of the heterogeneous-firm model with new exporter dynamics in Alessandria et al.


                                              3
(2021a). Industries in the model correspond directly to the goods used in our empirical
analysis: the 5-digit Standard Industrial Classification of Trade (SITC), revision 2. Firms in
each industry differ in terms of productivity, as well as variable export costs which they reduce
gradually through a risky investment.3 The export entry decision and gradual reduction in
export costs allows for the slow adjustment of individual and aggregate trade volumes to a
change in tariffs. Thus, past policy can have effects long after its implementation.
   Firms make decisions to start and stop exporting incorporating expectations about id-
iosyncratic shocks as well as aggregate shocks to trade policy. Non-exporters decide whether
to enter the export market and exporters decide whether to continue exporting. Uncertainty
about future tariffs, especially if tariffs are expected to rise, can stifle export entry and
encourage exit, lowering current aggregate trade volumes. The model features two trade-
policy regimes, NNTR and MFN, with tariffs taken directly from the data. The probability
of switching between regimes varies over time but is common across industries. The realized
path of trade policy is identical to the historical experience: The model begins in 1971 in the
NNTR regime and then switches to the MFN regime in 1980. We capture the initial lifting
of the embargo by assuming that there are zero exporting firms in 1970.
   The model is calibrated to match the historical dynamics of U.S. imports from China
across industries as well as salient facts about the exporter life cycle. Most importantly,
we calibrate the probabilities of switching between trade policy regimes so that the model
matches our estimated time path of the annual elasticity of trade to the NNTR gap. This
allows us to recover a forward-looking measure of the expected path of U.S.-China trade
policy at each moment in time. Our identification works as follows. A higher likelihood
of reverting from MFN tariffs to NNTR tariffs raises the expected present value of future
tariffs, which lowers the expected return to exporting and thus reduces exporter entry and
survival. This effect is stronger for high-gap industries than low-gap industries, reducing
imports in the former relative to the latter.
   We find the annual probability of China gaining access to MFN tariff rates during the
1970s was about 25 percent. Once China gained this access in 1980, the probability of losing

   3
   Drozd and Nosal (2012), Fitzgerald et al. (2016), Piveteau (2021), and Steinberg (2021) develop similar
models of slow firm-level adjustment to market entry through the accumulation of customers.

                                                    4
it was initially high, peaking at 81 percent in 1981. This observation reflects our empirical
finding that trade in high-gap goods stagnated relative to trade in other goods for several
years after the 1980 reform. Starting in 1986, when China applied to join the international
trade arrangement that would become the WTO, this probability began to fall rapidly as
trade growth in high-gap industries began to accelerate. By the mid to late 1990s, this
probability was only about 5­10 percent, on par with the estimates of Alessandria et al.
(2019) but lower than the estimates by Handley and Lim~
                                                      ao (2017). Joining the WTO had
a minor effect on the probability of losing access to MFN tariff rates, which is reflected in
the trade data: only 10­15 percent of the overall growth in imports of products with a high
tariff gap occurred in the 10-year window around WTO accession (1997­2007).
   Our model allows us to ask the counterfactual question: What would the transition
dynamics of U.S. imports from China have looked like if the path of trade policy had been
certain, rather than uncertain? In this scenario, with perfect foresight over trade policy,
aggregate trade grows faster and the elasticity of trade to the NNTR gap shrinks more quickly
than in the benchmark model with uncertainty (and in the data). By 1985, in the model
without uncertainty, the transition is about 90 percent complete, whereas in the benchmark
model, only about one third of the trade growth has been achieved. The faster trade growth
is particularly strong in high-gap industries and leads to a counterfactual elasticity of trade
to the NNTR gap that is less than one third of the estimated value at the start of the 1980
liberalization. A key feature of the model without uncertainty is the counterfactually high
trade growth in high-gap industries in anticipation of the 1980 reform. By contrast, in the
data, the coefficient on the gap grows larger during the late 1970s, consistent with a low
probability of moving from NNTR to NTR during this period and a high initial probability
of returning to NNTR from MFN in the early 1980s.
   Our calibrated model matches the heterogeneous paths of integration across Chinese
industries into the U.S. market. We use the model to recover the long-run trade elasticity
from moving between steady states with different tariffs. We find that this elasticity ranges
between 15 and 18 and that it increases in the initial tariff rate. These estimates are larger
than those reported in the literature4 and more than twice the elasticity of 6.5 that we

   4
       Head and Ries (2001) estimate elasticities between 7.9 and 11.4 for the Canadian-U.S. FTA. Romalis

                                                     5
estimate from cross-sectional data. The pooled cross section mixes the short-run and long-run
responses to tariffs and also contains very little tariff variation, because most of the countries
besides China in our sample face the same MFN rates. Our error-correction specification
distinguishes between the short run and long run and mitigates some of this limited variation.
It yields long-run elasticities of 8­10, which are larger than the cross-sectional estimates but
still below those implied by the model. The model is calibrated to reproduce the error-
correction estimates, so the difference between these estimates and the model's true long-run
elasticity implies uncertainty over trade policy makes recovering the model's true elasticity
difficult.
    This paper is related to the literature that studies the credibility of trade reforms. Early
work focuses on the aggregate effects of temporary reforms (Calvo, 1987) or the credibility
of reforms (Staiger and Tabellini, 1987; McLaren, 1997). More recent work uses firm-level
and industry-level data to identify the effects of trade-policy uncertainty. This literature
largely focuses on U.S. trade policy toward China. Handley and Lim~
                                                                  ao (2017) and Pierce
and Schott (2016) leverage the well-defined nature of the uncertainty--the annual vote to
retain China's NTR status and the gap between the NTR tariffs and the fallback NNTR
tariff--to measure the growth in trade that resulted from the elimination of uncertainty over
future tariffs. Unlike these papers, we consider how these tariff gaps, which also capture the
1980 liberalization, influence trade dynamics in the lead-up to China receiving Permanent
Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) status upon joining the WTO. Our paper also relates to
several papers that use models to estimate the path of trade policy.5 Handley and Lim~
                                                                                     ao
(2017) also use a dynamic exporting model and the evidence on a differential change in trade
to estimate the probability of NNTR reversal. Unlike their work, we estimate a time-varying
probability of U.S.-China tariffs over a longer interval. Complementary to our approach,
Alessandria et al. (2019) estimate a time-varying probability of a change in U.S. trade policy
from 1990 to 2005, but use within-year variation in trade flows and trade-policy risk.

(2007) estimates a median trade elasticity from NAFTA of 6.9. Simonovska and Waugh (2014) estimate a
trade elasticity of close to 4. Boehm et al. (2020) estimate a trade elasticity that ranges from 0.75 in the
short run to about 2 in the long run.
    5
      Alessandria et al. (2017) estimate the expected path of inward and outward trade policy for China from
macroeconomic time series. Ruhl (2011) estimates the probability of ending the ban on Canadian beef after
an outbreak of "mad cow disease."

                                                     6
    In section 2, we provide some background on U.S.-China trade policy and trade integra-
tion. In section 3, we estimate the impact of trade policy on trade using both cross-sectional
and panel methods. In section 4, we lay out the model, discuss its calibration, and present
our model-implied probabilities of tariff increases. Section 5 concludes.


2       Background on Integration
Much of the focus on Chinese access to U.S. markets centers on the period leading up to
China joining the WTO in December of 2001. A much larger trade liberalization, however,
took place 30 years earlier. The United States embargoed trade with China from 1949 to
1971, and from 1971 to 1979, Chinese imports to the United States were subject to highly
restrictive Non-Nornalized Trade Relations (NNTR) tariff rates (also known as "Column
Two" rates in the U.S. Harmonized Tariff Schedule). In July 1979, diplomatic relations were
restored, and China was granted access to U.S. markets at MFN rates in February 1980.
This access was conditional on satisfying conditions of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to
the Trade Act of 1974 and was part of a relatively new program to provide access to U.S.
markets to non-market (communist) economies.6 Many communist or formerly communist
countries accessed the U.S. market this way, although none achieved China's levels of import
penetration.
    The granting of MFN status in 1980, under President Jimmy Carter, was subject to
annual renewal each July by the U.S. president starting in 1981.7 From 1990 onward, under
Title IV, adopted as part of the Customs and Trade Act of 1990, Congress was given 60
days from the date of the president's renewal to disapprove it, which would cause tariffs on
Chinese goods to revert to the Column Two rates. In October 2000, Congress granted China
Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) upon China's agreement to join the WTO. In
December 2001, China officially entered the WTO, eliminating the annual renewal of NTR




    6
      China was the third country to receive a waiver, following Romania in 1975 and Hungary in 1978. After
China, no country gained access for another 10 years, and in the meantime, Romania lost access from 1988
to 1991.
    7
      The change in administration in 1981 likely increased uncertainty, as President Ronald Reagan adopted
more protectionist policies and was more openly anti-communist.

                                                    7
status.8 From 1990 to 2000, Congress only voted once against renewing China's NTR status.9
    These policy changes effectively took tariffs on Chinese imports from infinity (1949­1970)
to NNTR rates (1971­1979) and finally to MFN rates (1980­2017). Figure 2 plots the path
of the distribution of tariffs, summarized by the median tariff and the interquartile range,
from 1974 to 2008. The median tariff fell from 30 percent to about 8 percent. Subsequent
declines in tariffs were related to phaseouts from successive rounds of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT; the Tokyo round in 1980­1986 and the Uruguay round in 1994­
1999). To capture a broader view, including the embargo, and to control for these multilateral
GATT reforms, we plot China's inverse tariff rate in Figure 4. The inverse tariff rate is the
inverse of the Chinese tariff, on good g at time t, normalized by the NTR rate,

                                          INV      1 + N T R,gt
                                          gt  =                 ,                                      (1)
                                                    1 + CH,gt

which ranges from zero, when Chinese goods were embargoed, to one, when China accessed
U.S. markets at MFN rates. In the figure, we plot the median good and the interquartile
range. It shows only two large changes in tariffs: they occur in 1971 and 1980. In 1971, the
inverse tariff rate jumps from zero to 80 percent, and in 1980, it jumps to one, eliminating
the tariff gap. Unlike the GATT rounds, which are characterized by agreed-upon tariff
phaseouts, these tariff cuts were immediate. This is an advantage of investigating the Chinese
experience: phaseouts make disentangling the expectations of future tariffs from current
tariffs virtually impossible. The path of U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods was governed by a
very different process than the path of tariffs observed in other liberalizations, such as WTO
rounds, or from free trade agreements.
    Figure 1 provides some perspective on the importance of trade by China with the United
States. The left panel shows China exports lagged in its share of world GDP through the
mid 1980s, as China was initially quite closed. Comparing China's share of global non-U.S.
exports with China's share of U.S. imports in the right panel, we see the United States was
relatively closed to China until the mid to late 1980s. The right panel of Figure 1 plots
   8
      Additionally, access to the WTO brought China into the Agreement on Textile and Clothing that was
scheduled to phase out the quota system in four steps ending in 2005.
    9
      In 1992, the non-renewal resolution passed in the House and Senate but was vetoed by President George
H. W. Bush.

                                                    8
U.S. imports from China as a share of overall U.S. imports and shows the post-1980 period
featured sustained growth in U.S. imports from China, although at a slowing rate.
     The entry of new firms into exporting--growth on the extensive margin --is an important
way that aggregate trade grows in response to a tariff cut (Kehoe and Ruhl, 2013; Alessandria
et al., 2020), and this is an important mechanism in our quantitative model. In Figure 3, we
plot a measure of the extensive margin for exports from China to the United States. The
fraction of SITC goods that China exports to the United States grows gradually from about
0.2 in 1974 to 0.6 in 2008.10 In the median NTR country, this measure is flat.
     The prolonged growth of Chinese exports could be due to the gradual response of trade
to the very large past reforms, or it could be due to the expectations of future tariff reversals
becoming less likely. We explore these two possibilities, next, taking advantage of the rich
heterogeneity in trade policy in this period.


3        Empirical Evidence
This section documents two main facts about China's NTR tariff liberalization. First,
China's trade response was especially gradual relative to the average trade response to tariff
changes. Second, the level of tariffs prior to the NTR liberalization has a persistent role
in explaining the variation across goods in the volume of U.S. imports from China. Conse-
quently, the delayed effect of the NTR liberalization is instrumental in accounting for the
findings of the TPU literature regarding the impact of China's PNTR status grant in 2000
(Pierce and Schott, 2016; Handley and Lim~
                                         ao, 2017).

3.1      Data
We work with annual U.S. imports from 1974 to 2008, aggregated at the 5-digit level of the
Standard International Trade Classification (SITC), revision 2.11 We refer to this level of
aggregation as a good and denote it by g . Our data include applied duties, cost-insurance-
and-freight (CIF) charges, and the free-on-board (FOB) value of imports. The log FOB
value of imports is denoted by vgjt , where j indexes the exporting country and t indexes
    10
      Ideally, we would like to measure the number of new firm-goods being traded, but we lack data on
firm-level trade in China going back to the 1970s.
   11
      The data are from Feenstra (1996). Although more disaggregated import data are available, building a
consistent concordance is difficult and noisy.

                                                    9
time. Tariffs on imports, gjt , are calculated as the applied duties divided by the FOB
import value.
    The ad-valorem-equivalent NNTR and NTR statutory rates are obtained from Feenstra
et al. (2002) at the 8-digit level of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HS). We assign HS-8
products to 5-digit SITC rev. 2 goods using the concordance from United Nations Trade
Statistics (2017), and we define the SITC-level tariff as the median tariff within the good.
The NNTR gap is the difference between the NNTR rate and NTR rate, which can vary
over time as NTR rates change. Following Pierce and Schott (2016), we use the NNTR gap
in 1999 as our measure of "the" NTR gap.12,13
    Our baseline sample of exporters to the United States includes China and all the other
countries that had normal trade relations with the United States throughout the entire sam-
ple period and were not a part of preferential trade agreements (PTA) with the United States.
These conditions exclude Canada and Mexico, as well as the other communist countries.14
A key feature of our baseline sample is that after 1980, all sources should face the same NTR
rates with few exceptions.15 We also exclude all of the goods that include products that
were subject to quota removals under the Multi Fiber Arrangement (MFA), as documented
in Bambrilla et al. (2010). Table 1 reports the distribution of tariff rates by 1-digit SITC
industries by NNTR rates and applied rates. The mean NNTR rate is 28 with a standard
deviation of 18. The average applied rates are five in 1979 and two in 2001. For China, the
average applied rate is considerably higher than other countries in 1979 (20 versus five), but
quite similar to other countries by 2001 (three versus two). Thus, tariffs generally vary little
across countries receiving NTR rates, and most of the variation in tariffs in our analysis is
between NNTR and NTR rates in the early part of the sample.16


  12
      All of our results are robust to using the mean HS-8 NNTR gap, as well as a time-varying NNTR gap.
  13
      The simple correlation between the NNTR gap and the tariffs imposed on China in 2018 and 2019 at
HS-8 level is -0.06. This finding suggests the NNTR gap ceased to be an effective measure of trade-policy
risk and justifies our baseline sample-period end.
   14
      The list of countries excluded because they held NNTR status at some point in the sample period are
Albania, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Hungary, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Romania, Slovakia, Vietnam, and the 15 countries that formed the Soviet Union.
   15
      Applied tariffs would differ owing to aggregation, specific tariffs, temporary commercial policy, or mea-
surement error.
   16
      The lack of tariff variation among the NTR countries creates some concerns about the elasticities being
estimated across countries receiving NTR rates for the whole sample. We return to this in section 4.5.

                                                      10
3.2    Gradual Adjustment to Trade Liberalizations
The 1980 liberalization is ideal for studying the dynamic adjustment to trade policy. The
liberalization occurred in a single step, and China's eventual WTO accession was still 20
years away--and likely considered a very low-probability event. These conditions largely
eliminate the confounding effects of phased-in liberalizations and anticipation effects on the
observed export dynamics. Although other changes occurred in China during our period
of study, the gradual growth in trade volumes that we observe likely reflects the gradual
adjustment to the 1980 liberalization.
   A convenient way to characterize the adjustment process is through short-run and long-
run elasticities (Ruhl, 2008). We estimate short-run and long-run import elasticities using
two variations of the error-correction method (ECM) (Johnson and Oksanen, 1977; Johnson
et al., 1992; Gallaway et al., 2003). The first is the restricted version of the ECM, also known
as the partial-adjustment model. We estimate

        SR
  vjgt =China 1{j = China}jgt +  SR 1{j = China}jgt
         + China 1{j = China}vjg,t-1 + 1{j = China}vjg,t-1 + jt + jg + gt + ujgt ,          (2)


where  SR is the short-run (annual) elasticity, and the long-run elasticity is  LR =  SR /(1 -
). The lagged import term yields the speed-of-adjustment coefficient, 1/(1 - ). We also
include country-year (jt ) fixed effects to capture aggregate shocks to exporting countries
and good-year fixed effects (gt ) to capture good-level U.S. demand shocks. By including
country-good fixed effects (jg ), estimates should be viewed as exports of jg relative to 2008.
   The unrestricted version of the ECM is

                    SR
              vjgt =China 1{j = China}jgt +  SR 1{j = China}jgt
                       + 2,China 1{j = China}jg,t-1 + 2 1{j = China}jg,t-1

                       + 1,China 1{j = China}vjg,t-1 + 1 1{j = China}vjg,t-1

                       + jt + jg + gt + ujgt .                                              (3)




                                              11
The addition of the lagged tariff allows for a more flexible short- to long-run adjustment.
Note the dependent variable is the 1-year log difference and the short-run elasticity,  SR , is
the coefficient on the 1-year log difference in tariffs. The long-run elasticity is now  LR =
-2 /1 .17 We maintain the same set of fixed effects as in equation (2).
    In Table 2, we report the results of estimating equations (2) and (3) for U.S. imports from
China and the other NTR countries. To obtain separate estimates, we interact each of the
terms on the left-hand side of the estimating equations with an indicator variable for China.
In column 1, we report the cross-sectional estimates, that is, estimates from equation (2)
without the lagged import term. Not surprisingly, given China's large export growth, its
average trade elasticity is 2.5 times larger than the average of the NTR countries.18
    Column 2 reports the results of the restricted ECM. China's long-run elasticity is 7.8,
almost three times larger than its short-run elasticity of 2.8. For the NTR countries, the
short-run elasticity is 1.9 and the long-run elasticity is 4.0, a ratio of about two. Column
3 reports the estimates of the unrestricted ECM. There are two key takeaways. First,
China's larger trade elasticity reported in column 1 is almost entirely driven by the long-
run adjustment, because the annual trade elasticity is close to that of the NTR countries.
Second, China's ratio of the long-run to short-run elasticity (3.5) is more than twice as large
as that of the NTR countries (1.7).
    Table 3 shows that our finding that trade flows adjust relatively slowly to changes in trade
policy is robust to a range of alternative specifications. Columns 2 and 3 include shipping
costs (CIF charges) and dummies for entry and exit of goods as additional controls. Columns
4 and 5 show our results are robust to including all countries and MFA goods in our sample.
Column 6 reports results from a specification in which we only include goods that had non-
zero U.S. imports from China at some point in the period 1974­1979. Finally, columns 7
and 8 illustrate that China's speed of adjustment to the NTR liberalization is comparable to
that of Canada's and Mexico's in response to NAFTA, when tariffs were gradually eliminated

  17
      Note one can transform equation (3) into levels; then, the long-run elasticity becomes (2 - SR )/(1-1 ).
By setting 2 = 0, this expression is the same as the long-run elasticity under the restricted ECM.
   18
      When we restrict the sample of countries to Canada, Mexico, and the ex-communist countries, China's
elasticity is only 1.7 times larger than the other-country average. These countries experienced large heteroge-
neous liberalizations compared with the NTR countries in the benchmark sample, suggesting the magnitude
of tariff changes plays an important role.

                                                      12
over periods of up to 15 years. Although the delayed effect of NAFTA's tariff reductions are
not necessarily due to the phaseout of tariffs (Besedes et al., 2020), these similarities suggest
the adjustment to major trade liberalizations can take a long time.

3.3     The Delayed Effect of China's NTR Liberalization
We first document that the NNTR gap, commonly used in the TPU literature to capture
the risk of a reversal of China's NTR status, was strongly related to the applied duties on
China's exports to the United States before 1980. We then revisit the effect of the NNTR
gap on China's exports to the United States after its PNTR access, using our longer sample
period. Third, we show a strong trend in the effect, and it can be traced back to the 1980
NTR liberalization.

3.3.1   Revisiting the Effect of the PNTR Access

We revisit the results in Pierce and Schott (2016), changing only the sample period and the
aggregation level of trade flows. Pierce and Schott (2016) focus on HS-8 product trade flows
between 1992 and 2007. We use 5-digit SITC goods between 1974 and 2008 to estimate


            vjgt = 1{t < 2000}1{j = China}Xg + jgt + jt + jg + gt + ujgt ,                   (4)


where Xg is the NNTR gap for good g . This equation is the same as (2), except it lacks
lagged imports and includes the interaction between the China dummy and the pre-PNTR
dummy. Note  < 0 indicates China's exports of high NNTR-gap goods were either relatively
high in the post-PNTR period or relatively low in the pre-PNTR period. Although this
specification is not able to distinguish between the two cases, the common interpretation in
the TPU literature is the former.
   Table 4 reports the results. Column 1 uses the same sample period as in Pierce and
Schott (2016) but a coarser level of aggregation. The coefficient of interest,  , measures
the effect of the NNTR gap on a good's export growth after China's PNTR accession. We
find that  = -0.9, compared with -0.5 in Pierce and Schott (2016). Column 2 reports
the result for our full sample period. We find that  = -2.5, a 2.5 times increase from the
estimate obtained using the shorter sample period. Column 3 reports our results when we


                                               13
use our baseline sample of countries and the longer sample period. In this case,  increases
further to -3.3.
    Column 4 excludes applied tariffs from equation (4), because we exclude those from
our baseline estimation of the annual effect in the next subsection. The coefficient on the
pre-PNTR dummy is now  = -3.6, which is only a small increase from our benchmark
specification ( = -3.3). Column 5 shows the result is similar when we use the NNTR
rate instead of the NNTR gap, which is the result of the good-year fixed effects absorbing
the variation in MFN rates. Finally, column 6 uses the applied NNTR rate instead of the
NNTR gap in 2001. As evident in Figure 5, the NNTR statutory tariffs (a part of Xg ) are
correlated with the applied tariffs (g ). The correlation between the mean SITC applied
tariff rate over the period of 1974 to 1979 and the median NNTR rate is 0.78. The effect
of the pre-PNTR dummy is even stronger when we use applied NNTR rates instead of the
scheduled NNTR gap. Overall, these findings indicate the effect of NNTR rates on China's
exports to the United States after its PNTR access becomes significantly larger as the sample
period increases.

3.3.2    The Annual Effect of the NNTR Gap and Chinese Exports

We now explore the time path of the effect of the NNTR gap on China's exports to the
United States by estimating

                          2007
                vjgt =             t 1{t = t }1{j = China}Xg + jt + jg + gt + ujgt .                   (5)
                         t =1974


Note this equation is the same as equation (4), except that the effect of the NNTR gap is now
interacted with a year dummy, and we exclude the tariff rate because it is highly correlated
with the applied NNTR rate prior to 1980. Therefore, its inclusion would undermine the
explanatory power of the gap during these early years.19 This issue was less of a concern when
we considered only the shorter time period. The MFN rate in the gap measure, however,
is not an issue. The sample is restricted to NTR countries, so the good-year fixed effects
control for changes in scheduled MFN rates. Finally, note the elasticities {t }2007
                                                                               t=1974 capture

  19
     We report estimates of equation (5) that include tariffs in Table 3. The t coefficients in the earlier
years are, in fact, smaller than those from the specifications that do not include tariffs.

                                                    14
the effect of the NNTR gap of Chinese exports relative to the export level in 2008. Hence,
we expect the elasticities to be negative if growth in higher-NNTR-gap goods was depressed
or still adjusting to the NTR liberalization prior to 2008.
   The results of estimating equation (5) are illustrated in Figure 6 and reported in column
1 of Table 5. The trend in the effect of the NNTR gap is striking. Between 1974 and 1979,
the effect is relatively stable around an elasticity of -10, indicating high-NNTR-gap goods
were significantly depressed relative to low-gap goods before the NTR liberalization in 1980.
After 1980, the elasticity starts to rise gradually as high-NNTR-gap goods catch up with
low-NNTR-gap goods. This adjustment is slow and the coefficients level off at about -1.6
in 1993. From 1991 to 1993, the elasticity remains relatively stable between -1.7 and -1.1.
The slowdown in the adjustment between 1992 and 1999 coincides with the introduction
of the annual vote on China's NTR status by the U.S. Congress. After 1999, the elasticity
rises above -1 and becomes statistically insignificant, suggesting the adjustment to the NTR
liberalization was completed by 1999.
   Figure 6 presents three main takeaways. First, the large effect of the NNTR gap on
China's export growth can be traced back to the NTR liberalization. Second, the adjustment
to the NTR liberalization was very persistent and likely to have been slowed by to the
introduction of TPU. Third, the positive association between post-PNTR growth and the
NNTR gap found in Pierce and Schott (2016) and Handley and Lim~
                                                              ao (2017) is mostly due
to low pre-PNTR growth, as opposed to high post-PNTR growth.
   The difference-in-differences approach summarized in Figure 6 cannot differentiate be-
tween the influences of uncertain future policy and past reform on trade volumes. The
quantitative model we develop in the next section is our best tool for measuring these two
influences, but a simple modification to equation (5) suggests that the lagged effect of past
policy may be important. In Figure 7, we report the estimates of a version of equation (5)
in which we have added lagged trade volumes, vjg,t-1 , to the list of regressors. This model
allows for trade volumes to be serially correlated, which we would expect if aggregate trade
takes time to adjust to a cut in tariffs. Conditioning on lagged trade volumes decreases the
elasticity of trade to the NNTR gap by about 50 percent in the 1970s and the elasticity is
significantly lower than the baseline estimates until the 1990s.


                                              15
3.3.3   Robustness

The time-varying pattern of the effect of the NNTR gap on China's exports to the United
States, illustrated in Figure 6, is robust to the following range of alternative approaches
reported in Table 5 and Table 6.

Anticipation 1979. Figure 2 shows Chinese exports to the United States were rising ro-
bustly in 1979, but our empirical framework suggests this increase was smaller for high-gap
goods, because the elasticity estimate falls in 1979. The weak growth for goods whose tariffs
were about to decline could reflect some delays in purchases followed by boosted purchases
as emphasized by Khan and Khederlarian (2019). To control for the possibility of these
anticipatory effects, we estimate equation (5) including the lead change in applied tariffs
(jg,t+1 ). Effectively, only in 1979 is this control relevant, because in other years, changes
in applied tariffs are minimal (see Figure 4). Column 2 of Table 5 shows this inclusion indeed
smooths the response of trade flows to the NNTR gap around in 1979, and we no longer see
a drop in the elasticity.

Additional Trade-Cost Controls. The baseline estimation of equation (5) departs from
that in Pierce and Schott (2016) by excluding applied tariff rates jgt . We excluded the tariffs
to avoid problems caused by the high correlation between the NNTR rate and the applied
tariffs before the liberalization. Column 3 of Table 5 includes shipping costs, calculated
as CIF charges over the FOB value of imports. The coefficients of interest, {^t }2007 , are
                                                                                 t=1974

virtually unchanged. In column 4, the specification also includes the applied tariff rates.
Consistent with the correlation between applied tariffs and the NNTR gap, its inclusion
biases downward the coefficients of interest in the years before the liberalization. After 1980,
the coefficients of interest are almost identical to those in column 3; in the years before the
liberalization, they drop slightly.

Good-Level Life-Cycle Controls. Given the long time horizon of the analysis, we study
the robustness of the baseline results to the inclusion of variables that capture a good's life
cycle. Namely, we introduce the following variables in equation (5): age, which we define as
the number of years a good has been sourced from a country j ; age squared; and dummy


                                              16
variables for the first, second, penultimate, and last years a good appears in the sample.
Column 5 of Table 5 shows their inclusion has only a minimal impact on the baseline results.

Sample of Countries and Goods. In columns 1­3 of Table 6, we report the robustness
of our results to the restrictions on countries and goods of our baseline sample. Column 1
reports results from the specification that includes all countries. Column 2 reports results
from the specification that also relaxes the MFA exclusion. Whereas column 5 shows that
including all countries has no impact on the baseline results, the coefficients in column 2
drop by 10­20 percent. The drop is common across all years, however, leaving the speed of
adjustment and the overall pattern of the baseline unchanged. The baseline sample included
goods that were not traded in 1974­1979 but were traded later. Column 3 restricts the
sample to those goods in which U.S. imports from China were non-zero at some point before
1981. The coefficients of interest are almost identical to the baseline results, although,
interestingly, a slightly longer effect of the NNTR gap remains after the PNTR liberalization
in 2001.20

Alternative Measures of the NTR Liberalization. The baseline measure of the NTR
liberalization considers the good-level NNTR gap in 2001 to map the results into those of
Pierce and Schott (2016). Column 4 of Table 6 defines Xs to be the NNTR rate. Although
the coefficients of interest, {^t }2007 , are 10­20 percent smaller in the first years, the gradual
                                   t=1974

nature of the adjustment is unchanged. Column 5 defines Xs as the applied NNTR rate,
calculated as the average good-level tariff applied on imports from China between 1974 and
1980. The results with the applied NNTR rate are very similar to the baseline. Whereas
{^t }2007 are around 5-15 percent smaller than the baseline throughout all years, they
     t=1974

converge to zero (or statistical insignificance) slightly faster in the last five years before the
PNTR liberalization.

Level of Aggregation. Our baseline level of aggregation is at the 5-digit SITC level, be-
cause we can construct a continuous dataset for the sample period of 1974­2008 and include
  20
     We have also experimented with extending our sample period from 1974­2008 to include 1970­1973 and
2009­2017. Between 1970 and 1973, Chinese exports to the United States are insufficient to yield significant
estimates. However, when we pool over those years, the effect is similar to that in 1974. Extending the
sample period until 2017 yields an additional bump of around -1 percentage points in the elasticity of trade
to the NNTR gap.

                                                    17
the 1980 NTR liberalization. Nonetheless, the results with more disaggregated product-
level data are very similar to the baseline when we consider the periods 1974­88 (using the
8-digit TS-USA product-level aggregation) and 1990­2008 (using the HS-8 product-level ag-
gregation), separately. Figure 8 plots the time-varying effect of the NNTR gap on exports
from China obtained from equation (5) when we use the 8-digit TS-USA (Tariff Schedule
of the United States) product-level aggregation for the period 1974­1987.21 The pattern is
strikingly similar to the baseline pattern with SITC aggregation. Figure 9 uses the HS-8
product-level aggregation for the period 1989­2007. Between 1989 and 1993, the negative ef-
fect is larger, rising from around -3.43 in 1990 to around -1 in 1993. After 1993, it remains
relatively stable at -1. In the aftermath of China's PNTR access, the effect halves and
then becomes statistically insignificant by 2002.22 Note the summation of the total elasticity
under TS-USA (-4), HS-8 (-3), and the two years under SITC (-2) yields a total elasticity
of -9, which is close to the baseline estimate. More importantly, the time-varying pattern
of the effect is also consistent with the baseline results. These results suggests our baseline
findings are robust to the level of aggregation used.

China Supply Effects. Our baseline approach controls for U.S. demand shocks specific to
particular goods but not for good-specific Chinese supply shocks. To study the importance
of these potentially confounding effects, we use the World Trade dataset from Feenstra et
al. (2005) (1974-2000) merged with the BACI Trade database (2001-08).23 We estimate

                              2007
                   vijgt =             t 1{t = t }1{i = U.S.}1{j = China}Xg
                             t =1974

                             + 1{i = U.S.}1{j = China}Xg + igt + jgt + uijgt ,                        (6)


where jgt controls for exporter supply shocks and igt for importer demand shocks (and trade

  21
      The NNTR gap is not available at the TS-USA product aggregation. Instead of the NNTR gap, we use
the mean TS-USA applied tariff on U.S. imports from China between 1974 and 1979 to proxy for the NNTR
rate. Figure 5 shows applied NNTR rates are closely related to their schedule.
   22
      Tables B.1 and B.2 in the appendix provide some robustness checks of the described pattern.
   23
      Note this dataset is at the SITC 4-digit level. We include the 50 largest exporter countries in 2001
except Hong Kong, Canada, Mexico, and the former Soviet Union members and aggregate the remaining
countries into one. We further exclude goods subject to the MFA quotas as in our baseline. None of these
restrictions change the results.

                                                    18
barriers). Note our coefficients of interest now include the difference in China's exports to
the United States versus other destinations on top of the triple difference from our baseline
approach. The coefficients are relative to the effect in 2008 as in the baseline by including
the term 1{i = U.S.}1{j = China}Xg . Figure 10 reports the estimates of {t }2007
                                                                            t=1974 . The

overall pattern is similar to the baseline. Indeed, we cannot say the path of the gap coefficient
with China supply factors is statistically different than our baseline.


4     Quantitative analysis
To quantify the contributions of gradual adjustment to past reforms and expectations about
future policy changes to the growth of U.S. imports from China, we construct a partial-
equilibrium model of export participation dynamics and calibrate it to match the empirical
evidence documented in section 3.

4.1    Model
The model consists of G goods that correspond to the 5-digit SITC goods in the empirical
analysis. Within each good g , a continuum of firms produce differentiated varieties. Firms
are characterized by their productivity (z ) and variable trade cost ( ). Firms die exogenously
at a rate of 1 -  (z ), where firms with higher productivity have a lower probability of death.
The mass of firms in each good g is fixed: when a firm dies, it is replaced exogenously by
a new firm. To export to the United States, a firm must pay a fixed cost that depends on
whether it exported in the previous period. Two trade-policy regimes, NNTR and MFN,
exist, and the probability of switching between regimes varies over time.

Production and demand. Firms operate constant-returns-to-scale technologies that use
labor as the only input,
                                            yt = zt t ,                                       (7)

where z is a firm's productivity. Productivity follows a stationary first-order Markov process.
U.S. demand for a firm's good, dgt , is a downward-sloping function of the firm's price, p,


                                 dgt (p, t , gt ) = (pgt t )- Dgt ,                           (8)


                                                19
where g is the current U.S. tariff on goods of type g ,  is the firm's idiosyncratic variable
trade cost, and Dg is an aggregate demand shifter that is common to all firms in good g . The
firm's demand has elasticity , but it will not be the elasticity of aggregate trade to a change
in tariffs. The aggregate trade elasticity is determined by  and the export participation
response of the tariff change.

Trade costs. Firms face two types of costs to access the U.S. market. These costs are
technological--they are not policy variables. The first cost is a stochastic variable cost,  ,
which represents the efficiency with which a firm can transform a unit of goods in China into a
unit of goods in the United States. This cost can take three values ( > H > L ) and evolves
according to a stationary, first-order Markov process. When  = , the firm is a nonexporter.
When  is finite, some firms will choose to export. Following Alessandria et al. (2021a), we
assume the probability of retaining the current  is symmetric: P(L |L ) = P(H |H ) =  .
This specification implies exporters start small and, with some luck, grow large.

The second type of trade cost is a fixed cost, f , that the firm must pay in order to export
in the next period. The fixed costs are identical across firms. If the firm is currently a
nonexporter, it pays f0 to enter the export market next period. If the firm is currently
exporting, it pays f1  f0 to continue exporting in the next period. We summarize the
fixed-cost structure in a function, f ( ), where f () = f0 and f (L ) = f (H ) = f1 .

Trade policy. All firms in each good g face the same tariff, g , which can take one of two
values: the NNTR (Column Two) tariff, g2 , or the MFN (Column One) tariff, g1 . The tariff
regime is an aggregate state variable that follows a first-order, time-varying Markov process.
If the current tariff regime is NNTR, the probability that the regime in the next period will
be MFN is 21,t . Conversely, the probability of switching from MFN tariffs to NNTR tariffs
is 12,t . The fact that the trade-policy regime is an aggregate state means all goods (and all
firms in each good) face the same regime and the same transition probabilities at each point
in time. In the benchmark model, firms know the entire path of {21,t }               
                                                                      t=0 and {12,t }t=0 .

We consider alternative information structures in section 4.4.

Firm optimization. The firm's export status is determined in the prior period. The firm
maximizes current-period profits by choosing its price, taking as given its residual demand

                                              20
and the wage, w,


                             gt (zt , t , gt ) = max p dgt (p, t , gt ) - wt                          (9)
                                                       p,

                                         s.t. zt  dgt (p, t , gt )t .                                (10)


The value of a firm that chooses to export at t + 1 is

                   1                                   (zt )
                 Vgt (zt , t , gt ) = -f (t ) +              Et Vg,t+1 (zt+1 , t+1 , g,t+1 ) ,       (11)
                                                      1 + r z,,g

where r is the interest rate used to discount future profit. The value of a firm that chooses
not to export at t + 1 is

                          0                     (zt )
                        Vgt (zt , t , gt ) =          Et Vt+1 (zt+1 , t+1 , g,t+1 ) ,                (12)
                                               1 + r z,,g

and the value of the firm is

                                                           1                    0
            Vgt (zt , t , gt ) = gt (zt , t , gt ) + max Vgt (zt , t , gt ) , Vgt (zt , t , gt ) .   (13)


The break-even exporter z
                        ¯gt ( ) is indifferent between exporting and not exporting:

                                 1                      0
                               Vgt (¯
                                    zgt ( ), , gt ) = Vgt (¯
                                                           zgt ( ), , gt ) .                         (14)


Aggregation. The solutions to these programming problems yield decision rules over export
participation and, conditional on exporting, export volumes. The decision rules determine
the laws of motion over firms. The measure of firms that do not export is 0
                                                                          gt (z,  ), and

the measure of exporters is 1
                            gt (z,  ). We use these measures to compute aggregate trade

volumes,


                     EXgt =                        p (z, , gt ) y (z, , gt ) 1
                                                                             gt (z,  ) dz.           (15)
                                 {L ,H }       z




                                                            21
4.2      Calibration
The model is calibrated to reproduce facts about the historical dynamics of U.S. imports
from China. We initialize the model in 1970 with zero exporters (that is, all firms have
 = ) in all goods to capture the transition from autarky, and then feed in the realized
path of tariffs (NNTR rates during 1971­1979 and MFN rates from 1980 onward). We then
choose the model's parameters so that its transition dynamics match the facts documented
in section 3 and other salient facts about export participation dynamics reported elsewhere
in the literature. The calibrated parameter values are summarized in Table 7.

Assigned parameters. Several of the model's parameters are assigned externally. A model
period is one year. The wage is normalized to one and the interest rate used to discount
future profits is four percent. We take the time series for MFN and NNTR tariffs, g1
and g2 , directly from the data. The parameters that govern the firm's productivity and
survival processes are taken from Alessandria et al. (2021a). To eliminate the role of the
elasticity of substitution in the size distribution of firms, we assume producer productivity
         1
is z =   -1
              log a. A firm's productivity follows

                                                        iid    2
                              log at+1 = z ln at + ,     N (0, z ),                        (16)


which we convert to a Markov-chain approximation for computation. Firms are subject to
exogenous death shocks that depend on the firm's productivity; the probability of death is
1 -  (a) = max 0, min e-0 a + 1 , 1         .

Parameters calibrated to facts about exporter dynamics. The parameters that gov-
ern fixed and variable exporting costs are calibrated so that the model's terminal steady
state--in which tariffs have remained at MFN rates for many years--matches statistics on
export participation dynamics documented by Alessandria et al. (2021a). The sunk entry
cost, f0 , is chosen so that 22.3 percent of firms export. The continuation cost, f1 , is chosen
so that 17.0 percent of exporters exit. The low variable exporting cost, L , is normalized to
one and the high variable exporting cost, H , is chosen so that the average export entrant is
half as large as the average incumbent exporter (as measured by sales).

                                                 22
Parameters calibrated to short- and long-run trade elasticities. The elasticity of de-
mand, , and the probability of retaining the current variable export cost,  , are chosen
so that estimating the unrestricted error-correction model (3) on simulated data from the
model reproduces the short-run and long-run trade elasticities for China of 2.3 and 8.06,
respectively, as reported in Table 2. We find  = 3.55 and  = 0.87.24

Parameters calibrated to annual NNTR-gap elasticities. The key parameters in our
model are the probabilities of switching between tariff regimes, 12,t and 21,t . We calibrate
these parameters so that estimating equation (5) on simulated data from our model re-
produces the baseline annual NNTR-gap elasticities reported in column 1 of Table 5. The
probability that the economy moves from the NNTR rates to the MFN rates, 21,t , is as-
sumed to be constant and is set to match the average NNTR gap during the 1974­1979
period. We allow the probability of reverting from the MFN tariff rates back to the NNTR
rates, 12,t , to vary over time, and choose it to match the annual elasticity coefficients from
1980 onward.25 These parameters are identified by the way export participation in high-gap
industries responds to trade-policy uncertainty relative to low-gap industries. During the
1974­1980 period, a higher probability of moving from NNTR tariff rates to MFN rates
boosts export participation in high-gap industries more than in low-gap industries, which
increases the elasticity coefficient during this period.26 After 1980, a higher probability of
moving from MFN tariff rates back to NNTR rates reduces export participation in high-gap
industries more than in low-gap industries, so the model interprets the decline in the magni-
tude of the elasticity coefficient during this period as a decline in the probability of moving
back to NNTR status.

  24
      Note our calibrated demand elasticity is greater than the estimated short-run elasticity. We spread the
intensive-margin effect of the 1980 liberalization over two years (1980­1981) by assuming only half of each
industry's exporters get access to MFN tariff rates in 1980. We use this approach to capture the fact that
the NNTR-gap elasticity rises in a linear fashion from 1979 through 1981, as shown in Figure 6.
   25
      We HP-filter the coefficients from 1981 onward to smooth out temporary spikes (such as 1984), but we
use the 1980 coefficient without modification because it plays a dominant role in identifying the demand
elasticity, , which governs the short-run elasticity. The calibrated model matches this smoothed series
almost perfectly.
   26
      We have also experimented with a version of the model that includes a probability of moving back to
autarky. A higher probability of moving to autarky, however, has the same effect on the NNTR gap as a
higher probability of moving to MFN status. Moving to autarky hurts export participation more in low-gap
industries than in high-gap industries, because the former experienced larger initial liberalizations than the
latter.

                                                     23
In panel (a) of Figure 11, we plot the annual NNTR-gap elasticities from the model and
the data. The elasticities from the data are from Figure 6. Overall, the model fits the data
quite well during all three periods of U.S.-China trade history: the 1970s, before China was
granted NTR status; 1980­2000, after this status was unilaterally granted; and 2001 onward,
when China was a WTO member.


4.3    Estimates of Expectations of U.S.-China Trade Policy
Panel (b) of Figure 11 plots the main results of our calibration exercise: the estimated
probabilities of switching between policy regimes: We assume the probability of transitioning
from the NNTR to the MFN regime is constant and estimate it to be about 0.25. This
assumption allows the model to naturally match the slight downward drift in the elasticity
of trade to the NNTR gap from 1974 to 1979. The probability that the economy switches
back to the NNTR regime is initially 0.72 in 1980, rises to 0.80 in 1981, and then begins to fall
throughout the 1980s and early 1990s. By 1993, the regime-switching probability is less than
eight percent. A temporary increase occurs during 1994­1996, after which the probability
continues to fall throughout the late 1990s and 2000s. By 2008, the end of our observation
period, the probability of moving back to the NNTR regime falls to 3.4 percent. Note
no discrete drop or accelerated decline occurs in this probability when China gains PNTR
status in 2001 (in fact, the switching probability rises slightly, from 5.3 percent to 6.3 percent,
during 2000­2002), which reflects the observation in section 3.3.2 that this change in status
had little impact on the annual elasticity of trade to the NNTR gap. This finding indicates
gaining PNTR status did not materially alter Chinese exporters' beliefs about future U.S.
trade policy; switching back to the NNTR regime was viewed as extremely unlikely even
before China joined the WTO.
   Another way to interpret these results is to ask: what is the expected present value of
tariffs that Chinese exporters face at each point in time? Panel (c) of Figure 11 plots the
mean expected present value of tariffs across goods in the model,

                                        G               
                                   1
                          tP V =              (1 -  )          s-t Et [gs ]   ,               (17)
                                   G   g =1             s=t




                                                   24
alongside the mean applied tariff (NNTR before 1979 and MFN from 1980 onward). Whereas
the realized path of applied tariffs falls sharply in 1980 when China gains NTR status, and
then falls slightly throughout the 1980s and 1990s due to continued reforms to U.S. MFN
tariff rates, the expected present value of tariffs falls gradually but steadily throughout the
entire period. We find only a small discrete drop in 1980, and the expected present value
remains well above the applied MFN rate even after China joins the WTO in 2001.
   The behavior of the expected tariff helps us understand the gradual adjustment of export
volumes to the abrupt decrease in the current tariff. The large expected tariff suppressed
entry of Chinese firms in the export market. As the expected tariff fell, entry increased and
aggregate trade volumes grew. The uncertainty over future tariffs mattered the most in the
1980s and 1990s.

4.4     Alternative expectations
In our benchmark model, firms do not know which trade-policy regimes they will face in
the future, but they know how the probabilities of switching between regimes will evolve
over time. Here, we compare our benchmark model with two alternatives: a counterfactual
in which no trade policy uncertainty is present and another in which uncertainty exists,
but firms do not anticipate changes in regime-switching probabilities. We also compare our
model-implied probabilities of reverting from MFN to NNTR tariffs with those obtained via
Bayesian learning.

4.4.1   No trade-policy uncertainty

In the counterfactual without trade-policy uncertainty, the path of tariffs is deterministic.
Starting in 1970, firms know they will face NNTR tariffs during 1971­1979 and MFN tariffs
from 1980 onwards. Because the realized path of tariffs in the benchmark model with TPU is
the same as in the no-TPU counterfactual, differences in outcomes between the two models
are due solely to the presence of uncertainty in the former.
   Panel (d) of Figure 11 plots aggregate trade flows in the benchmark model and the
counterfactual without trade policy uncertainty. In the benchmark, Chinese exports to the
United States grow modestly after the embargo is lifted in 1971, jump slightly when the NTR
liberalization occurs in 1980, and continue to grow gradually throughout the 1980s, 1990s,

                                              25
and 2000s. The jump in exports between 1979 and 1981 is the growth in the exports of firms
that were already exporting when the liberalization took effect. The gradual growth that
follows comes from nonexporting firms choosing to enter the export market and firms that
are already exporting becoming better exporters (firms moving from H to L ). Although
the average tariff rate declines further as MFN tariffs are changed, much of the protracted
growth we observe is the slow adjustment to the liberalization in 1980.
   In the counterfactual without trade-policy uncertainty, exports grow much faster imme-
diately after the embargo is lifted, and grow more slowly after 1985. The rapid growth
during the 1970s is driven by firms that choose to start exporting in anticipation of the
1980 liberalization. The slower growth in the latter part of the observation period indicates
the counterfactual has largely converged to a steady state by the late 1980s. The vertical
distance between the two lines represents a measure of the effect of trade-policy uncertainty
on exports in a given period. This effect is largest immediately after the 1980 liberalization,
consistent with our empirical findings about the evolution of the NNTR gap and our model's
estimate of how the probability of reverting back to NNTR status fell over time. We see
little change in this effect when China joins the WTO in 2001. In fact, trade-policy uncer-
tainty still depresses exports several years afterward. This finding is explained by panel (c)
of Figure 11, which shows the expected present value of tariffs in our benchmark model is
still noticeably higher at the end of our sample than in the counterfactual without trade
policy uncertainty.

4.4.2   Unanticipated changes in trade-policy uncertainty

In our second alternative, we assume the trade-policy regime follows a Markov process as
in the benchmark, but that in each period, firms believe the current transition probabilities
will remain in force forever--firms are surprised each period when these probabilities change.
In this version of the model, we recalibrate the transition probabilities to match the annual
NNTR-gap coefficients while leaving all other aspects of the calibration unchanged. As in
the first alternative, the realized path of tariffs is the same as in the benchmark, so any
differences in outcomes are due to differences in firms' expectations.
   Panel (b) of Figure 11 shows the calibrated transition probabilities in this version of



                                              26
the model (labeled "surprises") are very similar to the benchmark probabilities. The initial
probability of losing MFN status in 1980 is slightly higher but falls slightly quicker thereafter.
Panel (c) of Figure 11 shows these small differences in probabilities imply the expected
present value of tariffs is similar throughout the sample period in this version of the model
to the benchmark, and Panel (d) shows they imply similar paths of aggregate trade.
   These two setups differ in their assumptions about firms' expectations over the proba-
bilities of switching between policy regimes. These different expectations yield quite similar
paths of probabilities in large part because they yield similar present values of tariffs (panel
(c) of Figure 11) in each period. This finding suggests our approach provides tight bounds
on these probabilities and on their economic effects.

4.4.3   Bayesian learning

In our model, firms do not update their beliefs about the probabilities of switching between
regimes; they simply take at face value the probabilities that are "announced" by the modeler.
Here, we ask how the probabilities that we obtain from our calibration exercise compare with
the posterior beliefs that a Bayesian agent would form after observing the economy remains
in the MFN regime year after year from 1980 onward.
   We focus this analysis on the probability of losing MFN status after the 1980 liber-
alization, 12 . We assume Bayesian agents have beta-distributed prior beliefs about this
probability when the liberalization occurs in 1980:

                                              (a + b) a-1
                        pprior (12 |a, b) =             12 (1 - 12 )b-1 .                    (18)
                                              (a) + (b)

The parameters a and b of this distribution control the mean and the degree of confidence
in this value. For example, a = b = 1 is the uniform distribution that has a mean of 0.5
but places equal weight on all possible values of 12 , whereas the beta distribution with
a = b = 5 has the same mean but is tightly concentrated around that value. This conjugate
prior distribution is convenient because the mean posterior after observing n successive
periods in which MFN status is retained is given by the simple expression a/(a + b + n).
   We consider a range of priors that all have the same mean as the initial 1980 probability
in the model but with more or less dispersion around this value, that is, priors that are more

                                                  27
or less confident that this initial probability is correct. This setup allows us to determine
whether agents in our model "learn" faster or slower than a Bayesian agent would. Specif-
ically, for each b = 1, 2, . . . , 5, we set a so that the mean prior, given by a/(a + b), equals
0.72. The prior with b = 1 represents an agent with little confidence in this value, whereas
the prior with b = 5 represents a highly confident agent. Panel (a) of Figure 12 plots the
density functions of each of the prior beliefs that we consider.
   Panel (b) of Figure 12 plots the model-implied probabilities of losing MFN status against
the evolution of the mean posteriors associated with each of these priors as agents observe
more and more successive periods in which MFN status is retained. During 1980­1985,
the Bayesian posteriors fall faster than our model-implied probabilities, which is consistent
with the delay in growth in the NNTR-gap coefficient during the early 1980s documented
in section 3.3.2. After 1985, however, this pattern is reversed, and by the late 1990s the
model-implied probability of losing MFN status is lower than the mean posterior for all
of the priors we consider-- even very widely dispersed priors that quickly incorporate new
information (such as b = 1).

4.5    Recovering the Long-Run Trade Elasticity
In addition to measuring the extent of trade-policy uncertainty, we can use our model to
recover the long-run effect of trade policy on trade flows in the absence of uncertainty--the
long-run trade elasticity--which is the key moment in most empirical and theoretical trade
studies. We find the long-run trade elasticity in our model without uncertainty is higher than
what we estimate in the data, using either cross-sectional or time-series methods, and that
it is increasing in the initial tariff. The large differences between our empirical estimates of
the long-run trade elasticity and the model's long-run trade elasticity point to the challenges
of measuring this object in the data in the face of uncertainty about future trade policy.
   To solve for our model's long-run trade elasticity, we eliminate all tariff uncertainty and
solve for the stationary equilibrium associated with the full range of tariffs observed in the
historical data, from NNTR rates to modern MFN rates. We measure it as the change in
the steady-state level of trade in a given good caused by a marginal change in the tariff on
that good, as a function of the initial tariff. We plot the results of this exercise in Figure 13.


                                               28
When tariffs are close to zero, the trade elasticity is close to 15, and it rises to about 18.5
at the highest tariff levels.
    Our model's long-run trade elasticity of 15­18 is larger than those recovered from our
empirical approaches. As reported in Table 2, the elasticity estimated in the pooled cross
section of U.S. imports from China is 6­7. This estimate, however, is obtained from the
entire historical sample of U.S.-China trade, which includes both short-run and long-run
responses to trade reforms, and therefore understates the true long-run elasticity. Using
panel methods, we find a slightly higher trade elasticity of 8 to 8.5 using the error-correction
model and an elasticity of about 10 when using the NNTR gap in the 1970s. Our model,
which is calibrated to reproduce these estimates, indicates that even these dynamic methods
understate the true long-run response of trade to permanent, deterministic changes in trade
policy.


5     Conclusions
We study, empirically and theoretically, China's integration into the U.S. market after the
long-standing embargo on Chinese goods was lifted in 1971. We find the dynamics of in-
tegration are consistent with substantial uncertainty about the future path of tariffs in the
late 1970s and early 1980s. Compared with the earlier period, our results imply much less
policy uncertainty in the late 1990s in the lead-up to China being granted permanent normal
trade relations in 2000. The substantial drop in the probability of NTR reversal in the mid
1980s, combined with the gradual trade expansion common to trade liberalizations, suggests
much of the growth in trade in high NNTR-gap products in the 1990s was due to the prior
liberalization and not the future outlook on trade policy.
    Our approach to estimating a forward-looking path of trade policy leverages unique
aspects of U.S. policy toward China in which the change in trade policy is known and
heterogeneous across products, but the likelihood and timing is unknown but common across
products. Our analysis could be extended to consider more contemporary events such as
Brexit, the U.S.-China trade war, safeguards, and domestic content requirements, as well as
traditional protectionist measures such as antidumping duties. In all these cases, the size
and timing of the reforms are uncertain, but by interpreting trade flows through a dynamic


                                              29
model, we can discipline the process for these possible trade-policy outcomes.
   Our analysis produces estimates of key time-varying trade elasticities and probabilities
of policy reversal that should be useful in disciplining general-equilibrium models of trade
policy and trade dynamics. Reconsidering the aggregate effects of China's global integration,
taking into account the dynamics of trade policy we have identified, would be interesting.
An important challenge to a general-equilibrium analysis is accounting for non-tariff barriers
such as quotas or safeguards, because these key aspects of China trade policy were changed
by the United States in the late 1990s and the 2000s.
   Finally, that trade depends on past, current, and future changes in trade policy suggests
we need to rethink our notions of changes in trade policy, the trade elasticity, and the
measurement of these trade elasticities. Alessandria et al. (2021b) build on our findings
here to show how to measure the trade response to unanticipated and anticipated changes
in trade policy.




                                             30
References
Alessandria, George, Costas Arkolakis, and Kim J. Ruhl, "Firm Dynamics and
 Trade," Working Paper 27934, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

  , Horag Choi, and Dan Lu, "Trade Integration and the Trade Balance in China," IMF
  Economic Review, August 2017, 65 (3), 633­674.

  ,   , and Kim J. Ruhl, "Trade Adjustment Dynamics and the Welfare Gains from
  Trade," Journal of International Economics, 2021, 131, 1034­58.

  , Shafaat Y. Khan, and Armen Khederlarian, "Taking Stock of Trade Policy Un-
  certainty: Evidence from China's Pre-WTO Accession," Working Paper 25965, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

  , , , Kim J. Ruhl, and Joseph B. Steinberg, "Dynamic Trade Elasticities," 2021.
  Mimeo.

Bambrilla, Irene, Amit Khandelwal, and Peter Schott, "China's Experience un-
 der the Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing
 (ATC)"," China's Growing Role in World Trade, 2010, pp. 345­87.

Besedes, Tibor, Tristian Kohl, and James Lake, "Phase Out Tariffs, Phase In Trade?,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2020, 127.

Boehm, Christoph E, Andrei A Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, "The Long
 and Short (Run) of Trade Elasticities," Working Paper 27064, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research 2020.

Calvo, Guillermo A., "On the Costs of Temporary Policy," Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics, 1987, 27 (1), 245­261.

Drozd, Lukasz A. and Jaromir B. Nosal, "Understanding International Prices: Cus-
 tomers as Capital," American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1), 364­95.

Feenstra, Robert C., "U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances," Working Paper
  5515, National Bureau of Economic Research 1996.

  , John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott, "U.S. Imports, Exports, and Tariff Data,
  1989­2001," Working Paper 9387, National Bureau of Economic Research 2002.

  , Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo, "World
  Trade Flows: 1962-2000," Working Paper 11040, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2005.

Fitzgerald, Doireann, Stefanie Haller, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi, "How Exporters
  Grow," Working Paper 21935, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.




                                         31
Gallaway, Michael P., Christine A. McDaniel, and Sandra A. Rivera, "Short-
 run and Long-run Industry level Estimates of U.S. Armington Elasticities," The North
 American Journal of Economics and Finance, 2003, 14(1), 49­68.
Handley, Kyle and Nuno Lim~   ao, "Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory and
 Evidence for China and the United States," American Economic Review, 2017, 107(9),
 2731­2783.
Head, Keith and John Ries, "Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation
 as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade," American Economic Review,
 September 2001, 91 (4), 858­876.
Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels, "Trade Elasticity Parameters for a Computable
 General Equilibrium Model," in Peter B. Dixon and Dale W. Jorgenson, eds., Handbook
 of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2013, pp. 1213­1269.
Johnson, James A. and Ernest H. Oksanen, "Estimation of Demand for Alcoholic Bev-
  erages, in Canada from Pooled Time-series and Cross-sections," The Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 1977, 59, 113­118.
  ,    , Michael R. Veall, and Deborah Fretz, "Short-Run and Long-Run Elastic-
  ities for Canadian Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages: an Error-Correction Mecha-
  nism/Cointegration Approach," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1992, 74(1),
  64­74.
Kehoe, Tim and Kim J. Ruhl, "How Important is the New Goods Margin in International
 Trade?," Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (2), 358­392.
Khan, Shafaat Y. and Armen Khederlarian, "How Does Trade Respond to Anticipated
 Tariff Changes? Evidence from NAFTA," 2019. Mimeo.
McLaren, John, "Size, Sunk Costs, and Judge Bowker's Objection to Free Trade," The
 American Economic Review, 1997, 87 (3), 400­420.
Pierce, Justin and Peter Schott, "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
  Employment," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7), 1632­1662.
Piveteau, Paul, "An Empirical Dynamic Model of Trade with Consumer Accumulation,"
  American Economics Journal: Microeconomics, 2021.
Romalis, John, "NAFTA's and CUSFTA's Impact on International Trade," The Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89 (3), 416­435.
Ruhl, Kim J., "The International Elasticity Puzzle," 2008. Mimeo.
  , "Trade Dynamics under Policy Uncertainty," American Journal of Agricultural Eco-
  nomics, 2011, 93 (2), 450­456.
Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh, "The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and
  Evidence," Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92 (1), 34­50.

                                          32
Staiger, Robert W. and Guido Tabellini, "Discretionary Trade Policy and Excessive
  Protection," The American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (5), 823­837.

Steinberg, Joseph B., "Export Market Penetration Dynamics," 2021. Mimeo.

United Nations Trade Statistics, "Correspondence Tables," https://unstats.un.org/
 unsd/trade/classifications/correspondence-tables.asp 2017. Accessed: 06-09-
 2021.




                                       33
                                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics (percent)

                                                                                                              Applied Duties
                                                           NNTR Rate     U.S. Export Share             1979                    2001
                     SITC 1-Digit                     Mean       Std.   1979         2001        China        NTR      China          NTR
     0   Food and live animals (food)                 17         15     10           1            12           5        6             2
     1   Beverages and tobacco                        48         41      0           0            31          11        4             3
     2   Crude materials, inedible, except fuels      11         15     13           1             6           1        1             0
     3   Mineral fuels, lubricants and related         3          8     15           0             2           0        2             0
     4   Animal and vegetable oils, fats and waxes    14          9      1           0             4           2        2             2
     5   Chemical and related products                31         19     10           2            16           4        2             2
     6   Manufactured goods                           41         21     13          12            33           8        4             4
     7   Machinery and transport equip.               33         10      0          36            29           5        2             1
     8   Misc. manufactured articles                  50         25     37          49            38          14        5             4
     9   Commodities and transactions, n.e.c.         29         19      0           0            29           0        1             1
     Average                                          28         18                               20          5         3             2
34




     Notes: NNTR Rate is the median HS-8 NNTR rate from Feenstra et al. (2002) at the 5-digit SITC level. U.S. Export Share is the
     share of total Chinese exports shipped to the United States. Applied Duties is the mean 5-digit SITC tariff (duties over FOB value).
     NTR refers to the set of countries that never received NNTR treatment by the United States nor had a FTA with it (see footnote 14).
     When computing the mean applied duties of NTR countries, only SITC codes with nonzero U.S. imports from China are considered.
                    Table 2: Short- and Long-Run Trade Elasticity: Baseline

                                            Cross-Section               ECM Rest.           ECM Unrest.
                                          jgt              jgt               jgt                 jgt
  1{j = China}jst                      -2.66            -2.60             -1.86
                                        (0.22)           (0.26)            (0.19)
  1{j = China}jgt                      -6.69            -6.80             -2.84
                                        (0.32)           (0.38)            (0.24)
  1{j = China}vjg,t-1                                                     0.53                 -0.47
                                                                           (0.00)               (0.00)
  1{j = China}vjg,t-1                                                     0.63                 -0.37
                                                                           (0.01)               (0.01)
  1{j = China}jgt                                                                              -2.02
                                                                                                (0.24)
  1{j = China}jgt                                                                              -2.29
                                                                                                (0.41)
  1{j = China}jg,t-1                                                                           -1.61
                                                                                                (0.16)
  1{j = China}jg,t-1                                                                           -2.95
                                                                                                (0.22)
  Long-run NTR Countries                                                  -3.97                -3.45
                                                                           (0.41)               (0.35)
  Long-run China                                                          -7.77                -8.06
                                                                           (0.65)               (0.57)
  Long-/Short-Run NTR Countries                                              2.14                1.71
  Long-/Short-Run China                                                      2.74                3.51
  FE                                   gt, jt, gj       gt, jt, gj        gt, jt, gj           gt, jt, gj
  N                                    1,185,475        934,554           934,554              934,554
  Adj. R-squared                          0.78            0.79              0.86                 0.27
Notes: Results in columns 1 and 2 are estimated as the log of imports on the log of tariffs. Column 2 restricts
the sample to be the same as in columns 3 and 4 (requiring non-missing lagged imports). Results in column 3
are from estimating (2), and those in column 4 are from estimating (3). In column 2, the coefficients on jgt
capture the short-run elasticity. In column 4, the coefficients on jgt capture the short-run elasticity. The
long-run elasticity in column 2 is the coefficient on jgt divided by one minus the coefficient on vjg,t-1 . The
long-run elasticity in column 3 is the coefficient on jg,t-1 divided by the coefficient on vjg,t-1 . Standard
errors in parentheses are clustered at the gj level.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.




                                                      35
                                                Table 3: Short- and Long-Run Trade Elasticity: Robustness

                                      Baseline       Shipping      Life cycle         All            Full        Balanced       NAFTA         NAFTA+MFA
      1{j = China}vjg,t-1             -2.02          -1.90         -2.02           -2.08          -2.18          -2.08          -1.93             -2.73
                                       (0.13)         (0.13)        (0.13)          (0.12)         (0.10)         (0.15)         (0.54)            (0.53)
      1{j = China}vjg,t-1             -2.29          -2.23         -2.29           -2.31          -2.66          -2.35          -2.21             -2.69
                                       (0.38)         (0.39)        (0.37)          (0.38)         (0.38)         (0.41)         (0.40)            (0.41)
      1{j = China}jgt                 -0.47          -0.47         -0.47           -0.46          -0.46          -0.44          -0.34             -0.34
                                       (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)          (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.00)         (0.01)            (0.01)
      1{j = China}jgt                 -0.37          -0.37         -0.37           -0.37          -0.37          -0.31          -0.35             -0.35
                                       (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)            (0.01)
      1{j = China}jg,t-1              -1.61          -1.49         -1.62           -1.72          -1.89          -1.56          -2.00             -2.63
                                       (0.11)         (0.11)        (0.11)          (0.09)         (0.08)         (0.11)         (0.37)            (0.32)
      1{j = China}jg,t-1              -2.95          -2.96         -2.96           -2.96          -2.85          -2.66          -2.56             -2.55
                                       (0.30)         (0.30)        (0.30)          (0.29)         (0.26)         (0.27)         (0.30)            (0.28)
      Shipping Costsjgt                              -2.78
                                                      (0.05)
36




      Long-run China                  -8.06          -8.01         -8.05           -8.06          -7.67          -8.51          -7.34             -7.31
                                       (0.79)         (0.79)        (0.78)          (0.77)         (0.67)         (0.82)         (0.85)            (0.77)
      Long-Run Other                  -3.45          -3.15         -3.45           -3.75          -4.14          -3.55          -5.88             -7.69
                                       (0.23)         (0.23)        (0.23)          (0.20)         (0.18)         (0.26)         (1.08)            (0.94)
      Long-/Short-Run China              3.51          3.60           3.52           3.49           2.89           3.61           3.32              2.71
      Long-/Short-Run Other              1.71          1.65           1.71           1.80           1.89           1.71           3.04              2.82

      FE                              gt, jt, gj     gt, jt, gj     gt, jt, gj    gt, jt, gj     gt, jt, gj      gt, jt, gj     gt, jt, gj        gt, jt, gj
      N                               934,554        934,554        934,554       1,053,446      1,232,395       569,854         92,614           105,738
      Adj. R-squared                    0.27           0.28           0.27           0.26           0.26           0.26           0.24              0.25

     Notes: All results are obtained estimating (3). The short-run elasticity is captured by the coefficient on jgt . The long-run elasticity is the coefficient
     on jg,t-1 divided by the coefficient on vjg,t-1 . The Life cycle model includes life-cycle controls for the first, second, penultimate, and last year that a
     good is traded, as well as the good's age and age squared. The All model includes all countries, the Full model further includes goods affected by the
     MFA quotas, and the Balanced model is restricted to goods with non-zero U.S.-China trade before 1981. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered
     at the gj level.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.
                            Table 4: Elasticity of Trade to NNTR Gap

                                                                    jgt
                           PS (2016)     1974­08           NTR      Ex. Tariffs    NNTR        App. NNTR
 1 t>2000 N N T RGapg      -0.92         -2.50         -3.36         -3.60
  j =China
                             (0.22)       (0.28)           (0.32)     (0.33)
 1 t>2000 N N T Rg                                                                -3.09
  j =China
                                                                                   (0.32)
 1 t>2000 AppN N T Rg                                                                           -4.13
  j =China
                                                                                                 (0.42)
 jgt                       -3.28         -3.20         -2.82
                             (0.14)       (0.11)           (0.14)
 Period                      `92­`07      `74­`08       `74­`08       `74­`08      `74­`08       `74­`08
 Countries                     All          All          NTR           NTR          NTR           NTR
 FE                         gt, jt, gj   gt, jt, gj    gt, jt, gj    gt, jt, gj   gt, jt, gj    gt, jt, gj
 N                          781,960      1,453,687     1,090,460     1,090,460    1,090,460     614,557
 Adj. R-squared                0.84         0.78          0.78          0.78         0.78          0.80

Notes: All estimates are obtained from variations of (4). Column 1 estimates the effect of the NNTR Gap on
Chinese imports after its PNTR access using the same period as in Pierce and Schott (2016) but at the SITC
aggregation level (see equation 5 in Pierce and Schott (2016)). Column 2 estimates the same equation using
the sample period 1974 to 2008. Column 3 further includes only NTR countries and China, and column 5
excludes tariffs from (4). Columns 5 and 6 use the NNTR rate in 2001 and the applied NNTR rate instead
of the NNTR gap. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the gj level.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01, 
p < 0.001.




                                                      37
                      Table 5: Annual Elasticity to NNTR Gap: Robustness

                                                               jgt
                          Baseline        Anticipation        Shipping         Tariffs        Life cycle
 1t=t 1j =China Xg
 1974                    -10.2             -9.83              -10.2           -8.41            -10.2
 1975                    -9.69             -10.2              -9.73           -7.95            -9.75
 1976                    -10.7             -10.4              -10.7           -8.72            -10.8
 1977                    -10.2             -10.5              -10.3           -8.31            -10.4
 1978                    -10.4             -9.88              -10.5           -8.38            -10.4
 1979                    -10.9             -9.84              -11.0           -9.04            -11.0
 1980                    -9.27             -9.08              -9.34           -9.07            -9.35
 1981                    -7.50             -7.42              -7.53           -7.36            -7.57
 1982                    -7.69             -7.67              -7.71           -7.56            -7.81
 1983                    -7.84             -7.46              -7.83           -7.74            -7.89
 1984                    -6.44             -6.76              -6.44           -6.36            -6.52
 1985                    -7.30             -7.08              -7.29           -7.21            -7.41
 1986                    -6.97             -6.74              -6.98           -6.92            -7.04
 1987                    -6.16             -5.98              -6.22           -6.17            -6.28
 1988                    -4.80             -4.58              -4.84           -4.81            -4.89
 1989                    -4.20             -3.93              -4.08           -4.04            -4.29
 1990                    -3.42             -3.45              -3.39           -3.36            -3.51
 1991                    -2.69             -2.48              -2.76           -2.71            -2.80
 1992                    -2.20             -2.12              -2.24           -2.20            -2.29
 1993                    -1.70             -1.63              -1.76           -1.70            -1.79
 1994                    -1.81             -1.65              -1.75           -1.69            -1.89
 1995                    -1.79             -1.74              -1.79           -1.75            -1.89
 1996                    -1.62             -1.56              -1.62           -1.54            -1.72
 1997                    -1.79             -1.58              -1.69           -1.68            -1.88
 1998                    -1.49             -1.52              -1.40           -1.39            -1.56
 1999                    -1.15             -1.12              -1.10           -1.09            -1.21
 2000                     -0.68              -0.34             -0.71           -0.71            -0.73
 2001                     -0.24              -0.31             -0.31           -0.31            -0.29
 2002                     -0.61             -0.59              -0.61           -0.61            -0.67
 2003                    -0.93             -0.68              -0.86           -0.87            -0.96
 2004                     -0.27              -0.37             -0.26           -0.26            -0.31
 2005                     -0.59             -0.51              -0.57           -0.57            -0.62
 2006                     -0.25              -0.30             -0.24           -0.24            -0.26
 2007                     -0.11                0               -0.16           -0.16            -0.13
 jg,t+1                                     1.05
 jgt                                                                          -2.51
                                                                     
 Shipping Costjgt                                             -3.03           -3.02
 FE                      gt, jt, gj         gt, jt, gj        gt, jt, gj      gt, jt, gj      gt, jt, gj
 N                       1,090,460          862,714           1,090,460       1,090,460       1,090,460
 Adj. R-squared             0.78              0.78               0.78            0.78            0.78

Notes: All estimates are obtained using variations of (5). Column 2 -- Anticipation -- includes the lead
change in tariffs to control for some of the anticipation to the 1980 NTR liberalization. Column 3 -- Shipping
-- includes shipping costs. Column 4 -- Anticipation -- further includes applied duties. Column 5 -- Life
cycle -- includes life-cycle controls for the first, second, penultimate, and last year that a good is traded,
as well as the good's age and age squared. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the gj level. 
p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.


                                                         38
              Table 6: Annual Elasticity to NNTR Gap: Robustness (continued)

                                                             jgt
                           All              Full           Balanced         NNTR            Applied
 1t=t 1j =China Xg
 1974                   -9.88            -8.88             -10.1           -8.23           -9.43
 1975                   -9.54            -8.37             -9.60           -8.37           -9.34
 1976                   -10.5            -8.16             -10.6           -9.31           -9.42
 1977                   -10.1            -8.00             -10.2           -9.05           -8.92
 1978                   -10.3            -7.50             -10.3           -9.01           -9.01
 1979                   -10.8            -7.64             -10.9           -9.49           -9.25
 1980                   -9.13            -6.17             -9.19           -8.27           -7.77
 1981                   -7.38            -4.83             -7.57           -6.30           -6.69
 1982                   -7.58            -4.82             -7.45           -6.77           -6.82
 1983                   -7.67            -4.48             -7.39           -6.67           -6.38
 1984                   -6.33            -3.95             -6.48           -5.54           -5.95
 1985                   -7.18            -4.63             -6.83           -6.56           -5.96
 1986                   -6.87            -4.15             -6.88           -6.17           -5.53
 1987                   -6.09            -3.82             -6.10           -5.53           -5.13
 1988                   -4.76            -3.20             -4.51           -4.41           -3.76
 1989                   -4.08            -2.54             -3.81           -3.66           -2.76
 1990                   -3.27            -2.29             -3.07           -3.09           -2.56
 1991                   -2.60            -1.73             -2.55           -2.27           -2.00
 1992                   -2.13            -1.41             -2.58           -1.83           -1.63
 1993                   -1.63            -0.90             -2.07           -1.31           -1.58
 1994                   -1.76            -1.19             -2.14           -1.41           -1.54
 1995                   -1.67            -1.18             -1.90           -1.52           -1.10
 1996                   -1.55            -1.18             -1.53           -1.37           -1.07
 1997                   -1.78            -1.17             -1.85           -1.50           -1.17
 1998                   -1.51            -1.25             -1.01           -1.40           -0.90
 1999                   -1.19            -0.88             -1.29           -0.94           -1.10
 2000                    -0.68            -0.55            -0.91            -0.56           -0.68
 2001                    -0.27            -0.21             -0.35           -0.24           -0.25
 2002                    -0.63            -0.29            -0.76            -0.51           -0.34
 2003                   -0.99             -0.52            -0.83           -0.85            -0.56
 2004                    -0.34            0.013             -0.30           -0.20            0.15
 2005                    -0.64            0.058             -0.29           -0.65            0.32
 2006                    -0.37             0.31             -0.57           -0.21           -0.33
 2007                    -0.14            -0.17              0.13           -0.15            0.28
 FE                     gt, jt, gj       gt, jt, gj        gt, jt, gj      gt, jt, gj       gt, jt, gj
 N                      1,223,264        1,453,687         658,635         1,090,460        614,557
 Adj. R-squared            0.78             0.78             0.80             0.78            0.80

Notes: All estimates are obtained using variations of (5). Xg is the good-level NNTR Gap in 2001, except in
column 4, in which it is the NNTR rate, and in column 5, in which it is the applied NNTR rate, calculated
as the good-level tariff rate applied to Chinese imports between 1974 and 1979. Countries included in the
baseline sample are China and countries with NTR, excluding Mexico and Canada. Column All includes all
countries. Column Balanced includes only the goods in which U.S.-China trade was non-zero before 1981.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the gj level.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.




                                                      39
                               Table 7: Calibrated Parameter Values

Parameter    Meaning                                     Value    Source/target

(a) Assigned
    w        Wage                                           1     Normalization
    r        Interest rate                               4 pct.   Standard
    z        Variance of productivity                     1.32    Alessandria et   al.   (2021a)
    z        Persistence of productivity                  0.65    Alessandria et   al.   (2021a)
    0        Correlation of survival with productivity   21.04    Alessandria et   al.   (2021a)
    1        Minimum death probability                   0.023    Alessandria et   al.   (2021a)
    g1       NNTR tariff                                 Varies   Data
    g2       MFN tariff                                  Varies   Data

(b) Calibrated to exporter life cycle
    f0       Entry cost                                   0.50    Export participation rate = 22 pct.
    f1       Continuation cost                            0.30    Exit rate = 17 pct.
  H /L       High iceberg cost                            2.60    Avg. entrant sales/avg. incumbent sales = 0.5

(c) Calibrated to trade elasticity dynamics
             Demand elasticity                            3.55    ECM estimate of SR trade elasticity = 2.3
             Prob. of keeping iceberg cost                0.87    ECM estimate of LR trade elasticity = 8.07

(d) Calibrated to annual NNTR gap
   21,t      Prob. NNTR to MFN                            0.25    Avg. NNTR gap during 1974­1979
   12,t      Prob. MFN to NNTR                           Varies   NNTR gap during 1980­2008




                                                   40
                                                        Figure 1: China's Growing Role in the World and the U.S.
                                     (a) China's Share of World Totals                                                       (b) China's Share of U.S. Trade
             0.20




                                                                                                                    0.20
             0.15




                                                                                                                    0.15
                                                                                                                                                         Imports from China
 China's Share




                                                                                                        China's Share
             0.10




                                                                                                                    0.10
                                    Non-U.S. GDP
             0.05




                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                                    Exports to China
                                                        Non-U.S. Exports
             0.00




                                                                                                                    0.00
                                          1970     1978      1986      1994   2002   2010   2018                                1970       1978   1986       1994      2002      2010               2018

Notes: Panel (a) shows China's share of Non-U.S. World GDP (dashed) and World Exports (solid). Panel
(b) shows China's share in U.S. exports (dashed) and imports (solid). Data source is UN Comtrade.



                                                          Figure 2: China's Aggregate Import Share and Duties

                                                                 NTR Access                        Congress Votes                                        PNTR Access
                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                                                                                                        -3
                              0.3
      Applied Duties (unweighted)




                                                                                                                           Trade (right)
                                       Tariffs (left)




                                                                                                                                                                                        Import Share (log)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -4
                  0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                          -5
     0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                        -6
                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                        -7




                                    1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

Notes: Tariffs are defined at the SITC level and calculated as the log of 1 + total duties over the total FOB
value of imports. The dashed lines are the median tariff across goods and the 25th and 75th percentiles. The
solid line is the log import share of China over the total of U.S. imports from all countries.




                                                                                                   41
                                                                     Figure 3: China's Extensive Margin of Exports to the U.S.
                                                0.6
                                                                             NTR Access                     Congress Votes                      PNTR Access
 # SITCs Imported from i / Total SITCs Imported
                                    0.5




                                                                                                                    China
         0.3          0.4




                                                                                                                Median NTR Countries
                                   0.2




                                                      1974          1978       1982          1986      1990         1994            1998        2002         2006

Notes: The lines are the number of imported SITC goods from China (solid) and the median of the NTR
countries (dashed) over the total SITC goods imported that year. A good is considered non-traded if its
share of the country's total exports to the U.S. is below 0.00001, in the spirit of Kehoe and Ruhl (2013).



                                                                               Figure 4: U.S. Trade Policy toward China
                                       1
 1+Duties NTR Countries / 1+Duties China




                                                                           End Embargo

                                                                                                                                                       Trade Wars
                                       .8




                                                                                                                                            WTO
                                                                                                                                           Access
                                                                                                                               PNTR
                                       .6




                                                                                                                               Access


                                                                                                                     Congress
                                       .4




                                                                                                                      Votes
                                                                                                       NTR
                                                                                                      Access
                                       .2
                                       0




                                                      1950   1955     1960   1965     1970   1975   1980    1985   1990      1995   2000    2005    2010    2015    2020

Notes: This figure plots the ratio of the 1 + tariff applied to China over the median 1 + tariff applied to
NTR countries. Tariffs--total annual duties over the total annual FOB value of imports--are defined at the
8-digit TS-USA level between 1974 and 1988 and at the HS-8 level between 1989 and 2018. The solid line is
the median of all products and the dashed lines are the 25th and 75th percentiles.




                                                                                                           42
                                           Figure 5: Average Applied Duties 1974­79 and the NNTR Rate
                1.3




                                                                                                    y=x
                        1.0
 Applied Duties 1974-79
                0.8




                                                                                                          Fitted
      0.5       0.3
                0.0




                                   0.0              0.3              0.5                      0.8          1.0              1.3
                                                                           Median NNTR Rate

Notes: Each dot is a SITC good (excluding MFA goods). The unconditional correlation is 77 percent and
the slope of the linear fit is 0.6 (solid line).



                                            Figure 6: Elasticity of U.S. Imports from China to NNTR Gap
                0
 Elasticity of Trade to NNTR Gap




                                                     NTR Access                                               PNTR Access
      -10       -15      -5




                                   1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

Notes: This Figure plots the estimates of   ^t for t = [1974, 2007] from (5). The dashed lines are the 95
percent confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered at the gj level.




                                                                               43
             Figure 7: Elasticity of U.S. Imports from China to NNTR Gap, with Lagged Imports
                0
 Elasticity Trade to NNTR Gap
    -10                -5




                                                                   Baseline          Including Lagged Trade
                -15




                                    1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

Notes: This Figure plots the estimates of     ^t for t = [1974, 2007] from (5), including the lagged value of
imports vjg,t-1 on the right-hand side (dashed lines). The standard errors that construct the 95 percent
confidence interval are clustered at the gj level.



                                      Figure 8: Annual Elasticity to NNTR Gap: TSUSA-8 Aggregation, 1974­87
                0              -1
  Elasticity Trade to NNTR Gap
 -4          -3        -2




                                                                              NTR Access
                -5




                                    1974        1976        1978         1980          1982           1984    1986       1988

Notes: This figure plots the estimates of  ^t for t = [1974, 1987] from (5) using 8-digit TSUSA product-level
aggregation of all variables, instead of SITC. This level of aggregation ends in 1988. The dashed lines are
the 95 percent confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered at the gj level.




                                                                                44
                                   Figure 9: Annual Elasticity to NNTR Gap: HS-8 Aggregation, 1989­2007
              0
 Elasticity Trade to NNTR Gap
                           -1




                                                                                          PNTR Access
 -3            -2
              -4




                                1989    1991    1993    1995    1997        1999   2001       2003      2005   2007

Notes: This figure plots the estimates of  ^t for t = [1989, 2007] from (5) using HS-8 product level aggregation
of all variables, instead of SITC. This level of aggregation is only available since 1989. The dashed lines are
the 95 percent confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered at the gj level.



                                       Figure 10: Annual Elasticity to NNTR Gap: China Supply Factors




Notes: This figure plots the estimates of  ^t for t = [1974, 2007] from (6) using the merged World Trade
dataset from Feenstra et al. (2005) (1974­2000) and the BACI Trade Dataset (2000­08). The dashed lines
are 95 percent confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered at the gj level.




                                                                       45
                     Figure 11: Trade and Policy Dynamics in the Model
       (a) Annual elasticity to NNTR gap                      (b) Trade-policy probabilities

  0                                                 0.8                        NNTR to MFN
                                                                               MFN to NNTR, surprises
                                                                               MFN to NNTR, benchmark

                                                    0.6
  5

                                                    0.4
 10
                                                    0.2
                           Data
                           TPU
                           No TPU
 15                                                 0.0
      1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                  1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
       (c) Expected present value of tariffs        (d) Aggregate trade volumes (log, 1974 = 0)

                         Benchmark                  2.0
                         No TPU
0.3                      Surprises
                         Avg. Tariff
                                                    1.5

0.2
                                                    1.0

0.1
                                                    0.5
                                                                            Benchmark
                                                                            No TPU
                                                                            Surprises
0.0                                                 0.0
      1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005                  1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005




                                               46
              Figure 12: Model-Implied Expectations versus Bayesian Learning
                    (a) Prior PDF                                                             (b) Posterior mean

            b=1.0                                                             0.8                             Model
3.5         b=2.0                                                                                             b=1.0
            b=3.0                                                                                             b=2.0
3.0         b=4.0                                                                                             b=3.0
            b=5.0                                                             0.6                             b=4.0
2.5                                                                                                           b=5.0

2.0
                                                                              0.4
1.5
1.0
                                                                              0.2
0.5
0.0
                                                                              0.0
      0.0     0.2               0.4              0.6   0.8         1.0              1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
                                            12



                                Figure 13: Long-Run Trade Elasticity in the Model



                                           15.5
                                           16.0
                     d logexport / d log




                                           16.5
                                           17.0
                                           17.5
                                           18.0
                                           18.5
                                               0.0           0.2          0.4           0.6        0.8




                                                                         47
Appendix
A      Sensitivity to Aggregation & Time Horizon
In section 3.3.3 we showed that the gradual effect of the NNTR gap on China's exports to
the United States is also present when considering trade at the more disaggregate 8-digit
TS-USA and the HS-8 level. Here we study how the level of aggregation affects the long-
to short-run trade ratio. The findings indicate that (1) the using a more aggregate level of
trade flows (SITC) does not change the average speed of adjustment to tariffs; and (2) it is
important to use the long sample period to capture the full extent of the gradualness.
    Precisely, we estimate the unrestricted version of the ECM in (3) for the sample period of
1974­88 using the 8-digit TS-USA level of aggregation to compare it with the results of using
the baseline SITC level. We do the same for the 1989­2008 period comparing the results of
the HS-8 level of aggregation with those using SITC. Table B.3 report the results. There
are two main takeaways. First, China's long- to short-run elasticity is smaller when splitting
the baseline sample period into two while continuing to use the SITC level of aggregation --
compare the baseline ratio of 3.5 (column 1) to that of 1974-88 at 2 (column 3) and that of
1989-2008 at 2.7 (column 5). This is consistent with the documented slow adjustment to the
1980 NTR liberalization that extended well into the 1990s. Second, the long- to short-run
elasticity ratio is not substantially affected by the level of aggregation. This is explained by
the fact that, both, the long- and the short-run elasticities, are mostly unaffected, except
for the case of NTR countries between 1989­2008 with HS-8 data (column 4), in which case
both are close to two times larger in with HS-8 data. For its part, the long run elasticity
is largely unaffected because the larger coefficients on the lagged tariffs (-2 ) at the more
disaggregate level are cancelled by the larger the coefficients of the lagged value of imports
(-1 ) at the more aggregate level.




                                              48
B   Tables

             Table B.1: Annual Elasticity to NNTR Gap - TS-USA, 1974-88
                                            Baseline    All             Applied Tariffs       Incl.
                                            Sample Countries          Communists, 1974-79    Tariffs
                Dep. Var.: vjgt                (1)      (2)                   (3)              (4)
                1{t = 1974}1{j = China}Xg   -4.35    -4.23                 -4.02            -3.01
                                             (0.42)   (0.42)                (0.43)           (0.43)
                1{t = 1975}1{j = China}Xg   -3.87    -3.81                 -3.55            -2.53
                                             (0.40)   (0.40)                (0.41)           (0.42)
                1{t = 1976}1{j = China}Xg   -3.80    -3.69                 -3.49            -2.43
                                             (0.38)   (0.38)                (0.39)           (0.40)
                1{t = 1977}1{j = China}Xg   -3.91    -3.80                 -3.59            -2.53
                                             (0.38)   (0.38)                (0.38)           (0.39)
                1{t = 1978}1{j = China}Xg   -3.44    -3.27                 -3.00            -2.09
                                             (0.36)   (0.36)                (0.36)           (0.37)
                1{t = 1979}1{j = China}Xg   -3.89    -3.78                 -3.54            -2.54
                                             (0.35)   (0.35)                (0.35)           (0.37)
                1{t = 1980}1{j = China}Xg   -2.69    -2.61                 -2.25            -2.48
                                             (0.33)   (0.33)                (0.33)           (0.33)
                1{t = 1981}1{j = China}Xg   -1.89    -1.79                 -1.78            -1.75
                                             (0.33)   (0.33)                (0.32)           (0.33)
                1{t = 1982}1{j = China}Xg   -2.02    -1.93                 -1.87            -1.97
                                             (0.33)   (0.33)                (0.32)           (0.33)
                1{t = 1983}1{j = China}Xg   -2.22    -2.15                 -1.93            -2.19
                                             (0.31)   (0.31)                (0.30)           (0.31)
                1{t = 1984}1{j = China}Xg   -2.16    -2.05                 -1.84            -2.14
                                             (0.31)   (0.31)                (0.30)           (0.31)
                1{t = 1985}1{j = China}Xg   -1.45    -1.35                 -1.09            -1.43
                                             (0.28)   (0.28)                (0.27)           (0.28)
                1{t = 1986}1{j = China}Xg   -1.03    -0.93                 -0.72            -1.00
                                             (0.26)   (0.26)                (0.26)           (0.26)
                1{t = 1987}1{j = China}Xg    -0.52    -0.47                  -0.32           -0.52
                                             (0.22)   (0.22)                (0.22)           (0.22)
                jst                                                                         -1.97
                                                                                             (0.15)
                FE                          gt, jt, gj   gt, jt, gj        gt, jt, gj       gt, jt, gj
                Observations                 455182       500641            652316           455182
                Adjusted R2                   0.800        0.800             0.798            0.800

    Note: All estimates are obtained by using (5), except that all variables are aggregated to 8-digit
    TS-USA product level, instead of the SITC level as in our baseline and that the average 1974-79
    applied tariff on China is used as Xg instead of the NNTR gap (not available for TS-USA).
    See Figure 4 for the NTR liberalization in 1980 with TS-USA aggregation. Column 1 uses
    our baseline sample design that excludes NNTR and NAFTA countries as well as goods that
    were subject to quota removals under the MFA. Column 2 uses all countries. Column 3 uses
    applied tariffs to all communist countries to calculate the NNTR rate, instead of applied tariffs
    to China only. Column 4 includes tariffs in (5) and as expected the coefficient diminishes in
    the early years. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the gj level.  p < 0.05, 
    p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.




                                                         49
          Table B.2: Annual Elasticity to NNTR Gap - HS-8, 1990-2007
                                Baseline         No            All        Full               Balanced
                                Sample        Tariffs     Countries    Sample       z included if vCHN,g,1990 > 0
    Dep. Var.: vjgt                 (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)                    (5)
    1{t = 1989}1{j = China}Xg   -3.42        -3.45         -3.36       -2.25                  -3.34
                                 (0.27)       (0.27)        (0.27)      (0.23)                 (0.29)
    1{t = 1990}1{j = China}Xg   -2.67        -2.70         -2.60       -1.82                  -2.58
                                 (0.26)       (0.27)        (0.26)      (0.23)                 (0.28)
    1{t = 1991}1{j = China}Xg   -2.18        -2.22         -2.14       -1.55                  -2.10
                                 (0.25)       (0.25)        (0.25)      (0.22)                 (0.27)
    1{t = 1992}1{j = China}Xg   -1.64        -1.55         -1.09       -1.54
                                 (0.24)       (0.24)        (0.24)      (0.20)                 (0.27)
    1{t = 1993}1{j = China}Xg   -1.03        -1.08         -0.98       -0.83                  -1.01
                                 (0.23)       (0.23)        (0.23)      (0.20)                 (0.26)
    1{t = 1994}1{j = China}Xg   -1.20        -1.26         -1.18       -1.07                  -1.14
                                 (0.22)       (0.22)        (0.22)      (0.19)                 (0.26)
    1{t = 1995}1{j = China}Xg   -1.06        -1.10         -0.99       -1.00                  -1.21
                                 (0.21)       (0.21)        (0.21)      (0.19)                 (0.25)
    1{t = 1996}1{j = China}Xg   -0.84        -0.87         -0.80       -0.84                  -0.80
                                 (0.21)       (0.21)        (0.21)      (0.18)                 (0.25)
    1{t = 1997}1{j = China}Xg   -1.01        -1.03         -0.99       -0.98                  -1.00
                                 (0.20)       (0.20)        (0.20)      (0.17)                 (0.24)
    1{t = 1998}1{j = China}Xg   -0.99        -1.00         -0.99       -1.11                  -0.88
                                 (0.19)       (0.19)        (0.19)      (0.17)                 (0.22)
    1{t = 1999}1{j = China}Xg   -0.63        -0.63         -0.62       -0.89                   -0.57
                                 (0.19)       (0.19)        (0.19)      (0.16)                 (0.23)
    1{t = 2000}1{j = China}Xg   -0.46        -0.47         -0.48       -0.88                     -0.31
                                 (0.18)       (0.18)        (0.18)      (0.16)                 (0.21)
    1{t = 2001}1{j = China}Xg   -0.50        -0.52         -0.51       -0.99                     -0.29
                                 (0.17)       (0.17)        (0.17)      (0.15)                 (0.20)
    1{t = 2002}1{j = China}Xg     -0.29        -0.30         -0.30     -0.60                     -0.15
                                 (0.17)       (0.16)        (0.16)      (0.14)                 (0.20)
    1{t = 2003}1{j = China}Xg    -0.32        -0.32         -0.35      -0.56                    -0.33
                                 (0.16)       (0.16)        (0.16)      (0.14)                 (0.19)
    1{t = 2004}1{j = China}Xg    -0.33        -0.32         -0.32      -0.54                     -0.18
                                 (0.15)       (0.15)        (0.14)      (0.13)                 (0.17)
    1{t = 2005}1{j = China}Xg    -0.31        -0.31         -0.31       -0.069                 -0.086
                                 (0.14)       (0.14)        (0.14)      (0.12)                 (0.16)
    1{t = 2006}1{j = China}Xg    -0.28        -0.28         -0.31        -0.14                   -0.18
                                 (0.14)       (0.14)        (0.14)      (0.11)                 (0.15)
    1{t = 2007}1{j = China}Xg      -0.17        -0.16         -0.19     -0.023                  0.050
                                 (0.12)       (0.12)        (0.12)      (0.10)                 (0.13)
    jst                         -3.87                      -3.37       -4.07                  -4.62
                                 (0.20)                     (0.26)      (0.22)                 (0.19)
    FE                          gt, jt, gj   gt, jt, gj   gt, jt, gj   gt, jt, gj             gt, jt, gj
    Observations                2079150      2079150      2314918      2930184                1246200
    Adjusted R2                   0.766       0.766          0.774      0.774                   0.778

Note: All estimates are obtained by using (5), except and that all variables are aggregated
to HS-8 product level, instead of the SITC level as in our baseline, and that jgt is added
to the right hand side of (5) (as in Pierce and Schott (2016)). Column 1 uses our baseline
sample design that excludes NNTR and NAFTA countries as well as goods that were subject
to quota removals under the MFA. Column 2 uses the same sample but excludes tariffs from
the regression. Column 3 uses all countries and column 4 further includes all goods. Column 5
uses only products from which U.S. imports from China was non-zero in 1990. Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered at the gj level.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.




                                                      50
Table B.3: Sensitivity of Long- & Short-Run Elasticities to Aggregation & Time Horizon
               ECM Unrestricted                1974-2008          1974-88                  1989-2008
                                                 SITC       TS-USA      SITC            HS-8      SITC
               Dep. Var.: vjzt                     (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)        (5)
               1{j = China}jst                  -2.02       -2.24 -2.23               -3.79 -1.76
                                                 (0.24)      (0.13)     (0.39)         (0.13)     (0.29)
               1{j = China}jst                  -2.30       -1.89 -2.33               -2.26 -2.21
                                                 (0.41)      (0.28)     (0.38)         (0.57)     (0.97)
               1{j = China}vjs,t-1              -0.47       -0.78 -0.67               -0.60 -0.54
                                                 (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)         (0.00)     (0.00)
               1{j = China}vjs,t-1              -0.37       -0.75 -0.61               -0.51 -0.45
                                                 (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.02)         (0.00)     (0.01)
               1{j = China}js,t-1               -1.61       -2.76 -1.89               -3.27 -1.74
                                                 (0.16)      (0.16)     (0.29)         (0.12)     (0.22)
               1{j = China}js,t-1               -2.96       -3.11 -2.86               -3.88 -2.72
                                                 (0.22)      (0.27)     (0.26)         (0.40)     (0.68)
               Long-Run NTR Countries           -3.45       -3.51 -2.83               -5.44 -3.21
                                                 (0.35)      (0.20)     (0.43)         (0.20)     (0.41)

               Long-Run China                   -8.07       -4.15        -4.66        -7.55        -6.06
                                                 (0.57)      (0.36)       (0.41)       (0.78)       (1.51)

               Long-/Short-Run NTR Countries     1.71         1.57         1.27         1.43         1.82

               Long-/Short-Run China             3.51          2.20        2.00         3.34          2.74
               FE                              st, jt, sj   st, jt, sj   st, jt, sj   st, jt, sj   st, jt, sj
               Observations                     934249       882590       297073      2122714       631559
               Adjusted R2                       0.269        0.383        0.361       0.291         0.292

    Note: All estimates are obtained by using (3). Column 1 uses the baseline sample period
    (1974­2008) and aggregation level of variables (5-digit SITC). Columns 2 and 3 use the sample
    period 1974­89, and columns 4 and 5 1989­2008. Column 2 uses 8-digit TS-USA aggregation
    of all variables. Column 3 and 5 SITC and column 4 8-digit HS level. Fixed effects of s are at
    the aggregation level of the sample used. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the
    zj level.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001.




                                                     51
