                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          LOBBYING BEHIND THE FRONTIER

                                    Matilde Bombardini
                                 Olimpia Cutinelli Rendina
                                     Francesco Trebbi

                                     Working Paper 29120
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w29120


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2021




We would like to thank participants at The Economics of Creative Destruction, a festschrift
symposium in honor of Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Matilde Bombardini, Olimpia Cutinelli Rendina, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lobbying Behind the Frontier
Matilde Bombardini, Olimpia Cutinelli Rendina, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 29120
August 2021
JEL No. D72,P48

                                           ABSTRACT

This chapter investigates the non-market response of firms to international trade shocks
increasing the level of competition in U.S. industries. Lobbying expenditures increase as a
consequence of import changes related to the China shock. The effect on lobbying is not
homogeneous across firms and it concentrates particularly in those producers which are behind
the technological frontier. We discuss theoretical mechanisms driving lobbying of firms away
from the technological frontier: not only the cost-benefit trade-off between innovation and
lobbying is relatively less appealing for low productivity firms, but the collective action ability of
low productivity firms improves after a competitive shock.

Matilde Bombardini                                Francesco Trebbi
Business & Public Policy Group                    Haas School of Business
Haas School of Business                           University of California, Berkeley
University of California, Berkeley                2220 Piedmont Ave
2220 Piedmont Ave                                 Berkeley, CA 94720
Berkeley, CA 94720                                and CIFAR
and CIFAR and RCEA                                and also NBER
and also NBER                                     ftrebbi@berkeley.edu
mbombardini@haas.berkeley.edu

Olimpia Cutinelli Rendina
Collége de France
and Paris School of Economics
olimpiacutinelli@hotmail.com
1    Introduction
This chapter focuses on the political economy of creative destruction. Indeed, political econ-
omy considerations are essential to capturing the full extent of the implications of the Schum-
peterian approach developed by Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt (Aghion and Howitt 1992,
2008), to which this book is devoted.
    As specified in many parts of this volume, the process of creative destruction revolves
around the clear identification of winners and losers in the unfolding of economic develop-
ment. Within this framework, antagonist groups of incumbents and challengers are granular
and non-atomistic, and therefore they carry the ability to not only affect market outcomes,
but also to substantially influence politics.
    An important aspect of studying the market-government interactions that arise as a con-
sequence of heightened competitive forces within the Schumpeterian perspective is lobbying
activities. This will be the specific subject of analysis of our chapter, particularly focused
on U.S. Federal lobbying activities. We will then abstract from considerations on revolving
doors, campaign donations (Stratmann 2005, Bombardini and Trebbi 2011), strategic ad-
vocacy through charitable giving (Bertrand et al. 2018, 2020), or grassroots organizations
and umbrella coalitions. Although this omission is clearly a shortcoming of our analysis,
we conjecture that the phenomena illustrated below would become even starker in terms
of magnitude and direction were these omitted dimensions to be taken into consideration.
Conversely, the advantage of employing lobbying expenditures is that lobbying expenditures
represent quantitatively an important channel of political influence. Annual lobbying reports
display amounts at least ten times larger than federal campaign contributions totals in dollar
terms. A second advantage is that we know the issues targeted by lobbyists, while we do not
know why Political Action Committees (PAC's) monetary contributions are given to politi-
cians, for example. Therefore, we can directly isolate the amount of lobbying expenditures
by sector targeting trade policy or other policies (Bombardini and Trebbi 2012) differently
from other avenues of political influence studied in the political economy literature.
    Our analysis takes its starting point from the important work on the relationship between
competition and innovation developed in Aghion et al. (2005), where the phenomenon of a
non-linear relationship between these two equilibrium outcomes was first clearly illustrated.
Aghion et al. (2009), furthermore, showed how foreign competition and entry may induce an
"escape-competition" effect, stronger for "frontier" firms/sectors that are able to separate
from the pack of lower productivity followers. Within the Schumpeterian framework, firms
that are able to innovate and differentiate from the competition will do that when competi-
tive pressures reach certain levels, such as the ones induced by Chinese import penetration


                                              2
following the country's accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001.
    Empirical validation of this intuition has spurred a lively debate in international trade
and productivity studies, not without some nuance. For instance, Autor, Dorn, Hanson,
Pisano and Shu (2016) find a decline in the patenting activity of all publicly traded firms
in the United States in industries more exposed to competition from Chinese firms imports.
Positive effects of competition on innovation and productivity are reported for the U.S. case
by Hombert and Matray (2018), for the E.U. by Bloom et al. (2016), and within China itself
by Brandt et al. (2017). In addition, Bombardini et al. (2017), Fieler and Harrison (2018)
have also produced supporting evidence highlighting the presence of the innovative push at
the top of the productivity distribution (i.e. at the technological frontier).1
    It is within this debate that the main research question at the core of this chapter lies.
If support to Aghion et al. (2009) logic is granted and an escape-competition effect (i.e.
a positive effect of a foreign competitive shock on domestic innovation) is strong for firms
closer to the frontier, the question is what happens to firms that do not have the know-how
to innovate or for whom innovation may not be profitable ­ those behind the frontier.
    The answer, this chapter will show, is: they lobby the government. relatedly, this article
contributes to the extant Political Economy literature by empirically answering the following
complementary questions: Do firms use political influence tools, i.e. lobbying, to curb foreign
competition in the event of a negative competitive shock? Which firms tend to lobby more
in response to large foreign competition shocks? Did the China shock increase lobbying
activity as an avenue to escape competition over the last thirty years in the U.S.?
    A vast literature on special interest politics (Grossman and Helpman 2001, Baumgartner
et al. 2009, Drutman 2015) clearly identifies escape-competition objectives, particularly from
foreign competition within an international trade context, as one of the goals of lobbying
and political influence activities. It is not by chance that one of the first and most influential
pieces of research on lobbying within the Economics discipline was exactly about protection
from foreign competition (Grossman and Helpman 1994) and quid-pro-quo politics.2 Several
subsequent empirical studies have validated and extended this discussion (Gawande 1998,
Goldberg and Maggi 1999, Gawande and Bandyopadhyay 2000) and this represents today
   1
     For a comprehensive review of this literature see also Shu and Steinwender (2020).
   2
     A quid-pro-quo approach to lobbying focuses on the payment for policy from a firm to a politician. This
is the mechanism at the core of seminal special interest work in Economics (Grossman and Helpman 1994).
However, original contributions such as Potters and Van Winden (1992), Austen-Smith (1993), Austen-Smith
and Wright (1994), and Bennedsen and Feldmann (2002), etc. focus on issues of asymmetry of information
and of expertise between firms and politicians. See de Figueiredo and Richter (2014), Bombardini and Trebbi
(2020) for comprehensive discussions of the differences in these interpretations of non-market strategies. For
the core message of this chapter it will not be necessary taking a stance on whether a quid-pro-quo or
informational mechanism or both are at work.



                                                      3
an active area of research at the intersection of international trade and political economy.
    Employing the most complete U.S. Federal lobbying information available (Kim 2018) and
state-of-the-art statistical identification approaches to measure the causal effect of heightened
competitive pressures from China (Autor et al. 2013) over the period 1999-2017, we report
a set of novel empirical findings in line with the Aghion-Howitt logic, yet augmenting it in
one important respect: losers from competition engage in non-market activities to escape
competition more.
    This chapter shows that in the U.S. the "China Shock" produced an average increase
in lobbying activities across all issues (i.e. not only on trade issues, but also budget, taxes
and all issues pertinent to funding and appropriation of subsidies and trade restrictions)
of substantial economic importance. The average increase in imports during the 1999-2017
period is shown to induce an increase in lobbying of approximately 31 percent using industry-
level data.
    Furthermore, focusing on Compustat firm-level information, it is the firms behind the
frontier who increase lobbying after foreign competition increases. The increase in lobbying
activities as a consequence of the China Shock appears concentrated in the subset of firms
below the sample mean for sales, employment, or Research and Development expenditures.
Our results are robust to several modifications of our main variables and time sampling
approaches in the construction of the panel data used in this study.
    To conclude, the article discusses, but does not explicitly formalize the potential mecha-
nisms behind our findings. A complete formalization is offered in Cutinelli-Rendina (2021),
which is also the original reference for the heterogeneity results in this chapter and to which
we refer for additional detail. We conjecture here that two different drivers of our findings
may be at work simultaneously. First and more directly, in the presence of heightened com-
petition from China, it is too costly to innovate for firms that are far from the productivity
frontier, while lobbying may be a relatively cheaper tool for them. A second, more subtle,
mechanism is that competition improves collective action effort among productivity laggards,
as a consequence of the logic of Olson (1965). Innovative frontier firms pull ahead through
innovation, leaving behind in the densely contested original product space the pack of firms
behind the frontier. Contemporaneously, as result of the heightened competition, the ex-
tremely low productivity firms outright exit the market, due to loss making in the presence
of entry from foreign competitors. Therefore, within a sector, there is a simultaneous exit of
the very top and of the very bottom productivity firms. The result is to create within the
original product space a more concentrated group of medium/low productivity firms (those
behind the frontier but not the absolute worse ones). In this remaining group, the incentive
to free ride in lobbying is lower and lobbying activities are shown to increase both in terms


                                               4
of per firm spending and total aggregate industry spending.
    We believe this chapter offers a contribution to the political economy literature that
has recently displayed an increasing interest in lobbying and non-market strategies. Exam-
ples within Economics include Bombardini and Trebbi (2012), Blanes i Vidal et al. (2012),
Bertrand et al. (2014), Kang (2016), Bombardini and Trebbi (2020), Bertrand et al. (2020)
and an even larger footprint can be found in Political Science.3 More importantly, this chap-
ter shows how the intuition of Aghion et al. (2009) produces clearly implications beyond
markets, yet of potentially vast economic policy importance.
    Our work also connects to another strand of Schumpeterian research, the one on pro-
ductive and unproductive entrepreneurship. Baumol (1990) may be considered the seminal
reference in Economics and Management Studies in this respect.4 His extensive body of work
on unproductive entrepreneurs is a contribution that planted the seed of many subsequent
investigations into the misallocation of fixed entrepreneurial resources from productivity-
enhancing to rent seeking activities, as function of time-varying factors (one of which could
be foreign competition, as in our instance) in the process of economic development. From
Baumol's work we also borrow a more qualitative approach, documenting a few relevant case
studies in the next section of the article.
    Relatedly, this chapter directly contributes to the discussion of lobbying efforts exerted
by economic losers (Hillman 1982, Cassing and Hillman 1986, Baldwin and Baldwin 1996,
Brainard and Verdier 1997, Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud 2007). This specific literature fo-
cuses on groups sustaining concentrated losses as the result of some form of foreign compe-
tition and documents their non-market response. The papers in this area are clear that the
response through activation of political ties may then take the form of information about
the political consequences of the policy or direct electoral support, both likely at play also
within our context.5
    In complementary work, Akcigit et al. (2018) (in addition to the chapter in this volume by
the same authors) explore a similar aspect of the Schumpeterian framework: the protection
on the part of incumbent firms of their positional rents. They provide empirical evidence
of this regularity based on detailed data on political connections and effort to innovate in
a representative sample of Italian firms. Within the framework postulated by Akcigit et al.
(2018), incumbents attempt to "ring fence" their rents through political protection. As
incumbents may happen to be the relatively lower productivity firms in the Italian context,
this logic is not only perfectly conformant to the one we study in this article, but, by focusing
  3
    See Drutman (2015) and de Figueiredo and Richter (2014) for recent reviews.
  4
    For a qualitative discussion, see Litan and Hathaway (2017).
  5
    See also Bombardini and Trebbi (2011) for a discussion of these channels.



                                                  5
on another country than the U.S., provides external validity to our empirical findings and
ultimately to the Aghion-Howitt logic.
    Finally, this chapter connects to a political economy literature emphasizing different
modes of interactions with the political environment for industries at different distance from
the technological frontier. Aghion et al. (2007) is an example with reference to the differential
role of democratic institutions and innovation for industries closer to the world technological
frontier where openness and entry characteristically associated to liberal democracy matter
more. Acemoglu et al. (2005) emphasize the role of economic losers in slowing down the
process of institutional evolution. The evidence in this chapter obviously points to lobbying
as one such mechanism through which this may manifest.
    The chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a series of motivating case studies
to frame the subsequent empirical analysis. Section 3 describes the data and the construction
of the variables used in our main tests. Section 4 presents our empirical strategy and approach
to inference. Section 5 reports our main results on both the average effect of the competition
shock and heterogeneity by high and low productivity firms. The last section concludes.


2     Case Studies
Before discussing our data and empirical strategy in a more targeted statistical analysis
of the U.S. case, we begin our analysis by providing a modicum of qualitative evidence
motivating our broader interest in the phenomenon of lobbying behind the frontier. This
section is therefore aimed at briefly illustrating different forms of lobbying and political
influence by economic laggards, which are indeed pervasive in both high and low income
countries, framing more broadly the phenomenon investigated in this study.


2.1    Zombie Firms
To illustrate the reasons why non-frontier firms may revert to non-market strategies when
exposed to adverse market shocks a particularly stark case can be made through the example
of zombie firms. The OECD (McGowan et al. 2017) defines zombie companies as "old
firms that have persistent problems meeting their interest payments ", essentially incumbent
firms surviving in the market only because of forbearance on the part of their creditors.
Furthermore, the OECD study attributes to the presence of such zombies a major and
increasingly heavier drag on total factor productivity in high income countries since the mid
2000's.
    Related to our work, observers have directly linked the mechanics of the zombie firms


                                               6
phenomenon to special interest politics and "lobbying by economic losers". In commenting
the OECD report cited above, The Economist magazine for instance reports that "Govern-
ments tend to back existing firms, since they have the power to lobby; small start-ups don't get
a hearing "6 and that "Which companies are most likely to get protected? The obvious answer
is incumbent groups that possess lobbying clout."7 These are essentially the mechanisms that
we analyze.
    In the persistent Japanese crisis Caballero et al. (2008) have shown convincingly that
zombie banks (i.e. insolvent financial institutions) have played a prominent role in depressing
growth. The authors trace back their survival to similar mechanism as zombies in other
industries: close ties with the government and regulatory incentives to issue bad loans.
Similarly, it is indicative that the Macmillan Dictionary defines a zombie bank as: "A bank
that is worth less than nothing, but continues to operate because its debt is supported by the
government ",8 where the role of the government is explicitly remarked.
    It is important to further clarify here that zombie companies may gain political access
not just through outright qui-pro-quo politics and bribes, but because these firms represent
sizable voter blocs, valuable to politicians in future elections (Stratmann 1992, Bradford
2003, Bombardini and Trebbi 2011). For example, in the U.K. instance during both the
Brexit and the COVID-19 crises, the prevalence of the zombie phenomenon (supported by
outright government-backed credit guarantees) has been often remarked and rationalized by
market observers, at least in part, as a politically motivated move.9


2.2     Senescent Industries
The 1980s and 1990s saw for the U.S. simultaneously a stark decline in manufacturing pro-
duction and increasing lobbying for protection from international competition. These facts
stimulated a vast literature on the political economy of senescent and declining industry
trade protection, most clearly encapsulated by the theoretical discussions in Cassing and
Hillman (1986), Braillard and Verdier (1994), Brainard and Verdier (1997), Baldwin and
Robert-Nicoud (2007). All these contributions draw attention to both the persistence of
tariffs over time in Western economies (for example, through the various rounds of GATT
negotiations) and the declining productivity dynamics within manufacturing sectors (shoes,
   6
     The Economist, "Attack of the zombie firms", by Buttonwood, Jan 12th 2017.
   7
     The Economist, "Industrial policies mean cosseting losers as well as picking winners", by Buttonwood,
Jan 19th 2017.
   8
     See also Admati (2017).
   9
     Bloomberg "One in Five U.K. Firms Can Barely Cover Debt-Interest Payments" By Alex Morales,
September 10, 2020. Financial Times "Zombies are the least of Britain's small business problems" By
Jonathan Ford, July 19, 2020.



                                                    7
apparel, steel production, shipbuilding, etc.), highlighting the shift away form costly tech-
nological innovation towards political influence activities. This theme is central to the point
that much of the debate among contributors was about the exact technology of lobbying and
the degree of sensitivity of political response functions to sector employment (Braillard and
Verdier 1994, Brainard and Verdier 1997). Brainard and Verdier, for example, state that "the
empirical evidence that declining industries receive a disproportionate share of protection in
countries such as the US would be better explained by a bias in the political process than by
pure economic differences."
    In fact, the "Buy American" provisions implemented by both of the two most recent
U.S. administrations have strong roots in lobbying efforts on the part of declining industries,
such as steel, an industry in steady decline since the early 1960s in the U.S.10 Steel federal
lobbying has substantially increased from $4.8 million in 2000 to $12.18 million in 2018 for
instance, while production has remained roughly constant over the same period.11 Figure
1 reports the complete available time series of aggregate U.S. lobbying spending for steel
producers, as available from the Center for Responsive Politics which employs the same data
as Kim (2018).12 This speaks directly to the statistical analysis in the following sections of
this chapter.


2.3     China's State Owned Enterprises
The case of Chinese State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) is perhaps one of the most emblematic
examples of the use of government connections for unproductive firms in shielding them
from market competition in low income countries. SOEs in China are an important political
element of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) patronage architecture, as they are used as
tools to solidify factional ties and to allocate rents to political cadres.13
    Brandt et al. (2020) report that "SOE priority status has survived decades of under-
performance. During 1978-2007, the state sector "contributed essentially zero to aggregate
growth in total factor productivity." Additional evidence confirms the deleterious impact of
state ownership on growth, profitability, and structural change."
    Maybe more worryingly, the economic role of such political connections in enabling bad
companies to expand (particularly through acquisition via "politically-connected investor "
  10
     The Wall Street Journal, "Bill's `Buy America' Provision Sets Up Potential Clash for GOP, Donald
Trump" By Brody Mullins and Kristina Peterson, December 2, 2016. The Wall Street Journal, "Biden's
`Buy American' Plan Eyed Warily by Other Countries" By Yuka Hayashi January 24, 2021.
  11
     See The Wall Street Journal "Big Steel, a Tariff Winner, Steps Up Its Spending in Washington" By
William Mauldin, February 12, 2019
  12
     Available at https://www.opensecrets.org/federal-lobbying/industries/summary?id=N14 Last accessed
June 2021.
  13
     For a related discussion, see Bai et al. (2020).

                                                  8
or using a "protective umbrella ", to use the Chinese terms) has been increasing between 2000
and 2020, as recent analysis has shown, for example in Bai et al. (2020). In China the costs in
terms of economic performance are clear. Bai et al. (2020) report that "capital productivity
of firms owned by the directly connected private owners are on average 40% lower than those
firms owned by unconnected private owners." Productivity gains from reforms associated to
the screening out of large swats of unproductive SOEs between 1998 and 2007 (Hsieh and
Song 2015, Berkowitz et al. 2017) also appear reversed in recent times.


3     Data
Our baseline measure of political activity will be the sum of annual expenses in lobbying
at the firm level for U.S. firms over the period 1999-2017. Thanks to the legal framework
built in the U.S. Lobby Disclosure Act of 1995 and amended and strengthened by the Hon-
est Leadership and Open Government Act of 2007, there exists an exhaustive and public
database where all federal lobbyists in activity ought to be registered, declare their activities
and issues petitioned, and report payments received from clients ­ the firms under analy-
sis in our paper. Although the primary data is available from the Senate Office of Public
Records (SOPR), Kim (2018) offers a much cleaner organization of this data, supplementing
information about each firm and its industry, linking lobbying reports to unique identifiers
enabling the cross-reference of the SOPR data set to other important firm-level databases
(such as the gvkey identifier for the Compustat database or the bvdid for the Orbis data ­
more on this below), and correcting faulty or incomplete entries.
    From the Kim (2018) database, we collect information on: 1) the name (and gvkey if
relevant) of the firm paying for lobbying services; 2) the amount spent by the client for
these lobbying services; 3) the issue lobbied (out of a predefined list of 76 issues listed in the
lobbying reports); and 4) the firm's industry. The data is available from 1998, and we collect
all the entries until 2017. We start our analysis in 1999 to be sure all the firms lobbying at
the federal level are actually registered.
    To give a sense of the magnitudes involved, total U.S. federal lobbying spending oscillated
between 3 and 3.5 billion dollars per year for the past ten years, starting from 1.5 billions in
1998, with about 12,000 registered lobbyists operating across all federal agencies each year.
    Because we are looking to study both the intensive and the extensive margin of the
lobbying response to an increase in foreign competition, we cross reference the lobbying
dataset to Compustat data and keep all the firms in industries that have received imports
from China, even if they never see any lobbying activity. Compustat is a standard repository
of balance sheet level information for publicly traded and large corporations and a routine

                                                9
reference data set for research in Financial Economics. It has to be noted that the focus on
Compustat data per se induces a strong element of selection in our analysis. Compustat firms
are typically large and complex organizations and are only representative of the right tail
of the size distribution of all U.S. firms. It is alson known that such large business entities
may be more prone to lobbying activities, due to the inherent fixed costs of government
interaction and the retention of specialized advocacy personnel, as illustrated for example
in Kerr et al. (2014). While less than representative, we believe Compustat is actually an
appropriate sample for our analysis as it identifies the sample of firms for which lobbying
decisions are actionable in practice.
    Trade data between China and the US is obtained from the UN Comtrade Database
for the period 1999-2017 (Comtrade 2020). This data gives the value of the bilateral trade
at the six-digit HS level, which we map into six-digit Naics codes using the Schott (2008)
concordance tables. When an HS code is mapped into multiple Naics codes, we report the
corresponding value of imports to all the industries.
    We use measures of sales, employment R&D expenses from Compustat North-America.
The number of patent applications comes from the USTPO database (Graham et al. 2013).
Missing a common identifier between our database and the USPTO one, we use a fuzzy
matching on names to link patent applications to their filing firms.


4    Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy is organized around two main reduced-form equations. We first
estimate the impact of changes in industry exposure to import competition on lobbying
expenditures at the firm level. The main empirical model we estimate is in first differences:



                        Lobbyi,j, =  + 1 Impj, + Xj,t + ei,j,                              (1)


    where Lobbyi,j, is the relative change in lobbying expenditures of firm i, in industry
j over time period  and is defined as Lobbyi,j, = log (Lobbyi,j,t ) - log (Lobbyi,j,t-1 ). All
null lobbying expenses are replaced by 1. Imp is the relative change in imports and is
defined analogously. Xj, are industry characteristics controlling for the factor intensity at
the beginning of the period. In particular, we control for the industry level of investment,
capital over the value-added, employment, and wage bill. For robustness we also use the
difference in imports over a period divided by the average of the two periods (Davis et al.



                                              10
2006), i.e.:
                                                    Impj,t - Impj,t-1
                                    Impj, =                              .
                                                 0.5Impj,t + 0.5Impj,t-1
    The explicit focus on first differences within firm i in our empirical analysis is driven by
the need of focusing on identifying variations not driven by firm-specific fixed observed or
unobserved characteristics, such as size or industry of operation of the firm. These extraneous
dimensions may cloud the analysis in that it is well established that very large firms able to
overcome the fixed costs involved in initiating federal lobbying activities or firms in regulated
industries (such as utilities, pharmaceuticals or banking) lobby considerably more.14
    The second main specification will extend equation (1) to an heterogeneity analysis al-
lowing us to focus on firms behind the frontier through a split sample approach.
    In our analysis of equation (1) standard errors are clustered at the industry-period level.
We define five periods of time, that are 1999-2002, 2002-2006, 2006-2010, 2010-2014 and
2014-2017. We also explored "long" differences over the two periods 1999-2010 and 2010-
2017 to assess robustness of our findings.
    All the firms identified in Compustat appear during their registration period. However,
we make here an effort to go beyond the register and include firms before/after their presence
in the register. To this goal, we use the USPTO database to asses if the firm existed before
(after) its entry (exit) in the the register/Compustat. Missing years between two years with
information are filled with zero expenses in lobbying, as the firm is shown to exist, but it is
in fact not lobbying.
    The main concern about estimating our baseline regression (1) as an OLS is that we could
capture the increase in the U.S. demand, and not a supply-shock from China. Following Au-
tor et al. (2013), we instrument U.S. imports change from China by the change in imports of
eight different countries, during the same period. These countries are Australia, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and Switzerland. We refer to this new vari-
able as OImp and define it in the following way: OImp = log (OImpt ) - log (OImpt-1 ),
where OImp denotes the total imports from these eight countries. Autor et al. (2013) provide
a discussion and evidence in support of the validity of this identifying assumption, which is
that the demand import shocks of these eight developed economies are orthogonal one to
another. We do not discuss this identification strategy further, in the interest of space, just
noting here that our approach is, by now, fairly standard in this literature. We refer the
reader interested in the debate about the econometrics of the China Shock and its recent
developments to Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2016).
  14
       See Kerr et al. (2014) for evidence and an extensive discussion.




                                                       11
4.1    Other Sampling and Data Considerations
As we have now specified all main variable of interests, we present here a brief discussion
of the summary statistics in Table 1, to provide some context to readers not familiar with
lobbying data.
    Our dataset is composed of 3,212 individual firms among which 1,142 also appear at least
once in the SOPR data set with strictly positive lobbying expenses. The average lobbying
expenses, considering all the observations and including firms that do not lobby, is of 217,000
dollars, and the total lobbying expenses in our dataset goes from around 240 million dollars
in 1999 to 300 million dollars in 2017. These are figures congruent with the ones reported in
Bertrand et al. (2014). Furthermore, the order of the magnitudes surpasses by far campaign
contributions, as illustrated in Bombardini and Trebbi (2020) . We conjecture here that
adding other political tools to our analysis would only increase, both in direction and in
magnitude, the effects that we report below based on lobbying expenditures alone. This
rationale is based on a reduction in attenuation due to measurement error.
    Firms are spread across 241 industries and we observe in the data a positive average and
median change in imports over industries and periods. The same can be said about lobbying
expenses. Focusing on firms that lobby at least once, we can observe that the mean difference
in lobbying expenses is very close in magnitude to the equivalent measure for imports.
    Trade and tariff issues together represent in total amount 9 percent of all the lobbying
expenses in our dataset and are the second federal lobbying issue receiving the most money,
right after the taxes issue. We decide not to focus solely on the expenses targeting officially
trade laws, because other laws (such as product regulations or public subsidies) might indi-
rectly raise new barriers to foreign entry, even if not falling necessarily under the trade issue
umbrella.


5     Main Results
This section reports our main empirical findings for this chapter. We begin by studying
the response of firms in terms of their lobbying activity as the result of heightened foreign
competition over the entire period of analysis 1999-2017.
   Table 2 presents the estimation results for our baseline model in equation (1). The
coefficients on the difference in imports are all positive and significant across specifications.
Column (1) shows that there is a positive and statistically significant correlation between
the change in imports and the change in lobbying expenses at the firm level. Column (2)
presents the corresponding Instrumental Variable estimate based on the China Shock eight


                                               12
countries IV. Further, in columns (3) and (5) we respectively control first for the period, and
then for both the period and the industry fixed characteristics. Recalling that our analysis
already operates in first differences, the latter are to be interpreted as controls for time
trends in a linear specification. The effect of the China Shock remains significant across
all specifications and the order of magnitude of the estimated coefficient stable, indicating
that omitted dimensions may not be a prominent concern in terms of misspecification in our
analysis.
    We note that the coefficients tend to be larger in the IV specifications (even columns in
Table 2) than in the OLS one (odd columns) in terms of magnitudes. This may be linked
to a plausible reverse causality issue in the OLS specification, due to the fact that lobbying
expenses could have had a negative impact on Chinese imports to the U.S., by stifling them
as predicated by our analysis, thus naturally biasing OLS coefficients downwards.
    In terms of quantitative interpretation of our estimates, these effects appear economically
meaningful. Given an average difference in log imports during this period of 0.62, the
coefficient of 0.43 from column (6), which represents the causal effect of the China Shock in
our more conservative specification, implies that lobbying expenditures as a consequence of
the industry-level foreign competition shock increase, on average, by 31 percent each period.


5.1    Who Lobbies?
In this subsection we show that viewing the question of the relationship between competition
and lobbying through a Schumpeterian prism allows us to further interpret the heterogeneity
of the response that we detect in the data.
    As a premise, an important part of the lobbying literature focuses on how firms within
an industry organize against foreign competition. Beginning from the seminal theoretical
model in Grossman and Helpman (1994), various papers have studied empirically how local
firms within an industry organize for protection in an international trade context. Examples
include Goldberg and Maggi (1999), Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000), Stoyanov (2009).
Our baseline result in Table 2, stating that firms facing an increasing competition from
foreign firms tend to increase their lobbying activity, appears in line with the "protection for
sale" line of thought.
    However, extant related research also emphasizes within industry heterogeneity in lob-
bying activities as relevant (Bombardini 2008, Bombardini and Trebbi 2012, Kim 2017) and
in this section we exploit such heterogeneity within industry. Such margin of heterogeneity
is immediately suggested by the Aghion-Howitt framework. Recall that Aghion et al. (2005)
predicts that competitors in a same industry will mainly innovate to escape competition


                                              13
when they are "neck-and-neck". When firms are technologically very far one from another,
the laggard firm will be discouraged and will not attempt to catch-up through investment
in innovation. Extreme laggards may outright exit the market and other non-frontier firms
now facing productive international competitors may stop innovating. In fact, we know that
the massive decrease in patenting in the U.S. caused by the China Shock can be traced back
to the relatively smaller and less innovative firms (Autor, Dorn, Hanson, Pisano and Shu
2016).
    It is in this environment that non-frontier firms may resort to non-market strategies to
preserve their profits. The hypothesis here is that when innovation over the technological
frontier becomes too expensive, some firms turn to lobbying, which has become relatively
cheaper, rather than innovation. It is non-frontier firms that attempt to escape from com-
petition through lobbying the government.
    In order to test this hypothesis, we separate our sample within industries according to
measures of size and productivity. Our measures of size are sales, employment, and R&D
expenditures, while our measures of productivity are sales per employee, R&D expenses
per employee, and the number of patent applications filed, all variables considered at the
beginning of the period  . We split the sample according to the industry mean for all
variables, except for patents, where we form one group with firms that did not file a patent
application with the USPTO in the year starting the period, and one group with firms that
did file at least one patent application. As our sample of firms is composed by the firms in
Compustat, we can then only focus on frontier firms, and the ones just behind the frontier.
Our results should be understood as focusing on a subset of the very large firms, and not on
all firms in an industry.
    Tables 3 and 4 present our main results for size and productivity heterogeneity, respec-
tively. We will discuss these estimates jointly, as a synoptic reading of the findings provides
a better sense of their robustness.
    The intuition behind the findings in Tables 3 and 4 is similar across all specifications: it
is always and only the firms below the industry mean that increase their lobbying expenses
following the adverse competitive shock due to Chinese import penetration. In essence, the
finding is that it is firms behind the frontier that are the ones responding to heightened
competition through lobbying. Indeed, these firms' response is so strong that we detect the
entire industry average lobbying activity increasing in Table 2.
    Especially for the measures of sales and R&D expenses (in levels and per employee) the
magnitude of the effect of the China Shock on lobbying activity for non-frontier firms is
much larger than in the baseline regression of Table 2. Coefficient estimates hover around
0.80-1.28, twice as large at the one reported in column (6) of Table 2, 0.43.


                                              14
    Differently, we notice that for frontier firms, the coefficient is negative in four out of six
specifications, even if they are always not statistically distinguishable from zero. These firms
are most likely responding to increased competition by innovating and moving into products
that cannot be easily challenged by foreign competitors.


5.2      Discussion of the Mechanisms
The preceding section's findings can be rationalized using a model where lobbying and inno-
vation are instruments available to firms facing increases in competition. Cutinelli-Rendina
(2021) explicits a stylized model based on Fieler and Harrison (2018), where firms face a
nested CES demand and choose between producing two versions of a variety: a more differ-
entiated version or a less differentiated one. All less differentiated varieties in a sector share
the same "nest", while each more differentiated variety has its own nest. Less differentiated
varieties have a higher price elasticity of demand, but lower fixed costs. Firms choosing
more differentiation can then impose a higher markup and benefit higher profits in their
nest. Differentiation is here intuitively interpreted as innovation.
   Firm i also has the possibility to invest individually an amount i to lobby for industry
protection. The lobbying efforts of all the firms at the sector level are imperfect substitutes
and are aggregated following the technology:
                                                           1
                                                           

                                          =            i       .
                                                   i


The marginal cost of foreign competitors is then increased by F (), where F is the lob-
bying success function satisfying simple assumptions (the function must be differentiable,
increasing, and concave ­ all standard assumptions in politico-economic models of special
interest politics). While this black-box approach to the special interest politics dimension of
the model may feel reductive, we highlight here that the literature in quid-pro-quo lobbying
tends to successfully achieve good empirical fit with such theoretical simplifications.15
    Similarly, as in Fieler and Harrison (2018), a competition shock decreasing the marginal
cost of (foreign) competitors is going to have two impacts on the production decisions of
the firms sharing the less differentiated nest: differentiation and exit will both increase.
Intuitively, this is because the markup of firms that remain less differentiated will decrease.
The novelty here is the introduction of the lobbying option and the prediction that lobbying
will increase at the sector level, even if some firms leave the nest where lobbying takes place.
Differentiation on the part of high productivity firms and exit of the least productive set of
 15
      Examples include Bombardini and Trebbi (2011), Kang (2016) and Huneeus and Kim (2018).


                                                  15
firms explain the concentration of the lobbying activity among fewer actors.
    Two mechanisms drive the increase in lobbying at the sector level: the first, and more
intuitive, is that firms for which differentiation is too expensive will naturally increase their
lobbying effort in proportion to the threat of competition. The second mechanism is more
subtle and linked to an improved collective action coordination in the undiversified "nest".
With a reduced number of firms in the nest (some moving out to a new nest and others out-
right exiting the market due to loss making), there is more concentration and less free-riding
per standard Olson (1965) logic, increasing incrementally each individual firm's lobbying
effort for the stayers.16 These combined two mechanisms induce sector-level increases in
lobbying under standard parameterizations.17
    While there might be other, more complex reasons why the change in lobbying due to
import competition may be most pronounced in relatively less productive/smaller firms (for
example, due to the differential mobilization of voting blocs of employees or other electoral
channels), we believe that the two mechanisms highlighted in this section are likely deserving
of attention due to their simplicity and plausibility.


6       Conclusions
Competition may stimulate innovation among high-performance firms, especially in the pres-
ence of persistent shocks, such as in the case of entry of Chinese exporters post WTO acces-
sion in the early 2000s.
    However, the work of Aghion and Howitt clearly postulates the emergence of both winners
and losers (Aghion et al. 2009), with the latter group facing a different set of incentives than
high-performance winning firms in the former group.
    It turns out that these two groups take on completely different strategies in responding
to foreign competition. While high productivity firms may respond via innovation, in this
chapter we show that the response to the China Shock from U.S. firms behind the produc-
tivity frontier comes in the form of a non-market activity: they lobby the U.S. government
more. Less productive firms focus on maintaining or erecting new barriers to entry in the
form of regulation, carve-outs, domestic subsidies, rather than in the form of innovation and
diversification.
    In the data we report economically meaningful responses in terms of lobbying to import
penetration from China by employing the state-of-the-art China Shock identification strategy
of Autor et al. (2013) and therefore causally linking increases in within sector competition
 16
      This second element is reminiscent of effects also discussed in Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud (2008).
 17
      See analysis in Cutinelli-Rendina (2021).


                                                     16
and lobbying effort of domestic firms.
    The postulated rationale behind the non-market response of non-frontier firms is because
innovation is relatively more costly for those behind the frontier, but also because collective
action becomes easier in the aftermath of a competitive shock. Extremely unproductive firms
exit and highly productive firms break away from the industry pack, leaving the remaining
set of actors in a more concentrated environment where lobbying is easier and there is lower
free riding.
    The "lobbying behind the technological frontier" phenomenon that we have uncovered
in this chapter appears a logical extension of the Schumpeterian framework developed by
Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt over the last three decades and one of the many important
Political Economy offshoots of their oeuvre. To provide further perspective, this chapter
also offers a brief discussion of a few, salient case studies focused on the political efforts of
economic laggards.
    Future work should extend our systematic statistical analysis to cases outside the U.S.,
where non-market strategies of firms might be as effective as in Washington DC, if not more.
The case of Brussels and European Union lobbying comes to mind.




                                               17
References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. A.: 2005, Institutions as a fundamental cause
  of long-run growth, Handbook of economic growth 1, 385­472.

Admati, A. R.: 2017, It takes a village to maintain a dangerous financial system, Oxford
 University Press Oxford.

Aghion, P., Alesina, A. F. and Trebbi, F.: 2007, Democracy, technology, and growth, Tech-
  nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R. and Howitt, P.: 2005, Competition and
  innovation: An inverted-u relationship, The quarterly journal of economics 120(2), 701­
  728.

Aghion, P., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P. and Prantl, S.: 2009, The effects of entry on
  incumbent innovation and productivity, The Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1), 20­
  32.

Aghion, P. and Howitt, P.: 1992, A model of growth through creative destruction, Econo-
  metrica 60(2), 323­351.

Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. W.: 2008, The economics of growth, MIT press.

Akcigit, U., Baslandze, S. and Lotti, F.: 2018, Connecting to power: political connections,
  innovation, and firm dynamics, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Austen-Smith, D.: 1993, Information and influence: Lobbying for agendas and votes, Amer-
 ican Journal of Political Science pp. 799­833.

Austen-Smith, D. and Wright, J. R.: 1994, Counteractive lobbying, American Journal of
 Political Science pp. 25­44.

Autor, D., Dorn, D. and Hanson, G. H.: 2013, The china syndrome: Local labor market ef-
 fects of import competition in the united states, American Economic Review 103(6), 2121­
 68.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. H., Pisano, G. and Shu, P.: 2016, Foreign competition
 and domestic innovation: Evidence from us patents, Technical report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.



                                              18
Autor, D. H., Dorn, D. and Hanson, G. H.: 2016, The china shock: Learning from labor-
 market adjustment to large changes in trade, Annual Review of Economics 8, 205­240.

Bai, C.-E., Hsieh, C.-T., Song, Z. M. and Wang, X.: 2020, Special deals from special in-
  vestors: The rise of state-connected private owners in china, Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Baldwin, R. E. and Baldwin, R. E.: 1996, Alternate approaches to the political economy of
  endogenous trade liberalization, European Economic Review 40(3-5), 775­782.

Baldwin, R. E. and Robert-Nicoud, F.: 2007, Entry and asymmetric lobbying: why govern-
  ments pick losers, Journal of the European Economic Association 5(5), 1064­1093.

Baldwin, R. E. and Robert-Nicoud, F.: 2008, Trade and growth with heterogeneous firms,
  Journal of International Economics 74(1), 21­34.

Baumgartner, F. R., Berry, J. M., Hojnacki, M., Leech, B. L. and Kimball, D. C.: 2009,
  Lobbying and policy change: Who wins, who loses, and why, University of Chicago Press.

Baumol, W.: 1990, Entrepreneurship productive, unproductive, and destructive, Journal of
  Political Economy 98(3), 893­921.

Bennedsen, M. and Feldmann, S. E.: 2002, Lobbying legislatures, Journal of political Econ-
  omy 110(4), 919­946.

Berkowitz, D., Ma, H. and Nishioka, S.: 2017, Recasting the iron rice bowl: The reform of
  china's state-owned enterprises, Review of Economics and Statistics 99(4), 735­747.

Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M., Fisman, R., Hackinen, B. and Trebbi, F.: 2018, Hall of mir-
  rors: Corporate philanthropy and strategic advocacy, Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M., Fisman, R. and Trebbi, F.: 2020, Tax-exempt lobbying:
  Corporate philanthropy as a tool for political influence, American Economic Review
  110(7), 2065­2102.

Bertrand, M., Bombardini, M. and Trebbi, F.: 2014, Is it whom you know or what you
  know? an empirical assessment of the lobbying process, The American Economic Review
  104(12), 3885­3920.

Blanes i Vidal, J., Draca, M. and Fons-Rosen, C.: 2012, Revolving door lobbyists, The
  American Economic Review 102(7), 3731.

                                           19
Bloom, N., Draca, M. and Van Reenen, J.: 2016, Trade induced technical change? the
  impact of chinese imports on innovation, it and productivity, The review of economic
  studies 83(1), 87­117.

Bombardini, M.: 2008, Firm heterogeneity and lobby participation, Journal of International
  Economics 75(2), 329­348.

Bombardini, M., Li, B. and Wang, R.: 2017, Import competition and innovation: Evidence
  from china, Mimeo, University of British Columbia .

Bombardini, M. and Trebbi, F.: 2011, Votes or money? theory and evidence from the us
  congress, Journal of Public Economics 95(7), 587­611.

Bombardini, M. and Trebbi, F.: 2012, Competition and political organization: Together or
  alone in lobbying for trade policy?, Journal of International Economics 87(1), 18­26.

Bombardini, M. and Trebbi, F.: 2020, Empirical models of lobbying, Annual Review of
  Economics 12(1).

Bradford, S.: 2003, Protection and jobs: explaining the structure of trade barriers across
  industries, Journal of International Economics 61(1), 19­39.

Braillard, S. L. and Verdier, T.: 1994, Lobbying and adjustment in declining industries,
  European Economic Review 38(3-4), 586­595.

Brainard, S. L. and Verdier, T.: 1997, The political economy of declining industries: Senes-
  cent industry collapse revisited, Journal of International Economics 42(1-2), 221­237.

Brandt, L., Rawski, T. G. et al.: 2020, China's great boom as a historical process, Technical
  report, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA).

Brandt, L., Van Biesebroeck, J., Wang, L. and Zhang, Y.: 2017, Wto accession and perfor-
  mance of chinese manufacturing firms, American Economic Review 107(9), 2784­2820.

Caballero, R. J., Hoshi, T. and Kashyap, A. K.: 2008, Zombie lending and depressed re-
  structuring in japan, American economic review 98(5), 1943­77.

Cassing, J. H. and Hillman, A. L.: 1986, Shifting comparative advantage and senescent
  industry collapse, The American Economic Review 76(3), 516­523.

Comtrade, U.: 2020, International trade statistics database. united nations comtrade
  database.

                                             20
Cutinelli-Rendina, O.: 2021, Innovation or lobbying: Who chooses what against foreign
 competition?, Working Paper College de France, France .

Davis, S. J., Faberman, R. J. and Haltiwanger, J.: 2006, The flow approach to labor markets:
  New data sources and micro-macro links, Journal of Economic perspectives 20(3), 3­26.

de Figueiredo, J. M. and Richter, B. K.: 2014, Advancing the empirical research on lobbying,
  Annual Review of Political Science 17, 163­185.

Drutman, L.: 2015, The business of America is lobbying: How corporations became politicized
  and politics became more corporate, Oxford University Press.

Fieler, A. C. and Harrison, A.: 2018, Escaping import competition in china, Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gawande, K.: 1998, Stigler­olson lobbying behavior in protectionist industries: evidence
 from the lobbying power function, Journal of economic behavior & organization 35(4), 477­
 499.

Gawande, K. and Bandyopadhyay, U.: 2000, Is protection for sale? evidence on the
 grossman-helpman theory of endogenous protection, Review of Economics and statistics
 82(1), 139­152.

Goldberg, P. K. and Maggi, G.: 1999, Protection for sale: An empirical investigation, Amer-
 ican Economic Review 89(5), 1135­1155.

Graham, S. J., Hancock, G., Marco, A. C. and Myers, A. F.: 2013, The uspto trademark
  case files dataset: Descriptions, lessons, and insights, Journal of Economics & Management
  Strategy 22(4), 669­705.

Grossman, G. M. and Helpman, E.: 1994, Protection for sale, The American Economic
  Review 84(4), 833­850.

Grossman, G. M. and Helpman, E.: 2001, Special interest politics, MIT press.

Hillman, A. L.: 1982, Declining industries and political-support protectionist motives, The
  American Economic Review 72(5), 1180­1187.

Hombert, J. and Matray, A.: 2018, Can innovation help us manufacturing firms escape
  import competition from china?, The Journal of Finance 73(5), 2003­2039.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Song, Z. M.: 2015, Grasp the large, let go of the small: The transformation
  of the state sector in china, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                             21
Huneeus, F. and Kim, I. S.: 2018, The effects of firms' lobbying on resource misallocation.

Kang, K.: 2016, Policy influence and private returns from lobbying in the energy sector,
 Review of Economic Studies 83(1), 269­305.

Kerr, W. R., Lincoln, W. F. and Mishra, P.: 2014, The dynamics of firm lobbying, American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4), 343­79.

Kim, I. S.: 2017, Political cleavages within industry: Firm-level lobbying for trade liberal-
  ization, The American Political Science Review 111(1), 1.

Kim, I. S.: 2018, Lobbyview: Firm-level lobbying & congressional bills database, Unpublished
  manuscript, MIT, Cambridge, MA. http://web. mit. edu/insong/www/pdf/lobbyview. pdf
  Google Scholar Article Location .

Litan, R. E. and Hathaway, I.: 2017, Is america encouraging the wrong kind of entrepreneur-
  ship, Harvard Business Review 13.

McGowan, M. A., Andrews, D. and Millot, V.: 2017, The walking dead? zombie firms and
 productivity performance in oecd countries.

Olson, M.: 1965, The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University Press.

Potters, J. and Van Winden, F.: 1992, Lobbying and asymmetric information, Public choice
  74(3), 269­292.

Schott, P. K.: 2008, The relative sophistication of Chinese exports, Economic Policy
  23(53), 6­49.

Shu, P. and Steinwender, C.: 2020, How free trade changes domestic firms' ability to innovate,
  LSE Business Review .

Stoyanov, A.: 2009, Trade policy of a free trade agreement in the presence of foreign lobbying,
  Journal of International Economics 77(1), 37­49.

Stratmann, T.: 1992, Are contributors rational? untangling strategies of political action
  committees, Journal of Political Economy 100(3), 647­664.

Stratmann, T.: 2005, Some talk: Money in politics. a (partial) review of the literature,
  Public Choice 124, 135­156.




                                              22
             Figure 1: U.S. Steel Producers Total Federal Lobbying (by year)




Notes: Source Opensecrets.org. Data for year 2021 is incomplete.




                                           23
                   Table 1: Summary Statistics

                   Mean      Median        Min           Max          Sd       Count

                                                   All firms
Lobby exp.         216,702     0            0         32,680,098   1,257,910   13,036
 Lobby exp.         0.301      0       -13.98            15.7         3.6      8,719
                                             Lobbying firms
Lobby exp.         545,984     18           0         32,680,098   1951251     5174
 LogLobbying        .670       0       -13.98            15.7         5.4      3921
                                            Import changes
 LogImports         .623      .502         -5.37         6.647       .930      1029
 LogOtherImports    .592      .513         -5.09         7.66         .79      1029




                                      24
  Table 2: The average effect of competition on lobbying

                             Dependent variable: Lobby
                       (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
Imports              0.175**     0.404***      0.137+    0.335*    0.131+    0.431**
                     (0.072)      (0.121)      (0.090)   (0.178)   (0.088)   (0.217)


First-stage F-stat                40.84                  20.95                12.37
Observations          8574         8574         8574      8574      8562      8562

Model                 OLS         2SLS          OLS      2SLS       OLS       2SLS
Period controls        No           No          Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Industry controls      No           No           No        No       Yes       Yes




                                          25
 Table 3: Heterogeneity: Lobbying from Behind the Frontier

                           Dependent variable: Lobby
                       < Ind            Ind          < Ind      Ind       < Ind      Ind
                       Mean            Mean          Mean      Mean       Mean      Mean
                        (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
                               Sales                 Employment             R&D Exp.
Imports               0.822***         -0.265       0.626***   -0.206    1.092***   -0.181
                      (0.274)      (0.482)          (0.216)    (0.516)   (0.361)    (0.526)


First-stage F-stat      7.87           21.47          8.64     16.88       6.77     19.94
Observations           5615            1628          6678       1632      4634       1319

Period, industry FE     Yes             Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes




                                               26
Table 4: Heterogeneity: Measures Scaled by Employment Levels

                           Dependent variable: Lobby
                       < Ind      Ind          < Ind      Ind        No       Yes
                      Ind Mean    Mean         Mean      Mean
                         (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
                         Sales/Emp              R&D/Emp                Patents
 Imports              0.803***    0.200       1.281***   -0.099    0.662**   0.012
                       (0.309)   (0.382)      (0.392)    (0.348)   (0.316)   (0.349)


First-stage F-stat      8.85      13.23         8.17      8.63      12.17    11.20
Observations            3879      2770         3689       1813      5481      3180

Period, industry FE     Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes




                                         27
