                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CAN MONETARY POLICY CREATE FISCAL CAPACITY?

                                        Vadim Elenev
                                       Tim Landvoigt
                                       Patrick J. Shultz
                                  Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh

                                    Working Paper 29129
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w29129


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2021




The authors thank seminar participants at the Wharton macro lunch and the University of
California at Santa Cruz. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, Patrick J. Shultz, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Monetary Policy Create Fiscal Capacity?
Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, Patrick J. Shultz, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 29129
August 2021
JEL No. E1,E12,E13,E2,E31,E32,E37,E4,E42,E43,E44,E6,E62,E63,G12,G18,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

Governments around the world have gone on a massive fiscal expansion in response to the Covid
crisis, increasing government debt to levels not seen in 75 years. How will this debt be repaid?
What role do conventional and unconventional monetary policy play? We investigate debt
sustainability in a New Keynesian model with an intermediary sector, realistic fiscal and
monetary policy, endogenous convenience yields, and substantial risk premia. When conventional
monetary policy is constrained by the ZLB during an economic crisis, increased government
spending and lower tax revenue lead to a large rise in government debt and raise the risk of future
tax increases. We find that quantitative easing (QE), forward guidance, and an expansion in
government discretionary spending all contribute to lowering debt/GDP ratio and reducing this
fiscal risk. A transitory QE policy deployed during a crisis stimulates aggregate demand.


Vadim Elenev                                     Patrick J. Shultz
Johns Hopkins University                         The Wharton School,
100 International Drive                          University of Pennsylvania
Suite 1329                                       Vance Hall
Baltimore, MD 21202                              Philadelphia, PA 19104
velenev@jhu.edu                                  pshultz@wharton.upenn.edu

Tim Landvoigt                                    Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
The Wharton School                               Columbia University
University of Pennsylvania                       Graduate school of Business
3620 Locust Walk                                 Uris Hall, office 809
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           3022 Broadway
and NBER                                         New York, NY 10027
timland@wharton.upenn.edu                        and NBER
                                                 svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu
1         Introduction

The global covid-19 pandemic has resulted in unprecedented contraction in aggregate consump-
tion, investment, and output in nearly every developed economy. For example, U.S. GDP fell
5% in 2020.Q1 and 33% in 2020.Q2 annualized. In response to the covid shock, both fiscal
and monetary authorities mounted a massive response which mirrored the response after the
Great Financial Crisis in magnitude but exceeded it in speed. Government spending increased
dramatically in 2020. Government debt relative to GDP reached levels at the end of 2020 that
have not been seen in the U.S. since 1947. On the monetary policy front, interest rates were
slashed to zero. A large-scale quantitative easing (QE) program was launched, and through
forward guidance, the Central Bank signaled that it would keep interest rates near zero and
bond purchases high until the economy had fully recovered. The Fed also announced a new
monetary policy regime in 2020 that would tolerate overshooting the 2% inflation target while
the economy was still recovering.1

    In this paper we ask whether these conventional and unconventional monetary and fiscal
policy responses have helped the economy recover, and more controversially, whether they can
help pay back the debt. We find that they have and that they can. Quantitative Easing
(large-scale asset purchases), a relaxation of bank capital requirements, and a higher inflation
target during the crisis and the early recovery, all contribute towards a smaller increase in the
debt/GDP ratio during the crisis and a faster decline in its aftermath. Unconventional monetary
policy also limits the risk of future tax increases substantially. Discretionary spending in a
crisis is also a powerful stabilization tool because of a large fiscal multiplier when the economy
is stuck at the zero lower bound (ZLB). Hence, fiscal and both conventional and unconventional
monetary policy work together to create more fiscal space.

    We study these questions by building a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model in
the New Keynesian (NK) tradition. Its main new feature is its ability to deliver non-trivial
risk and risk premia. To that end, we let the economy undergo both transitory productivity
shocks­standard in macro­and permanent productivity shocks­standard in finance­ and insist
on a high enough market price of risk associated with these shocks to deliver a quantitatively
    1
        See https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200827a.htm.




                                                  1
realistic output and equity risk premium. Standard NK models typically omit permanent risk,
and stabilization policy reduces much of the consumption risk ultimately faced by households.
As a result, the standard NK model generates trivial risk premia. In the presence of non-
trivial risk, the NK model becomes more difficult to solve and calibrate since the stochastic
steady state is far away from the deterministic steady state. We employ state-of-the-art global
projection methods to overcome this challenge.

  To study QE, we introduce two maturities for government debt and an intermediary sector.
The intermediary sector uses its holdings of reserves and firm capital to back deposits, subject to
leverage and liquidity constraints. Households invest in deposits, long-term government debt,
and firm capital. A QE policy policy purchases long-term debt from households and issues
(short-term) reserves to banks. By providing plentiful high-quality collateral to intermediaries,
this policy crowds out intermediary demand for firm capital. The reduction in capital demand
causes a shift from aggregate investment to consumption, which in the short-run affects the
economy like a positive shock to aggregate demand. Due to a large consumption multiplier
during the crisis when conventional monetary policy is constrained by the ZLB, QE is therefore
an expansionary policy that causes higher output, labor demand, consumption and investment,
ultimately resulting in a smaller increase in the debt/GDP ratio in the crisis. Furthermore, the
policy lowers long-term interest rates, which combined with short-term policy rates that are
lowered to the zero lower bound, substantially and persistently depresses the debt service on
government debt.

  We contrast a QE policy introduced in response to a crisis to QE policies introduced in
normal times, either permanent or transitory in nature. We find that transitory QE policies
introduced in normal times are largely ineffective. They provide a temporary consumption and
output boost, but the latter is ten times smaller than the same-size QE policy in a crisis. As
a thought experiment, we also consider a permanent QE program. This program is equivalent
to a permanent reduction in the maturity structure of government debt held by the public.
We find permanent QE to be welfare-increasing. While it boosts consumption temporarily, it
lowers the return on household wealth and crowds out banks' investment in firm capital. These
two forces lead to a permanently lower capital stock and slightly lower consumption in the long-
run. At the same time, intermediaries enjoy a greater supply of liquid assets, increase leverage


                                                2
while becoming less risky, and supply more deposits to households. The benefits from greater
liquidity provision to households outweigh the detrimental capital stock effect. However, we
also find that permanent QE enacted in response to a crisis (as opposed to in normal times) is
not effective in boosting aggregate demand and accelerating the recovery.

  These differences between QE policies of varying persistence create a subtle policy dilemma.
On the one hand, we find long-run benefits of permanent QE, which suggests that the current
maturity structure of government debt puts too much weight on long maturities. On the other
hand, it is important for QE policy to be (perceived as) temporary in order for the policy to
be effective in boosting demand in crises.

  In contrast to QE, raising the inflation target for longer in response to a crisis has stronger
real effects than an inflation target that is just increased for the duration of the crisis. This
suggests that the new monetary policy framework laid out by the Fed is beneficial.


Related Literature Our paper contributes to the vast literature on macroeconomics in New-
Keynesian (NK) models. Our contribution here is three-fold.

  First, we consider a rich set of fiscal and monetary policy tools which have not been studied
in this combination before. The "conventional" fiscal policies we study feature labor income
and corporate profit taxation, transfer spending, and discretionary spending. Crucially, all
four policies depend on the state of the economy, producing the counter-cyclicality of spending
and pro-cyclicality of tax revenues observed in the data. The "unconventional" fiscal policy
consists of an endogenous switching of regimes whereby the fiscal authority chooses tax rates to
target debt reduction once the debt/GDP ratio exceeds a threshold. Unlike standard models in
which fiscal policy responds to small changes in the debt-to-GDP ratio to keep debt bounded
(reviewed comprehensively by Leeper and Leith (2016)), our method allows a more realistic fiscal
regime that focuses on output stabilization most of the time, and only targets debt stabilization
when debt/GDP reaches extreme values. This non-linear rule necessitates a global solution
method. Conventional monetary policy consists of a standard Taylor rule. Unconventional
monetary policy arises as a crisis response and includes quantitative easing (QE), a relaxation
of intermediary leverage constraints, and a higher inflation target.

  Second, we find a combination of preferences and shocks that generate a realistic amount of


                                               3
risk and risk premia. The standard NK model fails to produce any meaningful amount of risk or
risk premia for realistically calibrated shocks. It is solved using log-linearization (or low-order
perturbation methods) which mostly ignore aggregate risk premia (and their time-variation).
Standard monetary and fiscal policies remove what little remaining risk households might oth-
erwise face.2 The crucial ingredients in our paper that result in meaningful risk and risk premia
are: (i) positively correlated transitory and permanent productivity shocks (calibrated to the
data), (ii) Epstein-Zin preferences which separate risk aversion from intertemporal substitution
motives, and (iii) a high enough coefficient of relative risk aversion, and (iv) a global solution
method. Meaningful risk premia are not just nice to have, they are necessary to understand
the effect of monetary and fiscal policies on debt sustainability. We suspect that they would
make an important difference when evaluating many other policies in NK models.

  Our third contribution is to introduce an intermediation sector which is better at providing
credit to firms than households and produces deposits that are valued by households.3 It is
subject to an occasionally-binding leverage constraint (Supplementary Leverage Ratio, SLR)
and liquidity regulation (Liquidity Coverage Ratio, LCR), and faces equity issuance costs that
make recapitalization during and after a crisis costly. This intermediary sector is important
for understanding QE, since QE injects reserves into the banking sector. This affects SLR and
LCR constraints and the allocation of assets between banks and households.

  In contemporaneous work, Sims and Wu (2021) consider a NK model with credit shocks,
financial intermediation, and short-term and long-term government debt to study conventional
and unconventional monetary policy. Billi and Walsh (2021) find, as we do, that higher dis-
cretionary spending in an economic crisis can decrease the debt/GDP ratio due to a large
fiscal multiplier. Andrade et al. (2021) study the effects of a higher inflation target in demand
recessions at the ZLB.
   2
      De Paoli, Scott, and Weeken (2010) document that nominal rigidities combined with monetary policy
following a Taylor rule greatly reduce consumption risk in a standard business cycle model. Gourio and Ngo
(2020) generate meaningful risk premia in a globally solved NK model with rare disasters and a ZLB on interest
rates. Isor´e and Szczerbowicz (2017) adapt Gourio (2012)'s approach to perturbation methods, yet require large
disaster probabilities to create non-negligible risk premia. Campbell, Pflueger, and Viceira (2020) and Pflueger
and Rinaldi (2021) introduce habit preferences in an NK model to produce realistically time-varying risk premia.
    3
      Piazzesi, Rogers, and Schneider (2021) study the properties of the NK model in a world with financial
intermediaries and ample reserves. Wang (2020) analyzes state-dependent pass-through of monetary policy in
an NK model with a financial sector. Elenev (2020) and Faria-e-Castro (2020) develop quantitative NK models
with intermediation sectors to evaluate policy responses during the GFC.



                                                       4
  In the wake of the financial crisis, large theoretical and empirical literatures arose on the
efficacy of QE and the channels through which it operates (Woodford, 2012; Vissing-Jorgensen
and Krishnamurthy, 2011, 2012, 2013; Vissing-Jorgensen et al., 2018; Bernanke, 2020). We
study QE in our model, finding strong state-dependence; QE has much stronger effects when
implemented in response to a crisis than in normal times. Like in the data, QE lowers long-term
interest rates in the model and "spills over" to lower the equity risk premium.

  A recent literature studies fiscal capacity in a world where the risk-free interest rate is below
the growth rate in the economy (see Blanchard (2019), Jiang et al. (2019, 2020, 2021), Barro
(2020), Brunnermeier et al. (2020), Reis (2021), Mankiw and Ball (2021), Cochrane (2019a,b),
among others). The work of Jiang et al. (2019, 2020) emphasizes that, in the presence of realistic
permanent output risk and risk premia, keeping government debt risk-free is challenging. It
requires making the tax revenue claim safer than the government spending claim ( T <  G ).
This in turn may mean raising taxes at inopportune (high marginal-utility) times. Our model
generates this feature. Tax rates are pro-cyclical and government spending is counter-cyclical
at business-cycle frequencies, helping households smooth aggregate risk. However, when the
fiscal authority breaches a certain high level for the debt/gdp ratio, it switches to a debt
management rule that brings debt/gdp levels back down. In this austerity regime, tax rates are
set to implement the desired debt reduction, accounting for endogenous labor supply responses
to those higher tax rates. The model quantitatively replicates the output risk premia in Jiang,
Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2019) as well as the tax and spending betas from
Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2020). The calibration suggests that the U.S.
economy entered the austerity region in 2021, and Congress should now be raising tax rates
to control the debt. The model offers a cautionary tale. Postponing the tax (or spending)
adjustment makes future austerity more severe, and can even lead to a situation where there
no longer exists a tax rate that can tame the debt. The model also says that the U.S. would
have been in a much deeper fiscal hole if it had not been for the extraordinary monetary policy
response.

  Our paper contributes to the large literature that studies the interaction of fiscal and mon-
etary policy (e.g. Sargent and Wallace (1981); Leeper (1991); Sims (1991); Woodford (1994),
Woodford (1995), Woodford (2001); Cochrane (1998), Cochrane (2001); Schmitt-Grohhe and


                                                5
Uribe (2000); Bassetto (2002); Reis (2016); Sims (2016)). Bianchi and Melosi (2019) introduce
state-dependent policy targets for monetary and fiscal authorities. In an application, Bianchi,
Faccini, and Melosi (2020) consider an emergency budget in the wake of the covid-19 pandemic
which the monetary authority accommodates by temporarily tolerating higher inflation. Our
fiscal rule is also state-dependent but not event driven. Rather, fiscal policy actively stabilizes
aggregate fluctuations until the debt/gdp ratio breaches an upper (lower) bound. Beyond that
point, fiscal policy becomes passive in that tax rates are adjusted to gradually lower (increase)
the debt/gdp ratio. We study the role of conventional and unconventional monetary policy in
this new setting of endogenously-switching fiscal policy regimes.

  A literature at the intersection of macro-economics and asset pricing studies how fiscal risk
manifests itself in asset prices (Croce, Nguyen, and Schmid, 2012b; Croce, Kung, Nguyen, and
Schmid, 2012a; Pastor and Veronesi, 2012; Kelly, Pastor, and Veronesi, 2015; Croce, Nguyen,
Raymond, and Schmid, 2019; Liu, Schmid, and Yaron, 2020; Corhay, Kind, Kung, and Morales,
2021). It typically works with models where uncertainty about future taxes affects firms in-
centives to invest in R&D, leading to lower long-run productivity growth through an endoge-
nous growth mechanism. Fiscal policies that stabilize the macro-economy in the short-run are
welfare-reducing since they result in tax uncertainty and higher volatility of consumption growth
in the long run, which hurts welfare when households have Epstein-Zin preferences. Our model
does not feature an effect of tax uncertainty on long-run growth since it is not an endogenous
growth model, and instead focuses on the effect of tax uncertainty on labor supply rather than
investment. We find that additional government spending and unconventional monetary policy
(UMP) lower risk premia in a macro-economic crisis, consistent with the stated objective of
UMP.

  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the model. Section 3 describes
the calibration. Section 4 discusses the properties of fiscal variables in normal times. Section
5 contains our main results describing crisis dynamics under various policy scenarios. Section
6 concludes. The appendix provides detailed model derivations (A), data sources used in the
calibration (B), details on the computational method (C), and additional results on QE policies
and forward guidance (D).




                                                6
2      Model

A representative household supplies labor, operates the investment technology, and owns shares
in non-financial firms and banks. The household derives utility from holding deposits issued
by financial intermediaries. The government issues nominal debt securities to fund its deficits.
Government debt has two maturities: short-term debt that matures in the next model period,
and long-term debt with duration  B . Short-term debt includes both government debt securi-
ties with short maturity (T-bills), as well as high-powered money issued by the central bank
(reserves).

    Intermediaries hold short-term government debt and firm capital as assets and issue deposits
and equity to households. Households also invest directly in firm capital and they hold long-
term government debt. We assume that only intermediaries hold short-term debt and only
households hold long-term debt, broadly in line with the aggregate data (as discussed in the
calibration section).


2.1      Production Technology

Productivity. Productivity Zt has a permanent and a transitory component


                                            Zt = Ztp Ztr ,


where


                                   log(Ztr ) = zt
                                                r
                                                  = z zt
                                                       r      z
                                                         -1 + t ,                            (1)

                                   log(Ztp ) = zt
                                                p    p
                                                  = zt -1 + gt .                             (2)


The growth rate of the permanent component evolves according to


                                               g + g gt-1 + g
                                  gt = (1 - g )¯            t.                               (3)




                                                  7
The innovations to transitory and permanent productivity are jointly normally distributed:

                                           g
                                      (z
                                       t , t )  Normal(µt , t ).



Means µt are chosen such that E[Ztr ] = 1 and E[gt ] = g
                                                       ¯. Productivity level and growth shocks
are the only two sources of aggregate risk in the model. It will turn out to be very important
to allow for a positive correlation between these two shocks.


Final Goods. Production follows the standard New Keynesian framework (Gal´
                                                                         i (2015)) with
price rigidities. The final output good Yt is a composite of intermediate good varieties Yt (i), i 
[0, 1] that are combined by a final-goods producer.

  Final output is
                                                   1                         -1
                                                                   1
                                     Yt =              Yt (i)1- di                ,
                                               0

where    is the elasticity of substitution. Final goods producers maximize profit by solving

                                                             1
                                    max Pt Yt -                  Pt (i)Yt (i)di,
                                    {Yt (i)}             0


where Pt is the aggregate price index and Pt (i) is the price of input i. This implies the demand
functions for all i:
                                                                       -
                                                        Pt (i)
                                         Yt (i) =                          Yt .
                                                         Pt

Intermediate Goods. Intermediate goods producers are monopolists for their varieties.
They choose price Pt (i) and inputs capital kt (i) and labor nt (i) to maximize profit

                 P
              Divt                                  K
                   = Pt (i)Yt (i) - Pt wt nt (i) + rt kt (i) - Ztp Pt P (Pt (i)/Pt-1 (i)),     (4)


where wt is the real wage and P (Pt (i)/Pt-1 (i)) is a convex menu cost for adjusting prices.
Profit is paid out in the form of dividends to households. Intermediate output is produced
using a standard Cobb-Douglas technology with aggregate productivity Zt


                                    Yt (i) = (kt (i))1- (Zt nt (i)) .


                                                         8
2.2    Financial Intermediaries

Financial intermediaries are firms that maximize the present value of dividends paid to their
shareholders. On the asset side, intermediaries invest in XtI,K units of capital at real price Qt
and buy XtI,S short-term government bonds at nominal price pS
                                                            t . On the liability side, they
                I
issue deposits Dt , modeled as one-period discount bonds, at nominal price pD
                                                                            t , and equity to

the households. Intermediaries have beginning of period equity capital WtI and are expected
to pay a fraction  of equity to their shareholders each period. When they raise new outside
equity At , they incur a quadratic equity adjustment cost with parameter . The total payout
to households each period is
                                                I
                                             Divt =  WtI - At .                                     (5)

  Intermediaries are subject to two regulatory restrictions. First, equity capital regulation
requires the following constraint on deposits (bank debt):

                                   I
                                  Dt   XtI,S + K Pt Qt XtI,K ,                                      (6)


where  restricts the total leverage of the intermediary, and K reflects the higher risk weight on
capital relative to deposits. The overall maximum leverage ratio  reflects the Supplementary
Leverage Ratio (SLR) constraint in real world bank capital regulation.

  The second regulatory restriction banks face captures the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR)
in the real world. Banks incur a liquidity cost per unit of deposits issued:

                                                                   1-   1
                                                           XtI,S
                                         t   =   0             I
                                                                            ,                       (7)
                                                            Dt

where  is the fraction of deposits a particular bank's depositors can be expected to withdraw
per period, and   0   scales the liquidity cost. We assume that exponent         1   > 1, such that the
cost is decreasing in short-term bonds.

  In summary, financial intermediaries solve:

                                                     
                                                                          I
                                     max                   Mt,t+k Pt+k Divt +k
                                I,K   I,S   I ,A
                               Xt   ,Xt   ,Dt    t
                                                     k=0



                                                        9
subject to the budget constraint:

                                                        S I,S                         Pt  2
       (1 -  )WtI + Pt At + (pD          I          I
                              t - Pt t )Dt + Rebatest  pt Xt  + Pt Qt XtI,K +              A,
                                                                                      Ztp 2 t

no-shorting constraints X I,j  0, for j  {K, S }, and the regulatory constraint (6). Interme-
diaries discount dividend payouts with the household discount factor Mt,t+k . Further, they
receive liquidity costs as lump-sum rebates, i.e. RebatesI         I
                                                         t = Pt t Dt .

  The transition law for bank equity WtI is given by


                         WtI = Pt rt
                                   K
                                     + (1 -  )Qt XtI,K   I,S    I
                                                   -1 + Xt-1 - Dt-1 .




2.3    Households

The representative household consumes Ct of the final output good and supplies labor Nt to
intermediate goods producers.
                     H
  Households invest Dt in intermediary deposits, which they value for their liquidity services
in addition to their pecuniary payoff, giving rise to the intra-period utility function:

                                                  1-
                                     Ct1- (Dt
                                            H 
                                              )                    Nt1+1
                                                             p 1-
                      H
              u(Ct , Dt , Nt )   =                     -   (Zt ) 0         - (Ztp )1- u
                                                                                      ¯,
                                         1-                        1 + 1

                                                H
where u
      ¯ > 0 is a constant ensuring that u(Ct , Dt , Nt ) < 0.

  Households have recursive preferences with subjective time discount factor  , inter-temporal
elasticity of substitution 1/, and risk aversion parameter  , such that their value function is:

                                                                           1-
                                                                    1-     1-
                                           H
                       Vt = (1 -  )u(Ct , Dt , Nt ) -  Et (-Vt+1 ) 1-           .               (8)


  In addition to deposits, households purchase XtH,K units capital at real price Qt and XtH,L
long-term government bonds at nominal price pL
                                             t .

  Capital and bond purchases are subject to portfolio costs. The long-term bond portfolio cost




                                                  10
takes the form                                                       L
                                                                     1
                                                     L       XtH,L
                                    L (XtH,L , Yt ) = 0
                                                      L
                                                                         Yt ,                               (9)
                                                     1        Yt

where Yt is aggregate output. Intuitively, this cost creates a downward-sloping demand curve
for long-term debt relative to GDP. The presence of this cost helps the model generate an
upward sloping term structure of interest rates, as well as capture the price impact of long-term
bond purchases by the central bank (Quantitative Easing). Capital costs take a similar form

                                                                      K
                                                                      1
                                                   K         XtH,K
                                  K (XtH,K , Kt ) = 0
                                                    K
                                                                          Kt ,                             (10)
                                                   1          Kt

where Kt is the aggregate capital stock. Costs associated with capital holdings capture house-
holds' comparative disadvantage of lending directly to firms.4

  Households further operate the economy's investment technology, which creates It units of
capital from It + (It , Kt ) units of the consumption good.

  In summary, each period households choose consumption, investment, deposits, capital, and
long-term bond holdings to maximize (8) subject to the budget constraint:

                                          L H,L
  Pt Ct + Pt (It + (It , Kt )) + pD  H
                                  t Dt + pt Xt  + Pt Qt XtH,K + L (XtH,L , Yt ) + K (XtH,K , Kt )

         WtH + Pt (1 - tw )wt Nt + Pt Qt It + (1 - tdiv )(Divt
                                                             I      P
                                                               + Divt ) + t + Rebatest ,                   (11)


where WtH is household financial wealth at the beginning of t. Additional resources for house-
holds are labor income wt Nt , which gets taxed at rate tw (equation (22)), profits of intermediate-
goods producers and financial intermediaries, which gets taxed at rate tdiv (equations (4) and
(5)), transfer payments from the government t (equation (16)), and lump-sum rebates of menu
costs from producers, equity issuance costs from banks, and bond portfolio costs:5

                                                               Pt  2
                    Rebatest = Ztp Pt (Pt (i)/Pt-1 (i)) +              L  H,L
                                                                p At +  (Xt   , Yt ).                      (12)
                                                               Zt 2
   4
      We follow the literature on intermediation (He and Krishnamurthy, 2013) and interpret capital holdings of
households as direct, capital-market based finance through equities or bonds. Capital held by intermediaries
reflects indirect finance through loans. The cost captures intermediaries' advantage for indirect finance.
    5                               H,K
      Capital portfolio costs K (Xt     , Kt ) are not rebated and thus represent resource losses. We view these
costs as inefficiencies stemming from suboptimal lending by households.



                                                      11
The transition law for household wealth is:

                       K
             WtH = Pt rt + (1 -  )Qt XtH,K   H              B  B L   H,L
                                       -1 + Dt-1 + (c + 1 -  +  pt )Xt-1 .                   (13)


The payoff to each long-term bond in (13) consists of the coupon c, amortization of old debt
1 -  B , and the market value of remaining debt  B pL
                                                    t .




2.4     Government

2.4.1   Fiscal Policy

The fiscal authority follows decision rules for transfers and discretionary spending that depend
                                                                     ^t = Yt /Ztp :
on the level of output relative to the economy's productivity trend, Y


                                                   ^t ),
                                             t =  (Y                                         (14)
                                                   ^t ),
                                            t =  ( Y                                         (15)


such that total spending is
                                      Ft = t Pt Yt + t Pt Yt .                               (16)
                                              Gt        t


  Given these spending rules, the government follows either active or passive fiscal policy. When
the government follows active fiscal policy, then tax rates on wage income and profits depend
                        ^t
only on cyclical output Y
                                           ~tn = 
                                                     ^t ),
                                                 ~n (Y                                       (17)

for n  {w, div }. We refer to this fiscal policy as active, since the government is only concerned
with actively stabilizing the economy by responding to deviations from the stochastic growth
trend. With intermediary profits as in equation (5) and intermediate goods producer profits as
in equation (4), tax revenue is


                              ~t = Pt 
                              T       ~tw wt Nt + ~tdiv (Divt
                                                            P      I
                                                              + Divt ).                      (18)


                                                                        ~t = T
The combination of tax and spending rules determine the primary surplus S    ~t -Ft . Denoting


                                                 12
the market value of government debt outstanding at the beginning of t by WtG , this implies
                                            ~ G at the end of the period, where
that the government needs to issue new debt W t



                                                      ~t .
                                         ~ tG = WtG - S
                                         W                                                      (19)


  When the government follows passive fiscal policy instead, tax rates are indirectly determined
as result of a debt issuance target. We refer to this fiscal policy regime as passive, since its goal
is to stabilize the level of government debt once it reaches very high levels (very low levels),
rather than insulate taxpayers from aggregate shocks.

  In particular, passive fiscal policy specifies a target level WtG for end-of-period debt as a
                                ~ G given in (19). Passive policy occurs when this debt level is
function of the active issuance W t
                                                                                     G
either below the profligacy threshold W G or above the austerity threshold W .

  We can summarize the combination of active and passive policy by the target level of debt:
                              
                              
                              
                                               ~ tG
                               (1 - v )W G + v W           ~ tG  W G
                                                        if W
                              
                                                               G
                       WtG   = W~G
                                 t                      if W        ~ G > WG
                                                                   >W t
                                                                                                (20)
                              
                              (1 - v )W G + v W~ tG        ~ tG  W G ,
                              
                                                        if W
                              


where v  (0, 1) parameterizes the degree of fiscal adjustment in the austerity and profligacy
regions. The government will then choose tax rates to target a surplus that satisfies:


                                    St = S (WtG ) = WtG - WtG .                                 (21)


To implement this surplus, the government adjusts tax rates by factor f (WtG ), such that tax
revenue is:


                                     tw wt Nt + f (WtG )~
          Tt = T (WtG ) = Pt f (WtG )~                  tdiv (Divt
                                                                 P      I
                                                                   + Divt             ~t .
                                                                          ) = f (WtG )T         (22)
                                 w
                                 t                    div
                                                      t


The debt target rule (20) combined with the tax rule (22) implies that the tax adjustment
                                              ~ G is in the interior region between profligacy
factor f (WtG ) = 1 when active debt issuance W t
                                                                        ~ G is by definition
and austerity thresholds. In that region, unconstrained active issuance W t


                                                 13
equal to the debt target WtG . However, when active issuance surpasses the austerity threshold,
the government will need to raise tax rates by setting f (WtG ) > 1 to achieve its target issuance,
                                                             ~ G . Analogously, when active
which by definition is below active (unconstrained) issuance W t

issuance drops below the profligacy threshold, the government can lower tax rates by setting
f (WtG ) < 1.

  To fund the debt WtG , the fiscal authority keeps the maturity composition of newly issued
government debt constant in book value terms, with a fraction µ
                                                              ¯ of debt being long-term. As a
useful normalization, we assume that coupon c on long-term bonds is always chosen such that
the average long-term bond price pL
                                  t is one (par bond). Then constant issuance in book values

requires:
                                          G,S
                                         Bt     1-µ¯
                                          G,L
                                              =      .
                                         Bt      µ
                                                 ¯
Combined with the requirement that the total issuance target must be met in market value
                 G,S       G,L
terms, WtG = pS
              t Bt   + pL
                        t Bt   , we obtain:

                                     G,S             ¯)WtG
                                                (1 - µ
                                    Bt   =                    ,                               (23)
                                             (1 - µ¯)pS  ¯ pL
                                                      t +µ  t

                                     G,L          µ¯WtG
                                    Bt   =                   .                                (24)
                                                  ¯)pS
                                             (1 - µ     ¯ pL
                                                     t +µ  t



2.4.2   Monetary Policy

The central bank chooses the interest rate on short-term government debt iS      S
                                                                          t = 1/pt . This is

consistent with the central bank directly setting the interest rate on reserves, as in the current
policy regime. It is also compatible with a central bank that has a small balance sheet and uses
open-market operations to target the rate in the interbank market. In both cases, absence of
arbitrage ensures the policy rate set by the central banks coincides with yield on short-term
debt and reserves.

  We consider a standard monetary policy rule subject to a zero lower bound

                                        1            1
                                          = max         ,1 ,                                  (25)
                                       pS
                                        t            pt




                                                14
where
                                                                     y
                                         1    1      t          ^t
                                                                Y
                                          
                                            = S      ¯          ¯        ,                                   (26)
                                         pt  p¯                 Y

where we denote gross inflation as t = Pt /Pt-1 . The central bank's inflation target is ¯ and
                                        ¯ . The rule specifies deviations from the average gross
its target level for cyclical output is Y
                ¯S .
interest rate 1/p

  We consider the balance sheet of the central bank as an additional policy tool. The central
bank can shorten the maturity structure of debt held by the public by buying long-term bonds
with reserves, or extend the maturity structure by selling long-term bonds for reserves. Note
that these operations do not affect the total face amount of outstanding government liabilities,
which are determined by the government budget constraint in (21). Rather, they just change
the composition of these liabilities.

  In particular, we assume the central bank chooses short- and long-term bond purchases,
 CB,S      CB,L
Bt    and Bt    , subject to a revenue neutrality constraint

                                                CB,L       CB,S
                                           -pl
                                             t Bt    = ps
                                                        t Bt    ,                                            (27)
                                                 CB,L   G,L
                                                Bt     Bt   ,                                                (28)
                                                 CB,S   G,S
                                                Bt     Bt   .                                                (29)


Constraint (27) imposes that the central bank swaps government liabilities at market value.
                                             CB,l
For example, a purchase of long-term bonds (Bt    > 0) needs to be paid for by a sale of short-
             CB,s
term bonds (Bt    < 0). Sales of short-term bonds are equivalent to new reserve creation.
For simplicity, we assume that the central bank can also short-sell long-term bonds to invest
in short-term bonds.6 Constraints (28) and (29) ensure that the central bank cannot purchase
more than the total supply of either bond.

  The payoff of the central bank's portfolio in t + 1 is

                               CB      CB,S                           CB,L
                            Divt +1 = Bt    + (c + 1 -  B +  B pl
                                                                t+1 )Bt    .                                 (30)
   6
   In reality, the central bank's ability to extend the maturity structure is limited by its holdings of long-term
bonds. We do not explore maturity-extending balance sheet policies in this paper.




                                                       15
Since new purchases are revenue-neutral by (27), this is also the profit of the central bank in
t + 1. The central bank remits this profit to the fiscal authority.


2.4.3     Consolidated Government Budget Constraint

Given both fiscal and monetary policy choices, the market value of next period government
debt is

                         G,S                           G,L
                 WtG
                   +1 = Bt   + (c + 1 -  B +  B pL
                                                 t+1 )Bt
                                                                CB
                                                           - Divt +1

                         G,S    CB,S     G,L    CB,L
                      = Bt   - Bt    + (Bt   - Bt    )(c + 1 -  B +  B pL
                                                                        t+1 ).             (31)


  We view central bank balance sheet operations as overriding the fixed maturity structure µ
                                                                                           ¯
chosen by the fiscal authority. For example, quantitative easing involves purchasing long-term
bonds by issuing short-term bonds, and thereby lowering the fraction of long-term bonds held
by the public under a QE policy µQE < µ
                                      ¯.

  The evolution equation for the value of government liabilities (31) clarifies that for the ac-
counting of debt claims between the government (central bank and fiscal authority), and the
public (banks and households), it suffices to keep track of the consolidated balance sheet of
                                                CB,S      CB,L
fiscal and monetary authorities. By purchasing Bt    and Bt    , respectively, the central
                                                                             G,S    CB,S
bank simply changes the net supply available to the public of both bonds to Bt   - Bt    and
 G,L    CB,L
Bt   - Bt    .




                                               16
2.5    Market Clearing

Short-term and long-term government debt, deposit, labor, firm capital, and goods market must
clear in equilibrium:

                         G,S    I,S    CB,S
                        Bt   = Bt   + Bt    ,
                         G,L    H,L    CB,L
                        Bt   = Bt   + Bt    ,
                          I    H
                         Dt = Dt ,
                                     1
                          Nt =           nt (i)di,
                                 0
                                     1
                        Kt-1 =           kt (i)di,
                                 0

               XtI,K + XtH,K = (1 -  )Kt-1 + It = Kt ,

                          Yt = Ct + It + Gt + (It /Kt-1 )Kt-1 + K (XtH,K , Kt ).


where we have invoked the transition law for the aggregate capital stock.



3     Calibration

The model is solved and calibrated at a quarterly frequency. A subset of model parameters
have direct counterparts in the data. The remaining parameters are calibrated to match target
moments from the data within the model. To compute model-implied moments, we simulate the
model for 120,000 periods (quarters) in total, consisting of 24 simulation runs of 5,000 periods
each (with a 3,000 period burn-in). Appendix C provides details on the solution method and
simulation approach. While these parameters are chosen simultaneously to match all targeted
moments, Tables 1 and 2 list for each parameter the specific moment that is most affected by
this parameter.




                                                     17
                                    Table 1: Parameters: Shocks, Firms, Households, and Intermediaries

     Par   Description                          Value    Source                                                             Data    Model
                                                                  Exogenous Shocks
     g     persistence perm. TFP                  0.6     AC(1) real GDP growth (1870-2017, Jorda et al. (2016))             0.25      0.27
     g     innovation vol. perm. TFP              1.2     Vol. real consumption growth (1870-2017, Jorda et al. (2016))     1.7%     1.64%
     z     persistence trans. TFP                0.87     AC(1) Ham. filtered TFP (Fernald (2012))                              -         -
     z     innovation trans. TFP                  1.5     Vol. Ham. filtered TFP (Fernald (2012))                               -         -
                                                                      Production
           marginal adjustment cost                10     Vol. investment-to-GDP ratio (53-20)                             1.50%     0.77%
           capital depreciation rate             0.02     investment-to-GDP ratio (53-20)                                 17.94%    16.26%
           Rotemberg adjustment cost              140     Vol. inflation (53-20)                                           0.65%     0.39%
           Intermediate goods elast.                7     Markup (van Vlokhoven (2020))                                         -         -
                                                         Preferences and Household Sector
           discount rate                        0.992     real risk free rate (1870-2017, Jorda et al. (2016))             0.42%     0.42%
           risk aversion                           20     Unlevered RP on GDP claim                                        1.00%     0.99%
18




           1/IES                                  0.7     Vol. consumption-to-GDP ratio (53-20)                            0.76%     0.92%
     0     disutility of labor                   3.12     normalize E[Y ] = 1                                                   -         -
     1     labor supply power                       2     standard value                                                        -         -
     L
     0     portfolio cost bonds                0.0017     Term spread (53-20)                                              0.30%     0.29%
     L
     1     portfolio cost bonds, elast.           1.8     Term spread vol. (53-20)                                         0.26%     0.25%
     K
     0     portfolio cost capital               0.003     Household capital share (He and Krishnamurthy (2019))                 -         -
     K
     1     portfolio cost capital, elast.           2     Quadratic                                                             -         -
                                                                    Intermediaries
      0    liquidity cost level                   0.12    FFR-time deposit spread (94-14)                                  0.32%     0.46%
      1    liquidity cost power             1/(1 -  )     normalization                                                         -         -
           dividend target                        0.08    bank leverage                                                      92%    91.18%
           equity issuance cost                     25    bank net payout rate                                              5.7%     7.84%
Aggregate Productivity The aggregate productivity process has permanent and transitory
components. The permanent productivity process, Ztp , is subject to a growth rate shock,
gt which follows an AR(1) process with persistence g = 0.6 and volatility g = 1.2%. The
volatility of this process is chosen to match the volatility of real consumption growth for the U.S.
for the period 1870-2017, based on the macrofinancial database by Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor
(2016). We choose the persistence to match the persistence of real output growth for the same
period.7 The transitory productivity process, Ztr , also follows an AR(1) in logs with persistent
parameter z = 0.87 and volatility parameter z = 1.5%. These parameters are directly
taken from Fernald (2012). Since both shocks are persistent, they become state variables. We
discretize gt and Ztr into 3-state Markov chains using the Rouwenhorst (1995) method. We
further assume that transitory TFP innovations and growth rate shocks are perfectly positively
correlated. While our model admits any correlation structure between the two shocks, a strong
positive correlation between the shocks is required to match the term structure of risk premia for
government debt. Intuitively, the government pursues fiscal stabilization policy through cyclical
tax and spending rules to buffer deviations of output from trend. To get the right correlation
structure of spending and taxation with consumption growth, permanent and transitory shocks
must coincide; Section 4.2 provides an in-depth discussion of the model's ability to match
empirical properties of risk premia on government spending and tax claims.


Production Investment adjustment costs are quadratic. We set the marginal cost parameter
to  = 10 to match the observed volatility of (detrended) investment to GDP of 1.5%. Depreci-
ation,  , is set to 0.02 to match the investment to output ratio of 17.94% observed in the data.
We set the parameter  in the Cobb-Douglas production function equal to 0.78 to target the
observed labor share of income of 64.16%. The elasticity of substitution for the wholesaler, ,
is set to 7 to target a markup of 0.15 from van Vlokhoven (2020). The Rotemberg adjustment
cost  is set to 140 and targets the observed quarterly volatility of inflation of 0.65%.


Intermediaries Intermediaries are subject to a supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) and eq-
uity capital requirements. The SLR constraint is parameterized by  = 0.97 to reflect real-world
   7
   Since our model features persistent shocks to the growth rate of productivity, we use the longest available
sample to determine the size of these shocks.



                                                     19
                                                                                                 1-~K
regulation on total leverage. The additional risk weight on capital K = 0.959 =                    
                                                                                                      ,   where
~K = 0.07. Together these parameters determine the maximum leverage ratio and equity
requirement for capital.

  We choose the equity payout target of banks,  = 0.08 we to target leverage of the interme-
diary sector, calculated by Elenev, Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021) to be 92%.8 A
higher value of  , in combination with the equity issuance cost, makes equity finance more costly
for banks and creates incentives for higher leverage. We further follow Elenev et al. (2021) in
calibrating the equity issuance cost to target the net payout ratio of the financial sector, defined
as dividends plus share repurchases minus equity issuance divided by book equity. A higher
equity issuance cost makes external equity more expensive and raises the net payout ratio.
Elenev et al. (2021) construct a time series of dividends, share repurchases, equity issuances,
and book equity, aggregating across all publicly traded banks from 1974 - 2018. They report
an annual net payout ratio of 5.7%, which the model approximately matches with  = 25.

  The liquidity cost per unit of deposits of banks, reflecting real-world liquidity coverage ratio
(LCR) regulation, is determined by the parameters  ,              0,   and   1.    represents the fraction of
deposits a particular bank's depositors can be expected to withdraw per period and is set to
0.05 following BIS (2013).         0   is set to 0.12 to target the spread between short-term debt and
deposits of 0.31% and        1   is set to 1/(1 -  ) for parsimony. The liquidity cost captures the
observed disconnect between deposit rates and short-term debt (Lenel et al., 2019).


Households and Preferences The coefficient of risk aversion,  , is set to 20 and targets
the unlevered risk premium on the GDP claim of 1% per quarter. The corresponding Arrow-
Pratt measure of relative risk aversion is around 5.9 We set the elasticity of inter-temporal
substitution to 1/0.7 to target the volatility of the consumption to GDP ratio. The subjective
discount factor of households  = 0.992 targets the average quarterly real rate of 0.42%, based
on the 1870-2017 sample from Jorda et al. (2016). The coefficient on the disutility of labor, 0 ,
   8
     This approach takes a broad view of intermediaries to include depository institutions, government-sponsored
enterprises, hedge funds, and some types of insurers.
   9
     The Arrow-Pratt measure of relative risk aversion is not equal to  in a model with Epstein-Zin preferences
and leisure in the utility function (Swanson, 2018). We also have the additional complication of the scalar u  ¯
in the period utility function. We compute the coefficient of relative risk aversion to average to 5.4 in a long
simulation of the model. Appendix C.2 provides the details of this calculation.



                                                      20
is set to 3.12 to normalize the unconditional mean of output to 1.10

  The portfolio cost for long-term bonds targets the mean and volatility of the term spread,
computed as the difference between the 10-year treasury yield and a weighted average of the
yield on 3-month Tbills and the Federal Funds rate. We calculate the weights for the short-
term rate based on outstanding market values of Tbills and reserves. This calculation yields
and average quarterly term spread of 0.36% with a quarterly volatility of 0.29%. The model
                                         L                         L
matches these targets with marginal cost 0 = 0.0017 and elasticity 1 = 1.8. Without the
portfolio cost, the model would generate a slightly negative term spread, a well known feature
of models with long-run risk.

  The portfolio cost for capital targets the fraction of firm capital held by households. There are
several forces in the model that determine the split of firm capital holdings between banks and
households. First, absent equity issuance and liquidity costs for intermediaries, firm capital is
more valuable to intermediaries than households, since it serves as collateral for issuing deposits
that earn a liquidity premium. Therefore, banks would hold all capital in the economy without
these costs. Second, firm capital has a relatively high bank equity requirement and, unlike
short-term debt and reserves, it does not relax banks' LCR requirement (i.e., at a given balance
sheet size, a marginal unit of capital that backs deposits increases banks' marginal liquidity
cost). Both regulatory costs reduce bank holdings of capital. Third, households have an inferior
technology for screening and monitoring firms, captured by households' capital portfolio cost.
Ceteris paribus, this cost increases the bank capital share.

  We follow the macro-finance literature on intermediation (e.g. He and Krishnamurthy (2019))
and target an intermediary capital share of 60%, reflecting the broad need of firms and house-
                                                            K
holds for intermediation. The model matches this share with 0 = 0.003. For parsimony, we
work with a quadratic cost function, K = 2.


Government Parameters Our fiscal policy rules are calibrated to match the unconditional
average and cyclical properties of transfer spending, discretionary spending, and tax revenue.
  10
     Monetary policy and fiscal rules in the model are parameterized with the implicit assumption that average
output is 1. Since the unconditional mean of output in a long-simulation of the nonlinearly solved model is far
away from the model's deterministic "steady-state", this normalization leads to a fixed-point: 0 needs to be
set such that jointly with all other parameters, E[Yt ] = 1 in the stationarized model.



                                                      21
                                              Table 2: Parameters: Government

     Par     Description                   Value  Source                                               Data    Model
                                                Government: Fiscal Policy Rules
     0       base corp. tax rate              21 BEA corp. tax to GDP (53-20)                          2.8%     3.33%
     0w      base lab. tax rate             25.5 BEA personal tax to GDP (53-20)                     16.39%    15.43%
     0       average spending/GDP           25.5 BEA govt. spending to GDP (53-20)                   16.40%    17.57%
     0       average transfers/GDP           3.4 BEA govt. transfers to GDP (53-20)                   3.45%     3.35%
     b       tax cyclicality                   2 regr. slope tax revenue/GDP on GDP growth (53-20)      0.32      0.26
     b       spending cyclicality             -2 regr. slope spending/GDP on GDP growth (53-20)        -0.86     -0.54
     b       transfer cyclicality            -10 regr. slope transfers/GDP on GDP growth (53-20)       -5.03     -2.75
      µ
      ¯      share of long-term debt        0.67 Share of LT treasuries (00-20)                      66.82%    68.45%
     WG      Profligacy threshold            2.4 See Section 4.1                                           -         -
         G
     W       Austerity threshold             4.5 See Section 4.1                                           -         -
                                               Government: Monetary Policy Rule
      ¯      inflation target                  1 Fed inflation target (2% p.a.)                            -         -
22




             Weight on inflation               3 standard value                                            -         -
     Y       weight on output                0.5 standard value                                            -         -
     ¯S
     p       natural interest rate          0.99 normalization                                             -         -
                                                Government: Financial Regulation
             max. intermediary leverage     0.97 Basel regulation                                          -         -
     K       add. risk weight on capital   0.959 Basel regulation                                          -         -
The exact functional forms of the fiscal policy rules in equations (41) and (42) for transfers
and spending, and algorithm (1) for tax rates, are given in Appendix A.6. These rules are
parameterized by a base rate with subscript                                      0    that determines average transfers (discretionary
spending, taxes) as fraction of output, and a cyclicality coefficient bj , j = , ,  , that gov-
erns the correlation with the cyclical component of output. In addition, discretionary spending
follows a so-called "fading" rule, meaning that the responsiveness of spending to output fluc-
tuations does not grow proportionally with the deviation of output from its balanced growth
path. The solid line in the left panel of Figure 1 plots the resulting cyclical rule for discretionary
government spending.11

                                                     Figure 1: Government Spending Rule

                                0.22                                                                        0.02
                                                       Fading Stabilizer
                                0.21                   Log-Linear Stabilizer                               0.015

                                 0.2                                                                        0.01
                                                                                     Difference / Output
            Spending / Output




                                0.19                                                                       0.005

                                0.18                                                                           0

                                0.17                                                                       -0.005

                                0.16                                                                        -0.01

                                0.15                                                                       -0.015

                                0.14                                                                        -0.02
                                   -0.1     -0.05     0         0.05           0.1                              -0.1     -0.05     0       0.05      0.1
                                          Output Deviation From Trend                                                  Output Deviation From Trend


                     w
  The parameters 0 , 0 and b control the base corporate tax rate, base tax rate on wages, and
                                   
their cyclicalities, respectively. 0 is set to 21% to target the observed corporate tax revenue
                   w
of 2.8% of GDP and 0 is set to 25.5% to match the observed tax revenue from wages to GDP
of 16.37%. We set b = 2 to match the observed quarterly correlation between log tax revenue
and the log of GDP growth of 0.08.

  The unconditional averages of spending and transfers are controlled by the parameters 0 and
0 , respectively. We set 0 to 17.7% to target the observed average spending to GDP of 16.40%
  11
    The gap between the linear and fading spending rules, plotted in the right panel of Figure 1, is calibrated
such that the fading aspect has no effects given the cyclical fluctuations caused by productivity shocks. However,
the rule disciplines our thinking about the magnitude of extra discretionary spending for our policy experiments
in Section 5.1.

                                                                                     23
and 0 to 3.4% to match the observed average transfers to GDP of 3.46%. The cyclicalities
of spending and transfers are controlled by b = -2 and b = -10, respectively. We choose
the cyclicality coefficients such that model regressions of the transfer spending, discretionary
spending, and tax revenue to GDP ratios, respectively, on GDP growth match the data.12

    We allow for the government to issue both short-term and long-term debt. The parameter
µ
¯ = 0.67 determines the constant fraction of debt being long-term. This parameter is chosen to
reflect the reported maturity distribution of outstanding debt. The average share of long-term
debt (greater than one year in maturity) of this series from 2000-2020 is 67.88%. The duration
of long-term government debt is 7.76 years, which we match in our model by setting  B to 0.92.

    The central bank follows a Taylor rule for the interest rate on short-term government debt.
The coefficient on inflation,  , is set to 3, and the coefficient on output, y , is set to 0.5.
The values are chosen to match slope coefficients in a regression of short-term interest rates on
inflation and output. The inflation target ¯ = 1 is set to target average inflation of 2% per

year.


Short-term and Long-term Debt Holdings We assume that households hold all of the
long-term debt and the intermediary holds all of the short-term debt in our model. For short-
term bonds, this assumption follows Lenel et al. (2019). To assess the assumption on long-term
bonds, we look at Treasury holdings from the Financial Accounts of the United States. The
broadly defined financial sector (insurance companies, money market funds, mutual funds,
and depository institutions) only holds 5.8% of long-term debt on average over the period
1953 - 2020.



4       Properties of Fiscal Policy

Before we evaluate whether monetary policy can help alleviate the government's debt burden
after economic crises, this section studies fiscal policies during "normal times", i.e., when only
productivity shocks to Ztp and Ztr drive economic dynamics, and only conventional monetary
policy is operative. We compare model outcomes from a long simulation to the data.
 12
      The model regressions allow for a different slope in profligacy and austerity.


                                                         24
               Figure 2: Distribution of Government Debt and Tax Adjustment




4.1       Endogenous Regime-Switching Model of Fiscal Policy

Figure 2 shows a histogram of the government debt/GDP ratio for the full 120,000 simulation
periods, overlaid with a scatter plot of the tax adjustment factor f (WtG ). Vertical lines indicate
the profligacy and austerity bounds, respectively. The economy spends the majority of time
(approximately 70% of all simulation periods) in the interior region between these thresholds.
Sequences of shocks may push debt/GDP into either one of the adjustment regions. In that
case, as described in Section 2.4, fiscal policy endogenously switches from active to passive,
meaning that the fiscal authority now chooses tax rates with the goal of stabilizing debt/GDP.

  These tax adjustments are successful in reigning in debt/GDP. However, the figure reveals a
clear asymmetry with respect to profligacy (low debt/GDP) and austerity (high debt/GDP).
This is caused by the distortionary effect of labor income taxation, resulting in a concave
"Laffer" curve of tax revenue generated from tax increases. Thus, consecutive marginal increases
in tax rates yield smaller marginal increases in tax revenue in the austerity region. In contrast,
consecutive tax rate decreases will yield greater marginal reductions in revenue in the profligacy
region.

  A direct implication of this Laffer curve effect is that the threshold for entering austerity
cannot be arbitrarily large. In particular, the model features an upper bound for the austerity
threshold: if the austerity regime only starts for levels of debt/GDP above this bound, then

                                                25
there does not exist a sequence of tax rate increases that can prevent government debt/GDP
from exploding for any possible path of exogenous shocks. Put simply, if austerity kicks in
"too late" in terms of debt/GDP, then government debt is not guaranteed to remain stationary
and is therefore no longer truly risk-free. While we have not systematically characterized this
bound, we have verified that for the calibrated model, the simulated time series meets the
conditions for stationary. Given all model parameters, the calibrated fiscal rules guarantee
that government debt remains well in the interior of the state space for which we have solved
the model.13 Among other factors, the maximum level of the austerity threshold depends on
equilibrium bond yields, which determine the government's interest expenses, the labor supply
elasticity, which controls the sensitivity of labor supply to higher tax rates, and the monetary
policy rule, which dictates how strongly the central bank responds to higher inflation caused
by tax increases (tax increases are negative aggregate supply shocks in the model).

  Since debt/GDP is in the interior region most of the time, the model generates long time
paths with changes in debt/GDP, but no adjustments in tax rates or spending in response.
This is a realistic feature of the model: Table 3 demonstrates that in the post-war sample, we
do not observe tax increases prompted by higher debt/GDP ratios. Rather, column (1) shows
that increases in debt/GDP coincide with lower tax revenue to GDP ratio periods. Similarly,
debt/GDP growth from t - 1 to t is associated with lower primary surplus in t in the data.
These correlations in the data are likely driven by (1) long-run trends of rising debt/GDP
and declining tax revenue since the early 1980s, and (2) the strong cyclicality of government
spending and tax revenues: during recessions, spending rises and revenues decline, causing
higher debt/GDP going forward. The model matches the data coefficients qualitatively and is
broadly comparable in magnitude (columns (3) and (4)). As in the data, the cyclical responses
of spending and tax revenue drive the correlations in the model (see also Section 4.2 below).
Since we have a much longer sample for the model-generated data, we observe rare visits to
profligacy (the indicator variable "Prof" is one if the economy is in the profligacy region, and
zero otherwise) and austerity regions (the indicator "Aust."). Columns (5) and (6) verify
that profligacy leads to lower revenue and surpluses, while austerity has the opposite effects.
Furthermore, an increase of debt/GDP in the austerity (profligacy) region causes a steeper
  13
    We have also verified that significantly increasing the austerity threshold will cause the simulated paths to
violate the state space boundaries.


                                                       26
                 Table 3: Debt/GDP and Surplus Dynamics: Model versus Data


                           Tax Rev.      Pr. Sur.     Tax Rev.       Pr. Sur         Tax. Rev.          Pr. Surp.
                             Data         Data          Model         Model            Model             Model
                              (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)                 (5)             (6)
                                                                                                 
 Debt/GDP                 -0.300        -0.693        -0.119        -0.309           -0.137             -0.323
                           (0.034)       (0.064)       (0.003)       (0.005)          (0.001)            (0.003)

Prof.                                                                                -0.017             -0.015
                                                                                      (0.0002)           (0.0004)

Aus.                                                                                  0.039             0.028
                                                                                      (0.0005)           (0.001)

 Debt/GDP × Prof.                                                                    -0.014             -0.069
                                                                                      (0.002)            (0.003)

 Debt/GDP × Aus.                                                                      0.031             0.042
                                                                                       (0.002)           (0.003)

Observations                  272          272         119,976       119,976          119,976            119,976
R2                           0.220        0.305         0.197         0.565            0.654              0.756
                                                                                                        
Note:                                                                             p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01

This table presents the results of regressing tax revenue to GDP and primary surplus to GDP on log changes
in the debt to GDP ratio. Columns (1) and (2) present the results from observed quarterly data for 1953-2021
for tax revenues and primary surpluses, respectively. Columns (3) and (4) present analogous results using the
simulated data. Columns (5) and (6) use the simulated data and include dummy variables to compute the slopes
in the austerity and profligacy regions. Columns (2)­(6) are computed using 24 different simulated sample paths
of 5,000 quarters each. We include a fixed effect for, and cluster standard errors by, simulation run.




                                                      27
increase (decrease) in tax revenue and surpluses, as expected from the alternative fiscal regime
in these regions of the state space. Finally, both in model and data, debt/GDP is highly
persistent: the (quarterly) auto-correlation coefficient of the data debt/GDP ratio is 0.9946,
while in the model it is 0.9950. Therefore, our model demonstrates that lack of responsiveness
in fiscal policy to changes in debt/GDP is still consistent with stationary debt dynamics in
the long-run. This is because such fiscal adjustments can be triggered by debt/GDP reaching
extreme levels, which we have not observed in the modern history of U.S. fiscal policy.

  At the same time, our model clarifies that fiscal adjustments cannot be arbitrarily delayed. In
particular, if government debt is to remain stationary and riskfree, adjustments to the primary
surplus are necessary before debt/GDP becomes unsustainably large. Figure 2 shows that this
must begin with debt/GDP ratios of around 112.5%. The U.S. economy is expected to breach
this level in 2021. The model predicts that delaying tax increases until debt/gdp is higher results
in more severe austerity, at a minimum, and in the potential impossibility of debt stabilization
(due to ever stronger Laffer curve effects at high debt levels) and eventual default.


4.2    Cyclical Properties of Fiscal Policy

In the short run, fiscal policy provides insurance to taxpayers. When output is below trend,
tax rates decline and government discretionary spending rises, as governed by the policy rule
coefficients b and b . But to make government debt risk-free, fiscal policy cannot provide this
insurance in the long run (Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2020)). To illustrate
the this horizon dependence in the simulated model, we regress cumulative fiscal policy growth
rates on cumulative GDP growth over increasing horizons. For each fiscal claim Xt  {Tt , Ft },
we estimate

                                          X   X                            X
                      log Xt+h - log Xt = h + h (log Yt+h - log Yt ) +     t,h



                          X
and plot the coefficients h in the left panels of Figure 3. The bottom-left panel plots coefficients
for 400 quarters, while the top-left panel "zooms in" on the first 60 quarters. Contemporane-
ously, the tax claim has a positive cash flow beta ­ tax revenues rise more when GDP goes
up ­ and the spending claim has a negative beta. But as the horizon increases, the spending


                                                28
beta rises above tax beta i.e. cumulative spending growth increases in cumulative GDP growth
more than tax growth. This reversal is necessary to keep government debt risk-free. At long
horizons, fiscal policy must be co-integrated with output through spending and taxation rules
in (16) and (18), so both betas converge to 1.

  As pointed out by Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2019), the intertemporal
government budget constraints implies that investors in government securities hold claims that
entitle them to future primary surpluses. This in turn means that we can view bondholders
as holding a long position in an asset that pays out tax revenues, and a short position in an
asset that pays out government spending. The value of government debt can be expressed as
the expected present discounted value of this long-short portfolio, evaluated at the household's
SDF MH
     t,t+h , plus a residual term Et that arises from incomplete markets between households

and intermediaries, as well as frictions associated with holding government debt e.g. liquidity
benefits for intermediaries from holding short-term debt and portfolio costs for households from
holding long-term debt.

                                                      
                          ~G=         MH                    MH
                          W t          t,t+h Tt+h -          t,t+h Ft+h + Et .
                                h=1                   h=1



  The cyclicality of fiscal policies provides insurance to taxpayers at business-cycle frequencies
and, by the same token, creates risk that must be borne by bondholders. To see how this
risk varies by horizon, we compute the risk premium on claims to h-period ahead taxes and
spending, or h-strips. We compute prices of these strips recursively. The 0-ahead claim is equal
to the cash flow received that period, and the h-period ahead claim is equal to the price of the
h - 1-period ahead claim next period, discounted using the one-period SDF:


                            pX         H      X
                             t,h = Et Mt,t+1 pt+1,h-1 ,          pX
                                                                  t,0 = Xt



                                                                                             -1
Risk premia can be computed as expected returns in excess of the risk-free rate Et [MH
                                                                                     t,t+1 ]

i.e.

                                           pX
                                            t+1,h-1               -1
                              rpX
                                t,h = Et            - Et [MH
                                                           t,t+1 ]
                                             pX
                                              t,h




                                                 29
                       Figure 3: Fiscal Risk and Cyclicality of Fiscal Policies

               2
                                                               5
               1

               0                                               0

              -1
                                                               -5
              -2
                   0        5             10        15              2        4   6    8        10   12   14


               2
                                                               5
               1

               0                                               0

              -1
                                                               -5
              -2
                   0   20       40   60        80   100                 20       40       60        80        100




  In the right panel of Figure 3, we plot the risk premia for h-quarter ahead tax and spending
strips, and plot them along side the risk premium on claims to h-quarter ahead GDP. Since
a claim to GDP is like an unlevered claim to firm dividends, GDP strip risk premia are like
the risk premia on (unlevered) dividend strips. As the yellow line in the right panel shows, the
model generates a high (unlevered) equity risk premium of about 4% per year.

  Over short horizons, the bondholder is exposed to a great amount of risk. The risk premium
on the tax claim, which the bondholder is long, is high, while the risk premium on the spend-
ing claim, which the bondholder is short, is very negative. Put differently, at business cycle
frequency, bondholders are providing insurance to taxpayers, who are short the tax claim.

  To keep government debt risk-free, these premia must reverse at longer horizons. That is, the
return to the long taxes, short spending portfolio must become a hedge at longer horizons. Put
differently, taxpayers, who are short the tax revenue claim, face substantial risk at intermediate
horizons as shown by the low tax betas in the left panels:  T <  G for intermediate and long
horizons. As emphasized by Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2020), keeping the
debt safe requires shifting aggregate risk onto the taxpayers.




                                                          30
5       Main Results: Crisis Response

5.1     Fiscal and Monetary Policy in Crises

Our main experiment is an unanticipated demand shock that coincides with a negative per-
manent (and transitory) productivity shock (since they are perfectly correlated). The demand
shock is modeled as a 0.9% increase in the subjective time discount factor  . Once the shock
to the discount factor and productivity hits, agents in the model expect it to mean-revert with
probability 0.5. We study a specific path where the shock lasts for four quarters before stochas-
tically mean-reverting. The central bank's ability to lower the policy rate in response to this
shock is limited by a zero lower bound.


5.1.1    Macro Variables

Baseline: Only Automatic Stabilizers and Conventional Monetary Policy We first
study the recovery paths of the economy for the baseline policy, which includes a Taylor rule
governing the conventional monetary response and automatic fiscal stabilizers given by coun-
tercyclical spending rules (14) ­ (15) and procylical tax rule (17). Government purchases (dis-
cretionary spending) follow the fading rule plotted in Figure 1. We label this baseline scenario
as "Autom. Stab."

    The effects of the negative shock and these different policy responses on macroeconomic
aggregates are displayed in Figure 4. The two left-most panels in the top row show the exogenous
shocks and their persistence (these are the same for all policies). The bottom row shows that the
combination of the productivity and discount factor shocks cause a deep economic crises absent
additional policy interventions (Autom, Stab., blue line). Output and consumption decline by
8%, investment by 20% and labor by 11%. The recession is highly deflationary (top right), with
the inflation rate dropping below -10%. The central bank tries to counter the demand shock
as much as possible through lowering the policy rate to zero. The policy rate remains trapped
at the ZLB for the duration of the shock (4 quarters).




                                               31
                                                Figure 4: Main Policy Experiments: Macro Variables

                                       log(Z)                                           Disc. Shock                                                                                         Pol. Rate
                              0                                                1                                                                                                   3
                                       Autom. Stab.                                                                                    0
                              -2                                                                                                                                                  2.5
       Diff. from BGP (%)




                                                         Diff. from BGP (%)
                                       Discretionary                          0.8
                                       Combo                                                                                           -2
                              -4                                                                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                Annual %




                                                                                                                                                             Annual %
                                       Long UMP                               0.6                                                      -4
                              -6                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                              0.4                                                      -6
                              -8                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                       -8
                             -10                                              0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                      -10
                             -12                                               0                                                                                                   0
                                   0   10          20                               0     10          20                                    0   10     20                               0    10         20


                                            Y                                                  C                                                 Inv                                              N
                              2                                                5                                                       0                                           0
       Change from BGP (%)




                                                        Change from BGP (%)




                                                                                                                Change from BGP (%)




                                                                                                                                                            Change from BGP (%)
                              0                                                                                                        -5                                          -2

                              -2                                               0                                                                                                   -4
                                                                                                                                      -10
                              -4                                                                                                                                                   -6
                                                                                                                                      -15
                              -6                                               -5                                                                                                  -8

                              -8                                                                                                      -20                                         -10

                             -10                                              -10                                                     -25                                         -12
                                   0   10          20                               0     10          20                                    0   10     20                               0    10         20




Policy 1: Additional Discretionary Fiscal Stimulus We then study how different poli-
cies with additional fiscal and monetary stimulus affect the economy's recovery path. In the
first policy experiment, the government pursues discretionary spending beyond what is implied
by the automatic stabilizers. For this policy, we assume that the government closes the gap
between the fading rule and spending that increases linearly in the output gap; this gap is
plotted in the right panel of Figure 1. We label this policy "Discretionary."

  Turning to the first policy experiment, additional government purchases (Discretionary, red
line) have a moderately stimulative effect. We can read the difference off the right panel of
Figure 1 as extra spending of around 1.8% of output given the realized output drop of 8%.
Since output increases by more than 2% in response to this policy (difference between blue
and red lines), we can conclude that government purchases have a fiscal multiplier above unity,
consistent with other studies of fiscal policy at the zero lower bound (see, e.g., Christiano et al.
(2011); Eggertsson (2011); Woodford (2011) on the theory and Klein and Winkler (2019) on
the empirics).


Policy 2: Adding Unconventional Monetary Policy In the second policy experiment,
the government augments the first policy with unconventional monetary policy (UMP). UMP

                                                                                                           32
consists of three legs. The first leg is QE, the second leg is an exemption of reserves from
banks' Supplemental Leverage Ratio (SLR), and the third leg is a higher inflation target. QE
in our model is equivalent to a change in the maturity structure of debt held by the public. We
assume that the central bank builds up a portfolio of long-term with total value equal to 32%
of GDP, or equivalently 40% of the stock of long-term debt before the policy.14

  Exempting central bank reserves and certain treasury securities from the SLR was a real-
world feature of policy, which we capture in our model.15 The inflation target is raised from
2% to 3% annually. This third leg captures forward guidance. With a Taylor rule, raising the
inflation target is akin to keeping the policy rate lower for longer. We refer to the combination
of discretionary and unconventional monetary policy as the "Combo" experiment.

  The Combo policy (purple line) adds unconventional monetary policy (UMP) on top of the
discretionary fiscal spending. The combination of QE, SLR relaxation, and a higher inflation
target has a clear positive impact on macro aggregates: output, consumption, and labor all
see declines that are about 1% point of GDP smaller relative to the previous experiment.
Investment and inflation improve by around 4% points.

  We provide a detailed discussion of each aspect of the three-legged UMP mechanism in Section
5.2 below. For now, we point to QE generating a response that is akin to a positive demand
shock through a crowding-out effect and a liquidity creation effect. The crowding-out channel
says that QE leads banks to reduce their demand for firm capital, now that they are flush
with reserves. Reserves enjoy lower bank equity requirements than firm capital, and no capital
charges at all during the SLR relaxation, making them better collateral for deposits. QE also
directly lowers banks' cost of creating deposits (equation (7)). Since deposits are valued for
their liquidity benefits by households, QE lowers the production cost of a good from which
households derive utility. We refer to this benefit of QE as the liquidity creation channel.

  Committing to a higher inflation target for the duration of UMP is equivalent to setting a
lower policy rate at any given level of inflation. This is expansionary at the ZLB, since the
central bank effectively promises to compensate for its inability to lower rates during the crisis
  14
    As of July 2021, the Fed holds $8.1 trillion worth of assets, roughly 36% of 2021.Q2 GDP.
  15
    The exact policy is that we increase  in (6) to 1 from 0.97, while keeping the product K constant. This
implies that the equity requirement for capital is unaffected. The SLR exemption for bank reserves was in effect
from April 2020 until March 2021; see Federal Reserve System (2020). Regulators are currently considering
permanent changes to SLR requirements for safe assets.


                                                      33
with lower rates during the recovery, once rates lift off from the ZLB (Werning, 2011; Basu and
Bundick, 2017).


Policy 3: Longer-term Unconventional Monetary Policy In the third policy experi-
ment, we allow UMP to persist well into recovery. For the automatic stabilizer baseline as well
as policies (1) and (2) above, the shock and any policy responses last for 4 quarters and mean
revert with probability 0.5 thereafter. For this third experiment, the demand and productivity
shocks still follow these laws of motion. However, the unconventional monetary policy response
is now assumed to only mean revert with probability 0.1 each quarter, such that the policy
persists for an expected additional 10 quarters after the crisis ends in expectation. Policy pa-
rameters are exactly the same as in the second experiment. Thus, the only difference between
(2) and (3) for the duration of the negative shock is an announcement effect: in case of policy
(3), agents know that the government's policy response will persist with probability 0.9 per
quarter after the demand and productivity shocks have mean-reverted. We refer to this policy
as "Long UMP." One aspect of Long UMP is that the inflation target is kept high for longer.
One interpretation of this is the new monetary policy framework the Fed adopted in 2019,
in which it would tolerate higher inflation for longer if the economy had not returned to full
employment. Another aspect of Long UMP is that QE is phased out more slowly, consistent
with the experience post-GFC and the expectation post-covid.

  Adding persistence to UMP greatly increases its benefits (green line in Figure 4). This is
mostly due to announcement effects upon impact. During the crisis (periods 1 through 4), all
policy variables are identical for the purple and green lines. Yet, announcing higher persistence
of UMP has immediate positive effects on output, consumption, and investment.

  Interestingly, long-running UMP causes the short-term policy rate set by the central bank
to overshoot (top right panel of Figure 4). This is because announcing this policy causes extra
inflation in the short-run, to which the central bank responds with rate increases based on its
monetary policy rule.16
  16
    One could consider additional policy variations that feature a lower coefficient on inflation in the Taylor
rule for the duration of the policy.




                                                      34
                                              Figure 5: Main Policy Experiments: Fiscal Variables

                                                ST Debt                                               LT Debt                        Debt/GDP
                                  150                                                       60                        1.1

            Change from BGP (%)




                                                                      Change from BGP (%)
                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                       1
                                  100
                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                      0.9
                                                                                             0
                                   50
                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                            -20

                                    0                                                       -40                       0.7
                                        0        10              20                               0   10         20         0          10       20


                                            Prim Surplus/GDP                                          LT Yield                    -3
                                                                                                                                10Debt Service/GDP
                              0.01                                                          4.5                       10

                                    0
                                                                                             4                         8
                                                                       Annual %



                       -0.01
                                                                                            3.5                        6
                       -0.02                     Autom. Stab.
                                                 Discretionary
                                                                                             3                         4
                       -0.03                     Combo
                                                 Long UMP

                       -0.04                                                                2.5                        2
                                        0        10              20                               0   10         20         0          10       20




5.1.2   Fiscal Variables

Figure 5 displays the evolution of debt quantities and long-term bond yields. Absent additional
policy intervention, debt/GDP increase sharply from 75% to above 100%. The primary surplus
turns sharply negative to -3% of GDP. Yields on long-term government bonds initially decline
as the central bank slashes the short rate to zero. But as short-term interest rates recover
after 4 quarters of the shock and the quantity of debt/GDP increases, so do long-term bond
yields. The highly persistent increase in yields and quantities of long-term debt feed back on
each other, as high bond yields increase the cost of servicing the debt, which in turn requires
the government to issue more debt.

  Additional discretionary spending lowers the deficit/GDP and the debt/GDP ratio through
the fiscal multiplier effects on GDP discussed above. The debt service is modestly lower than
in the baseline.

  The addition of unconventional monetary policy (purple line, Combo) makes a big difference
for fiscal dynamics. To implement QE, the central bank swaps 40% of the fraction of outstanding


                                                                                                      35
long-term debt for short-term debt. This reduction in the quantity of long-term debt causes
households to move up their demand curve for long-term debt, implying higher long-term bond
prices and lower bond yields. The reduction in long-term bond yields, and the fact that a larger
fraction of debt held by the public is short-term with QE, both contribute to lower government
interest expenses, which in turn lead to a smaller rise of the debt/GDP ratio.

  Turning to the long UMP experiment, long-term bond yields decline slightly less on impact
in Figure 5, since GDP is higher, debt/GDP lower, and long-term yields move opposite to
debt/GDP. However, yields stay lower for longer. These dynamics add up to lower debt servicing
costs in the long-run. Combined with the strong positive effects on output in the short-run,
these dynamics cause a smaller rise and steeper recovery of debt/GDP.

  Each policy helps to alleviate the severity of the crisis and therefore causes a less sharp rise
of the debt/GDP ratio. In the top right panel of Figure 5, the difference between the red and
green lines measures the effectiveness of UMP in lowering the debt/GDP ratio relative to a
central bank that follows its standard MP rule. The main result of the paper is that UMP
creates fiscal space. The debt/GDP ratio is nearly nearly 10% points lower five years after the
start of the crisis with long UMP than without it. Debt service is commensurately lower.


Fiscal Risk Avoidance As result of a smaller rise in debt/GDP, the economy is at lower
risk of entering the austerity region. Thus, UMP helps the economy avoid detrimental tax hikes
during this crisis episode. We refer to this benefit of UMP as the fiscal risk avoidance channel.
We can see this channel at work in Figure 6.

  This figure plots the dynamics of tax adjustments triggered by profligacy or austerity for
the baseline crisis with only automatic stabilizers on the left, with discretionary government
purchases in the middle, and with additional persistent UMP on the right. The bold lines
plot mean paths. In addition, Figure 6 shows standard errors as dashed lines around each
mean path. Furthermore, the color intensity around each line indicates the likelihood that
the economy's stochastic path will visit the corresponding levels of tax adjustments.17 For the
  17
    We generate the IRF graphs by simulating 5,000 random paths. For each period of the IRF, we estimate the
kernel density of possible paths. Darker shades indicate higher density. Since austerity-induced tax increases
are a nonlinear function of debt/GDP, expected mean tax increases due to austerity are positive even though
the average debt/GDP path never enters the austerity region in Figure 7.



                                                     36
                 Figure 6: Main Policy Experiments: Government Debt Paths




baseline scenario with only automatic stabilizers (left panel), austerity-induced tax adjustments
occur along the mean path. The figures also illustrates that there is considerable fiscal risk:
the worst paths out of the crisis require tax rates that are close to 1.4 times the baseline tax
rates. Additional discretionary government spending (middle panel) reduces this risk slightly
by mitigating the severity of the crisis; the fact that higher spending reduces fiscal risk during
the recovery highlights that the model generates a large fiscal multiplier in crises. Adding long-
running UMP to the policy combo (right panel) almost eliminates the need for tax increases
completely along the mean path. It also significantly reduces the risk of austerity, with the
worst paths now only needing 20% higher tax rates.

  Figure 7 shows the corresponding paths of debt/GDP. The mean paths in this figure are
identical to those displayed for the respective policies in the top right panel of Figure 5. At the
top of each panel, the austerity region is shaded in grey. We can see that government policies
reduce the risk that the economy enters the austerity region. Specifically, government spend-
ing decreases the probability from 40% to 33%. Long-running UMP reduces this probability
further to only 10%. Not only can monetary policy help the government ease the future debt
burden from additional borrowing on average, but it also alleviates fiscal risks by lowering the
probability of explosive debt expansion that requires painful fiscal adjustments.

  In Section 5.2, we provide additional results that break out the different components of UMP
in the crisis experiments above. There we also compare the effect of QE during economic crisis
to the effect in normal times.


                                                37
                                            Figure 7: Main Policy Experiments: Government Debt Paths




                                                 Figure 8: Main Policy Experiments: Risk Premia
                                                      Y                           EER K                           EER Y
                                   2                                      8                               8
                                                                                                                  Autom. Stab.
                                                                                                                  Discretionary
                                   0
            Change from BGP (%)




                                                                                                                  Combo
                                                                          6                               6       Long UMP
                                   -2
                                                               Annual %




                                                                                               Annual %
                                   -4                                     4                               4

                                   -6
                                                                          2                               2
                                   -8

                                  -10                                     0                               0
                                        0        10       20                  0   10      20                  0   10              20




5.1.3   The Financial System and Risk Premia

Figure 8 displays the response of expected excess returns on firm capital claims (middle panel)
and on output (right panel) during the crisis. Output changes are repeated in the left panel for
convenience. Absent policy interventions, risk premia spike sharply ­ the capital risk premium
by 4% points annually and the output premium by close to 2% points.

  Discretionary fiscal spending (red line) has limited effects on these elevated risk premia.
However, UMP significantly reduces risk premia on both claims, with the magnitude of the
effect being almost the same for short- and long-running UMP. This demonstrates that UMP
reduces required returns on risky assets, a stated objective of the policy.




                                                                                  38
                                                       Figure 9: Effect of UMP in Crisis: Macro Variables

                                              ST Debt                                            LT Debt                                                                     Pol. Rate
                                                                                        0                                                        0.05                                                                       2.5
                                100            QE
        Change from Base (%)




                                                               Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                     Diff. to Base (ann %)




                                                                                                                                                                                              Diff. to Base (ann %)
                                               QE + SLR                                -10                                                                          0                                                        2
                                    80         UMP
                                                                                       -20                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                    60                                                                                                       -0.05
                                                                                       -30                                                                                                                                   1
                                    40                                                                                                               -0.1
                                                                                       -40                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                    20                                                                                                       -0.15
                                                                                       -50                                                                                                                                   0
                                     0
                                                                                       -60                                                           -0.2                                                              -0.5
                                          0   10          20                                 0   10        20                                                            0    10         20                                       0   10       20


                                                   Y                                                  C                                                                        Inv                                                         N
                                     2                                                  2                                                                           5                                                       2.5
             Change from Base (%)




                                                                Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                             Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Change from Base (%)
                                                                                                                                                                    4                                                        2
                                    1.5                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                     1                                                  1                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                    0.5                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                       0.5

                                     0                                                  0                                                                           -1                                                       0
                                          0   10          20                                 0   10        20                                                            0    10         20                                       0   10       20




5.2     Understanding the Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy

We recall that UMP in Figures 4­8 is a combination of three policy changes (Combo). The first
leg is QE, which entails the central bank buying long-term debt from households by issuing
reserves to intermediaries. The second component is a relaxation of the SLR constraint for
reserves and short-term debt. The third component is an increase in the inflation target from
2% annually to 3%.


5.2.1        Decomposition: Effects During Crisis

Figure 9 shows a decomposition of the effects of these policies relative to the baseline model with
only automatic stabilizers; i.e., all lines in Figure 9 are differences with the blue lines in 4­8.
The red line shows the effects of only QE, decreasing the supply of long-term debt held by the
public and replacing it by short-term debt. This policy by itself has moderate positive effects
on macro aggregates, reflecting both the liquidity creation and fiscal risk avoidance channels.
When combined with a relaxation of the SLR for reserves (yellow line), the policy accounts for
about half of the total effect of UMP on output. Adding the higher inflation target leads to the
full effect of increasing output by roughly 2%, consumption by roughly 1.5%, and investment

                                                                                                                39
by 4% relative to the baseline.
                                                          Figure 10: Effect of UMP in Crisis: Fiscal Variables

                                                            Debt/GDP                                               Tax adj.                                                 Income tax rate
                                                0                                                        0                                                        1

                                                -1                                                     -0.5
                            Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                               Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                            Diff. to Base (%)
                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                -2                                                      -1

                                                -3                                                     -1.5
                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                -4                                                      -2

                                                -5                                                     -2.5                                                     -0.5
                                                     0        10          20                                  0    10         20                                       0        10        20


                                                         Prim Surplus/GDP                                          LT Yield                                                Debt Service/GDP
                                                1                                                        0                                                        0
                                                               QE
                                                                                                       -0.1                                            -0.05
                                                                               Diff. to Base (ann %)



                                        0.8                    QE + SLR
               Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                   Diff. to Base (%)
                                                               UMP
                                        0.6                                                            -0.2                                                     -0.1

                                        0.4                                                            -0.3                                            -0.15

                                        0.2                                                            -0.4                                                     -0.2

                                                                                                       -0.5                                            -0.25
                                                0
                                                                                                       -0.6                                                     -0.3
                                   -0.2
                                                     0        10          20                                  0    10         20                                       0        10        20




Simulated paths in crisis. Demand and productivity shocks last for four quarters before mean-reverting stochas-
tically. The figure plots the difference of the economy's path under different policy scenarios relative to the
automatic stabilizer baseline. "QE" (red) is quantitative easing only, "QE + SLR" (yellow) adds SLR exemption
for reserves, and "UMP" adds higher inflation target.


  We can see how these policies affect fiscal variables in Figure 10. In total, UMP reduces
debt/GDP by about 4.5%. QE accounts for about 1/3 of this effect, the higher inflation target
contributes more than 1/2, with the SLR relaxation contributing the remainder. QE is effective
at reducing the government's debt service, both by lowering long-term bond yields by about
30 basis points and by shifting the maturity structure of debt held by the public towards the
short-term. The higher inflation target mainly affects debt dynamics through improving the
real economy and thus causing a much smaller primary deficit. The lower debt/GDP ratio in
turn results in lower long-term yields.

  The middle and right panels in the top row of Figure 10 show the change in the tax adjustment
due to austerity, and the change in the effective tax rate on wage income. In total, UMP causes
a 2% smaller increase in tax rates on average by avoiding austerity. As a result, income tax
rates during the recovery from the crisis are lower by about 50bp. Why does UMP cause higher

                                                                                                                  40
                                             Figure 11: Effect of UMP in Crisis: Financial Variables
                                                Capital I                                        Deposits I                                       Lambda I
                                    0                                                  10                                                3
                                                                                                                                                   Autom. Stab.
                                                                                                                                                   QE
                                   -10                                                                                                  2.5

             Change from BGP (%)




                                                                 Change from BGP (%)
                                                                                        0                                                          QE + SLR




                                                                                                                   Diff. from BGP (%)
                                                                                                                                                   UMP
                                   -20                                                                                                   2
                                                                                       -10
                                   -30                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                       -20
                                   -40                                                                                                   1

                                                                                       -30
                                   -50                                                                                                  0.5

                                   -60                                                 -40                                               0
                                         0       10         20                               0    10          20                              0    10             20



income tax rates in the short-run during the crisis relative to the economy without UMP? This
is because UMP causes a less steep decline in output, and tax rates are pro-cyclical in output
deviations from trend due to the pro-cyclical tax rule in equation (22).

  In Figure 11 we study how QE affects key financial intermediary variables. Unlike Figures
9 and 10 this figure does not plot differences to the baseline automatic stabilizers scenario,
but instead deviations from the no-shock growth path. Under a business-as-usual policy (blue
line), the demand shock induced crisis causes a sharp tightening of the intermediary's leverage
constraint, as can be seen from the value of the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint I in
the right panel. Before the crisis, the constraint is not binding and the multiplier is zero.
When the demand shock hits, intermediaries become equity constrained as capital prices drop
sharply. They respond by shedding the more expensive collateral asset, capital, which they sell
to households. As a result, intermediary capital holdings decrease by over 40% (left panel).
Overall, intermediaries shrink their balance sheet, also reducing deposit issuance by roughly
the same amount (middle panel).

  Regular QE (red line) floods the balance sheet of intermediaries with reserves. This large
increase in reserve supply has opposing effects. On the one hand, the liquidity cost of issuing
each dollar of deposits is greatly reduced. However, because (and to the extent that) even
reserves require scarce equity with the baseline SLR of 0.97, QE induces banks to sell even
more of their capital holdings to households.

  This capital sale to households is our model's representation of the crowding-out effect of
lending, documented empirically by Diamond, Jiang, and Ma (2021). Even with this crowding-
out effect, QE still causes a smaller net decline in deposit supply than the automatic stabilizer

                                                                                                 41
scenario, demonstrating the large liquidity creation benefit of QE during the crisis.

  The equity squeeze of intermediaries stemming from the flood of reserves is substantially mit-
igated by eliminating the SLR requirement for reserves (yellow line). The Lagrange multiplier
on intermediaries' leverage constraint is now much smaller, and intermediaries only sell 30% of
their capital to households instead of over 50%. As a result, overall deposit supply falls by less
than 10% initially and even increases after a few quarters, allowing the economy to realize the
full benefit of cheaper liquidity production.

  Unsurprisingly, adding a higher inflation target to the policy mix (purple line) has little effect
on these intermediary balance sheet quantities.


5.2.2   Economic Mechanism: QE As A Positive Demand Shock

To further our understanding of the economic mechanism through which QE works in our
model, we perform the decomposition when QE is implemented in "normal times", i.e. without
simultaneous occurrence of negative demand and productivity shocks. Details are in Appendix
D.1. There, we first study the economy's transition from the baseline calibration to a world
with permanent QE, where the central bank permanently alters the maturity composition of
government debt towards short-term debt (the maturity of debt held by the public falls from
5.28 to 3.26 years). We then analyze the differences between this shift to permanent QE and a
temporary QE policy shock that occurs independent of other (negative) economic shocks.

  The discussion in Appendix D.1, visualized in Figures 12 and 13, clarifies that permanent QE
causes a reallocation of capital from intermediaries to households, resulting in an economy with
less investment and a permanently smaller capital stock. The reason is the crowding out effect
discussed before: by providing intermediaries with plentiful reserves, the central bank reduces
intermediaries' demand for physical capital as collateral to back deposit issuance. Reserves are
a superior collateral asset since they alleviate both equity and liquidity (LCR) requirements of
intermediaries. As intermediaries' valuation of capital decreases with greater reserve supply,
they sell capital to households, and overall demand for capital declines. During the transition to
a smaller capital stock, aggregate consumption rises. In the new steady state with permanent
QE, consumption is slightly lower then in the initial economy, but intermediaries' balance sheets
are larger and they have higher leverage, substantially boosting deposit supply. Household

                                                42
welfare in consumption-equivalent units is almost 0.4% greater.18 The economy's behavior
during the transition to permanent QE resembles a neoclassical growth model without nominal
frictions: since the "QE shock" is permanent, the policy does not trigger short-term demand
effects.

  As we discuss in Appendix D.1, visualized in Figures 14 and 15, this behavior is different when
the QE policy is temporary, as it is in our main policy experiment. The fundamental mechanism
is still that QE temporarily provides plentiful high-quality collateral to intermediaries, causing
them to shed physical capital to households. As in the permanent case, households respond to
the decreased overall capital demand by temporarily consuming more. However, the transitory
nature of the policy activates the New Keynesian elements of the model: QE affects the econ-
omy like a standard positive demand shock resulting from e.g. a temporary drop in households'
discount factor. The shift from investment to consumption stimulates aggregate demand, caus-
ing producers to increase demand for production inputs. Equilibrium hours and real wages rise
with higher labor demand, and aggregate output expands. Thus, unlike permanent QE which
leads to a slow transition to lower output, the temporary QE policy is expansionary in the
short-run and output-neutral in the long-run. Since temporary QE increases both consumption
and deposit supply, the policy is welfare-increasing on impact. However, the magnitude of the
overall positive effect is small: a replacement of 40% of long-term debt by reserves only leads
to a 6 basis point rise in output, a 0.1% rise in consumption, and a 0.01% short-term welfare
gain.

  This is in sharp contrast to the effect of QE during the crisis (Figure 9), during which only
QE causes output to rise by roughly 0.7% and the combination of QE and SLR relaxation
causes a rise of 1%. Therefore, comparing the economy's response to QE during crises, as in
Figure 9, to its response in normal times, as in Figure 14, demonstrates that our model features
a high multiplier on QE. While these policies have very small short-term benefits when applied
in normal times, they have ten times larger short-term output effects when applied during the
crisis. Further, the policies have long-term benefits as they contribute to a smaller increase and
faster recovery of the debt/GDP ratio.
   18
      The fact that household welfare increases with permanent QE indicates that the initial economy suffers
from a shortage of liquid assets that causes over-accumulation of physical capital and a shortage of deposits.




                                                     43
5.2.3   Economic Mechanism: Announcement Effects at the ZLB

Figure 4 for our main policy experiment shows that adding persistence to UMP greatly enhances
the benefits of this policy (Long UMP versus Combo). Since UMP in the main experiment is
a combination of QE, a SLR constraint relaxation, and a higher inflation target, this section
dissects the contribution of each component to this benefit of a longer-lasting policy. For
this purpose, we turn off the higher inflation target as part of the policy mix. Figure 16 in
Appendix D.2 reveals that without higher inflation target, the additional benefits stemming
from greater persistence disappear. Put differently, all of the additional benefits of "Long
UMP" over "Combo" in Figure 4 are due to the higher inflation target.

  This finding is consistent with the results discussed above: making QE by itself more per-
sistent reduces the short-term demand stimulus caused by the policy, since greater persistence
moves the policy closer to the case of permanent QE, which we showed lowers output.

  The central bank's commitment to a higher inflation target affects the economy by changing
expectations of higher future interest rates once the economy recovers and lifts off from the ZLB
(Werning, 2011; Basu and Bundick, 2017). Given the fact that QE on its own does not benefit
from longer policy duration, a comparison of the "Long UMP" and "Combo" lines in Figure
4 isolates the effect of forward guidance about the central bank's monetary policy rule. In the
"Long UMP" scenario, the central bank credibly promises to keep the inflation target higher
at 3% rather than 2% for an additional 10 quarters after the crisis on average. Since the policy
rate is stuck at the ZLB during the crisis, this commitment has no effect on actual interest
rates in the crisis period. However, upon announcement the policy has a large positive effect on
aggregate demand, causing a relative increase in output by 1% and investment by almost 5%.
Our policy experiment highlights the quantitative force of this expectations-driven mechanism,
both in terms of how much it can limit the severity of the crisis and affect its long-term fiscal
consequences.




                                               44
6      Conclusion

We study economic crisis dynamics in a New Keynesian model with realistic risk and risk premia.
Conventional monetary (Taylor rule) and fiscal policy (automatic stabilizers) are insufficient
to stabilize government debt in many states of the world. Keeping government debt risk-free
implies a high risk of future austerity, a regime where fiscal policy must abandon stabilizing
macro-economic fluctuations and focus on debt reduction instead. We find that unconventional
monetary policy can significantly reduce this fiscal risk, and that it leads to a smaller increase
in debt/GDP during the crisis and a faster reduction thereafter.

    In our model both QE and committing to a higher inflation target are powerful policies in
economic crises, when conventional monetary policy is stuck at the ZLB. Temporary QE affects
the economy akin to a positive demand shock by shifting macroeconomic activity from invest-
ment to consumption. An announcement of permanent QE in response to a crisis acts as a
negative supply shock in the long run with little effect on output in the short run. These results
highlight that the effectiveness of QE arises from its temporary nature. In contrast, forward
guidance about the inflation target in the crisis becomes more powerful as the promised per-
sistence of the policy post recovery increases. This sheds new light on the Fed's new monetary
policy strategy, which promises to tolerate higher inflation while the economy is still recovering
from a recession.




                                               45
References
Philippe Andrade, Jordi Gal´  i, Herv´
                                     e Le Bihan, and Julien Matheron. Should the ECB Adjust its
  Strategy in the Face of a Lower r*? Working Papers 1236, Barcelona Graduate School of Economics,
  February 2021. URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/bge/wpaper/1236.html.

Robert J Barro. r minus g. NBER Working Paper, October 2020.

Marco Bassetto. A game-theoretic view of the fiscal theory of the price level. Econometrica, 2002.

Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick. Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand. Econometrica,
  2017.

Ben S. Bernanke. The new tools of monetary policy. American Economic Review, 110(4):943­83,
  April 2020. doi: 10.1257/aer.110.4.943. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/
  aer.110.4.943.

Francesco Bianchi and Leonardo Melosi. The dire effects of the lack of monetary and fiscal coordination.
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2019.

Francesco Bianchi, Renato Faccini, and Leonardo Melosi. Monetary and fiscal policies in times of large
  debt: Unity is strength. 2020.

Roberto M. Billi and Carl E. Walsh. Seemingly irresponsible but welfare improving fiscal policy at
  the lower bound. 2021.

BIS. Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and liquidity risk monitoring tools. Technical Report
  January, 2013.

Olivier Blanchard. Public debt and low interest rates. American Economic Review, 109(4):1197­1229,
  2019.

Markus Brunnermeier, Sebastian Merkel, and Yuliy Sannikov. The fiscal theory of price level with a
 bubble. 2020.

John Y. Campbell, Carolin Pflueger, and Luis M. Viceira. Macroeconomic drivers of bond and equity
  risks. Journal of Political Economy, 128(8):3148­3185, 2020. doi: 10.1086/707766.

Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. When is the government spending
  multiplier large? Journal of Political Economy, 2011.

John H. Cochrane. A frictionless model of u.s. inflation. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1998.

John H. Cochrane. Long term debt and optimal policy in the fiscal theory of the price level. Econo-
  metrica, 2001.

John H Cochrane. The fiscal roots of inflation. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2019a.

John H Cochrane. The value of government debt. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2019b.

Alexandre Corhay, Thilo Kind, Howard Kung, and Gonzalo Morales. Discount rates, debt maturity,
  and the fiscal theory. 2021.

                                                  46
Max Croce, Howard Kung, Thien Nguyen, and Lukas Schmid. Fiscal policies and asset prices. Review
 of Financial Studies, 2012a.

Max Croce, Thien Nguyen, and Lukas Schmid. The market price of fiscal uncertainty. Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 2012b.

Max Croce, Thien Nguyen, Steven Raymond, and Lukas Schmid. Government debt and the returns
 to innovation. Journal of Financial Economics, 2019.

Bianca De Paoli, Alasdair Scott, and Olaf Weeken. Asset pricing implications of a new keynesian model.
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(10):2056­2073, 2010. ISSN 0165-1889. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/j.jedc.2010.05.012. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/S0165188910001156.

William Diamond, Zhengyang Jiang, and Yiming Ma. The reserve supply channel of unconventional
 monetary policy. Working Paper, 2021.

Gauti Eggertsson. What fiscal policy is effective at zero interest rates? NBER Macroeconomics Annual
  2010, 2011.

Vadim Elenev. Mortgage credit, aggregate demand, and unconventional monetary policy. 2020.

Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. A macroeconomic model with fi-
  nancially constrained producers and intermediaries. Econometrica, 89(3):1361­1418, 2021. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA16438. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
  3982/ECTA16438.

Miguel Faria-e-Castro. Fiscal policy instruments. Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers,
  2020.

Federal Reserve System. Temporary exclusion of u.s. treasury securities and deposits at federal reserve
  banks from the supplementary leverage ratio. Fed. Reg., 85(72):20578, April 2020.

John G. Fernald. A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity. 2012.

Jordi Gal´
         i. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian
  Framework and Its Applications Second edition. Number 10495 in Economics Books. Princeton
  University Press, April 2015. URL https://ideas.repec.org/b/pup/pbooks/10495.html.

Francois Gourio. Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review, 2012.

Francois Gourio and Phuong Ngo. Risk Premia at the ZLB: A Macroeconomic Interpretation. Working
  Paper Series WP 2020-01, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, January 2020. URL https://ideas.
  repec.org/p/fip/fedhwp/87504.html.

Zhiguo He and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic Review, 103
  (2):732­770, 2013.

Zhiguo He and Arvind Krishnamurthy. A macroeconomic framework for quantifying systemic risk.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(4):1­37, October 2019. doi: 10.1257/mac.
  20180011. URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/mac.20180011.




                                                  47
Marl`
    ene Isor´
            e and Urszula Szczerbowicz. Disaster risk and preference shifts in a new keynesian model.
 Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 79:97­125, 2017. ISSN 0165-1889. doi: https://doi.
 org/10.1016/j.jedc.2017.04.001. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 S0165188917300751.

Zhengyang Jiang, Hanno Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan. The u.s. public debt
  valuation puzzle. Working Paper, April 2019.

Zhengyang Jiang, Hanno Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan. Manufacturing
  risk-free government debt. SSRN Working Paper No. 3646430, July 2020.

Zhengyang Jiang, Hanno Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan. What determines
  the government's funding costs when r=g? unpleasant fiscal asset pricing arithmetic. Working
  Paper, March 2021.

Oscar Jorda, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor. Macrofinancial History and the New Business
  Cycle Facts, pages 213­263. University of Chicago Press, May 2016. doi: 10.1086/690241. URL
  http://www.nber.org/chapters/c13776.

Bryan Kelly, Lubos Pastor, and Pietro Veronesi. The price of political uncertainty: Theory and
  evidence from the option markets. Journal of Finance, 2015.

Mathias Klein and Roland Winkler. Austerity, inequality, and private debt overhang. European
 Journal of Political Economy, 2019.

E.M. Leeper and C. Leith. Chapter 30 - understanding inflation as a joint monetary­fiscal phenomenon.
  volume 2 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, pages 2305­2415. Elsevier, 2016. doi: https://doi.org/
  10.1016/bs.hesmac.2016.03.012. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S1574004816000136.

Eric M. Leeper. Equilibria under active and passive monetary and fiscal policies. Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 1991.

Moritz Lenel, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. The short rate disconnect in a monetary
 economy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 106:59­77, 2019.

Yang Liu, Lukas Schmid, and Amir Yaron. The risks of safe assets. 2020.

N. Gregory Mankiw and Laurence M. Ball. Market power in neoclassical growth models. 2021.

Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices. Journal of
  Finance, 2012.

Carolin Pflueger and Gianluca Rinaldi. Why does the fed move markets so much? a model of monetary
  policy and time-varying risk aversion. 2021.

Monika Piazzesi, Cieran Rogers, and Martin Schneider. Money and banking in a new keynesian model.
 2021.

Ricardo Reis. Funding quantitative easing to target inflation. Discussion Papers, Centre for Macroe-
  conomics, 2016.

Ricardo Reis. The constraint on public debt when r<g but g<m. Working Paper London School of
  Economics, March 2021.

                                                 48
Geert Rouwenhorst. Asset pricing implications of equilibrium business cycle models. In Cooley, editor,
  Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton University Press, 1995.

Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace. Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic. Federal Reserve Bank of
  Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 1981.

Stephanie Schmitt-Grohhe and Martin Uribe. Price level determinacy and monetary policy under a
  balanced-budget requirement. Journal of Monetary Economics, 2000.

Chistopher A. Sims. Fiscal policy, monetary policy, and central bank independence. Technical report,
  2016.

Christopher A. Sims. A simple model for study of the determination of the price level and the
  interaction of monetary and fiscal policy. Economic Theory, 1991.

Eric Sims and Jing Cynthia Wu. The four equation new keynesian model. 2021.

Eric T. Swanson. Risk aversion, risk premia, and the labor margin with generalized recursive
  preferences. Review of Economic Dynamics, 28:290­321, 2018. ISSN 1094-2025. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/j.red.2017.10.003. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/S1094202517300820.

Has van Vlokhoven. Estimating the Cost of Capital and the Profit Share. 2020.

Annette Vissing-Jorgensen and Arvind Krishnamurthy. The effects of quantitative easing on interest
  rates: Channels and implications for policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2011.

Annette Vissing-Jorgensen and Arvind Krishnamurthy. The aggregate demand for treasury debt. The
  Journal of Political Economy, 2012.

Annette Vissing-Jorgensen and Arvind Krishnamurthy. The ins and outs of large scale asset purchases.
  Technical report, 2013.

Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Stefan Nagel, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Ecb policies involving govern-
  ment bond purchases: Impact and channels. Review of Finance, 2018.

Olivier Wang. Banks, low interest rates, and monetary policy transmission. 2020.

Ivan Werning. Managing a liquidity trap: Monetary and fiscal policy. 2011.

Michael Woodford. Monetary policy and price level determinacy in a cash-in-advance economy. Eco-
  nomic Theory, 1994.

Michael Woodford. Price level determinacy without control of a monetary aggregate. Carnegie-
  Rochester Series of Public Policy, 1995.

Michael Woodford. Fiscal requirements of price stability. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 2001.

Michael Woodford. Simple analytics of the government expenditure multiplier? American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011.

Michael Woodford. Methods of policy accomodation at the interest-rate lower bound. 2012.



                                                 49
A       Model Appendix
A.1      Preliminary Definitions
We reformulate the problems of the household, wholesaler, retailer, and intermediary to ensure
stationarity. For nominal quantities, define real, stationary variables as

                                                       ^t = X
                                                       X
                                                               t
                                                                  .
                                                           Ztp Pt

where Ztp is the permanent component of productivity. For real variables, we denote stationary
values as
                                         ^ t = Xp
                                         X
                                                 t
                                                   .
                                               Zt
We define inflation as the gross growth rate on the price level
                                                         Pt
                                                             = t ,
                                                        Pt-1
and the growth rate of the permanent component of productivity as

                                                      Ztp
                                                           = exp(gt ).
                                                     Ztp-1

Finally, we let St = {Ztr , gt , Kt , WtH , WtI , WtG } be the vector of aggregate state variables.


A.2      Household
We write the household problem recursively, defining real household wealth using the payoffs
to holding capital, deposits, and the long-term bond.

                                                              ^H
                                                              D                         ^ H,l
        ^ H = exp(-gt )                K               ^ H,K    t-1            B  B B Xt-1
        W t                           rt   + (1 -  )Qt Xt-1 +       + (c + 1 -  +  pt )                   .
                                                               t                         t

The value function needs to be divided through by (ZtP )1- to ensure stationarity
                                                                                                                    1-
                                                                                                              1-    1-
     ^ H , St ) =
V H (W                  max                      ^t , Nt , D
                                      (1 -  )uH (C         ^ H ) -  Et exp((1 -  )(gt+1 ))(-V H (W
                                                                                                 ^ H , St+1 )) 1-
       t                                                     t                                     t+1
                    ^t ,Nt ,B
                    C       ^ H ,D
                                 ^H
                             t    t


subject to
      ^t = W
      C     ^ tH + (1 - tw )w             ^t + (1 -  div )(Divt
                               ^t Nt + Qt I                   I
                                                                + DivtP
                                                                        ) + t + Rebatest
         -I^t - (I     ^ t-1 ) - L (X
                   ^t /K              ^t , Y
                                        H,L  ^t ) - pD D
                                                       ^ H - pL X
                                                                ^ t - Qt X
                                                                  H,L                 ^ tH,K , K
                                                                           ^ H,K - K (X        ^ t ),
                                                            t        t   t




                                                                50
where intra-period utility is
                                                            1-
                                              ^t1- (Dt
                                              C      H 
                                                       )
                         H ^t , Nt , D
                                     ^ H) =                           Nt1+1
                        u (C           t                          - 0       -u
                                                                             ¯.
                                                  1-                  1 + 1
                                         ^ t-1 = Kt-1 /Ztp , since it is chosen in t - 1 for production
Note that the aggregate capital stock is K
in t.
     We define the intra-temporal marginal rate of substitution between deposits and consumption
as
                                                uD       C^t
                                     MRSD
                                        t =        =            .
                                                uC   (1 -  )D^t
                                                              H


               ^ t , St )  Vt and the certainty equivalent.
     Denote V (W
                                                                                    1-
                                                                       1-           1-
                                                       ^ tH
                     CEt = -Et exp((1 -  )(gt+1 ))(-V (W    H
                                                          +1 , St+1 ))
                                                                       1-                .

The partial derivative of the certainty equivalent with respect to the value function is then
given by
                                                                                             1-
          CEt (VtH
                 +1 )                               -                               1-       1-
                                                                                                -1
            H
                      = exp (1 -  )(gt+1 ) (VtH
                                              +1 )
                                                   1- E
                                                        t exp((1 -  )gt+1 )(-Vt+1 )
                                                                                    1-
          V t + 1
                                                        -
                                               VtH
                                                 +1
                                                       1-
                      = exp (1 -  )(gt+1 )
                                               CEt

     We can denote the partial derivatives of the portfolio cost functions as
                                                                           L -1
                                                                           1
                                        ^ tH,L , Y
                                     L (X        ^t )           ^ tH,L
                                                                X
                             K
                             X,t                        L
                                                      = 0
                                      X ^ tH,L                   Y^t
                                                                             K -1
                                                                             1
                                        ^ tH,K , K
                                     K (X        ^ t)             ^ tH,K
                                                                  X
                             L
                             X,t                        K
                                                      = 0
                                      X ^ tH,K                     Y ^t



and the partial derivatives of the value function with respect to bond and capital holdings as

                           H       VtH     exp(-gt )
                          VB,t           =           c + 1 -  B +  B pL
                                                                      t ,
                                   ^ t-1
                                   X H,L      t
                           H       VtH                 K
                          VK,t            = exp(-gt ) rt + (1 -  )Qt .
                                   ^ tH,K
                                   X  -1




                                                      51
A.2.1   First-order conditions

Stochastic Discount Factor Define the household's intertemporal marginal rate of substi-
tution between time t and t + 1 as
                      VtH
                      Ct+1       VtH                VtH
                                                      +1 /Ct+1
          Mt,t+1 =           =     H
                                      exp( - gt+1 )
                      VtH        Vt+1               VtH /Ct
                      Ct
                                                                                                    1-
                                                    -     1                         - ^ 
                                                                                 ^t1+1
                                          Vt+1     1-   ^t+1 (1
                                                        C
                                                                     -  )(1 -  ) C     Dt+1
                 =  exp - gt+1                                                                  1-
                                          CEt                1                   ^t1- D
                                                                                      ^t
                                                             ^t (1
                                                             C
                                                                     -  )(1 -  ) C

Hence, we can define the household stochastic discount factor as
                                                    -1           - ^         1-             -
                                            ^t+1
                                            C                 ^t1+1
                                                              C      Dt+1           Vt+1   1-
              Mt,t+1 =  exp(-gt+1 )                                -
                                                                                                .
                                             ^t
                                             C                C^t D
                                                                 1    ^t
                                                                                    CEt


Consumption Attaching multiplier t to multiplier on the budget constraint, the FOC for
consumption is given by
                                                                           1-
                                       (1 -  )(1 -  ) Ct1- Dt
                                                            

                                 t =                                            .
                                                        Ct

                                             ^ tH,L is
Long-term bonds The FOC for long-term bonds, X

                                                         VtH+1 CEt
                             -t pL     K
                                 t - t X,t + Et                    =0
                                                         ^ t VtH
                                                         X H,L
                                                                +1

Hence, we can write the FOC for the household's holding of the long-term bond as follows
                                                                       -
                             t+1                          VtH
                                                            +1
                                                                      1-
                                                                            c + 1 -  B +  B pL
                                                                                             t+1
        pL   K
         t = X,t + Et            exp (- )(gt+1 )                                                         .
                             t                            CEt                       t+1

Simplifying, we get

                                                        c + 1 -  B +  B pL
                                                                         t+1
                        pL   K
                         t = X,t + Et Mt,t+1                                                                 (32)
                                                                t+1

Deposits The FOC for the household's purchases of deposits is given by
                                        ^t1- (D
                                       (C     ^ H ) )1-        VtH
                                                                 +1 CEt
                                                t
                -t pD
                    t +  (1 -  )                        + E t            = 0.
                                              ^t
                                              D H
                                                               D^ t Vt+1

Then using the definition of the intratemporal marginal rate of substitution between deposits
and consumption, and the stochastic discount factor, we have that the FOC for deposits is


                                                   52
given by
                                                  D                             1
                                          pD
                                           t = MRSt + Et Mt,t+1                     .                     (33)
                                                                            t,t+1

Capital Households operate the economy's investment technology and optimally solve the
intratemporal problem of producing It unites of capital from It + (It , Kt ) units of the con-
sumption good. The first order condition is given by

                                                       Qt = 1 +  (t -  ) .                                (34)

Labor The household FOC for labor supply is given by
                                                                                              1

                                                    ^t1- (D
                                             ^t )-1 C     ^ H )
                                                                           1-   (1 - tw )wt   1
                        Nt =         (1 -  )(C              t                                     .       (35)
                                                                                    0

In summary, the household's optimality conditions are given by Equations (32) to (35).


A.3     Banks
The stationarized recursive bank problem is

                ^ tI , St ) =
           V I (W                     max              ^I -A
                                                       W   ^t + Et Mt,t+1 exp(gt+1 )V I (W
                                                                                         ^ I , St+1 )
                                                        t                                  t+1
                                ^ I,K ,X
                                X      ^ I,S ,D
                                              ^IA^
                                  t      t      t t,


subject to

                     ^I +A
              (1 -  )W   ^t + (pD -                       ^I   + RebatesI   S ^ I,S      ^ tI,K +  A
                                                                                                   ^2 ,
                       t        t                      t )Dt            t  pt Xt    + Qt X
                                                                                                  2 t
and
                                               ^I   X
                                               D    ^ tI,s +  K Qt X
                                                                   ^ tI,K .
                                                t

                                            X^ tI,S  0
                                            ^ tI,K  0
                                            X


where the first constraint reflects the regulatory constraint and the final two constraints reflect-
ing no-shorting constraints for short-term bonds and capital. Bank equity evolves according
to
                                                                     X^ tI,S  D^I
               ^ I                     K
              Wt+1 = exp(-gt+1 ) rt+1 + (1 - t+1 )Qt+1 Xt +   ^ I,K
                                                                             - t .
                                                                     t+1      t+1


Bank equity We attach multiplier ^ I to the budget constraint. Then the FOC for raising
                                   t
new equity is given by
                                0=   ^ I (1 - At ) - 1                             (36)
                                       t


                                                                  53
Short-term bond First, note that the partial derivative of the liquidity cost with respect to
short-term debt is given by
                                                                       -   1
                                     t                        ^ tI,S
                                                              X
                                           = (1 -      1) 0
                                    ^ tI,S
                                    X                          D ^tI



Attaching multipliers  ^ t and  I,S
                               ^t    to the leverage constraint and non-negativity constraint,
respectively, we can we write the first order condition for short-term bonds as
                                               -   1
                                      ^ tI,S
                                      X
    0=   -^I   pS   - (1 -   1) 0
                                                                           ^I ) 1 +
                                                       + Et Mt,t+1 (V I ) (W         ^t +  I,S
                                                                                          ^t
           t    t                                                            t+1
                                      D^t I                                      t+1


Deposits Noting that the partial derivative of the liquidity cost with respect to deposits is
given by
                                                       1- 1
                               t               X^ tI,S
                                   = 0 1                    ,
                             D ^tI
                                                D  ^tI


we can write the first order condition for deposits as
                                               
                                          1- 1
                                    ^
                                   Xt I,S
          0=   ^ I pD - 0 1                                         ^I ) 1 -
                                                - Et Mt,t+1 (V I ) (W        ^t.
                 t    t                                              t+1
                                    Dt^ I                                t+1


                           I,K
Capital Attach multiplier ^t   to the non-negativity constraint on capital. Then the FOC
for capital is

       0 = -^ I Qt + Et Mt,t+1 (V I ) (W
                                       ^ I ) rK + (1 - t+1 )Qt+1               +^ t  K Qt +  I,K
                                                                                            ^t   .
              t                          t+1  t+1



Envelope condition To further simplify the bank's first order conditions, we note that the
envelope condition is given by
                                             ^ I) =  + 
                                     (V I ) (W         ^ I (1 -  ).
                                               t         t


  Combining envelope condition and first FOC for new equity, ^ I = 1/(1 - A
                                                                          ^t ), we can define
                                                               t
the bank stochastic discount factor as

                                              ^                     1-
                         MI
                          t,t+1 = Mt,t+1 (1 - At )  +                          ,
                                                                      ^t+1
                                                                  1 - A
and the rescaled multipliers as

                                            t = ^ t (1 - A^t ),
                                          I,S
                                          t   = I,S
                                               ^t    (1 - A^t )
                                        I,K
                                        t   = I,K
                                             ^t        ^t ).
                                                  (1 - A

                                                       54
Then the bank FOC can be rewritten as
                                                                                                                   -   1
                                           1                                                      ^ tI,S
                                                                                                  X                          I,S
                  pS
                   t   = Et   MI
                               t,t+1               + t  + (1 -                     1) 0                                    + t   ,   (37)
                                       t+1                                                         D ^tI

                                                                                                    1-     1
                                           1                                           ^ tI,S
                                                                                       X
                  pD
                   t   = Et   MI
                               t,t+1               + t +            0 1                                        ,                     (38)
                                       t+1                                              D ^tI


                  Qt = Et MI      K
                           t,t+1 rt+1 + (1 - t+1 )Qt+1
                                                                                                 ¯ t + t
                                                                                          + t  K Q     I,K
                                                                                                           .                         (39)

  Note that when the leverage constraint and no-shorting constraint on short-term debt are not
binding, the Euler equations for short-term debt and deposits imply that the spread between
the two prices is a static function of the liquidity coverage ratio:
                                                                -   1
                                                  ^ tI,s
                                                  X                                   ^ tI,s
                                                                                      X
                         pS
                          t   -   pD
                                   t   =    0                                    1-1-                              1
                                                   D  ^I                               D  ^I
                                                      t                                               t

At 100% LCR, this reduces to ps      d
                                t - pt = 0 ( 1 - 1 -  1 ). Because  << 1, the price spread is
increasing in 1 . When 1 is closer to 1, short-term bonds are cheaper than deposits and have
a higher rate. When 1 is high, short-term bonds are more expensive than deposits and have a
                                                               1
lower rate. The prices are exactly equal at 100% LCR if 1 = 1-   
                                                                  .


A.4     Firms
A.4.1   Retailers

Final output is
                                                          1                              -1
                                                                              1
                                           ^t =
                                           Y                   Yt (i)1- di                    .
                                                      0

  Retailers maximize profit
                                                                        1
                                              ^t -
                                       max Pt Y                                   ^t (i)di.
                                                                            Pt (i)Y
                                        ^t (i)}
                                       {Y                           0

This implies the demand functions for all i
                                                                                  -
                                                ^t (i) =        Pt (i)                 ^t .
                                                Y                                      Y
                                                                 Pt

Further, perfect competition and free entry among retailers requires that they make zero profit
                                      ^t = 1 Pt (i)Y
in equilibrium. This in turn means Pt Y            ^t (i)di and
                                            0

                                                                                         1
                                                           1                            1-
                                                                            1-
                                           Pt =                Pt (i)             di          .
                                                      0




                                                                55
A.4.2         Wholesalers

We simplify notation by dropping i subscripts and writing pt = Pt (i). Then
                                                                           -
                                                                      pt        ^t .
                                                      y (pt ) =                 Y
                                                                      Pt

The stationarized recursive problem of a wholesale firm is in real terms
                                                                                           2
    W                            pt                  K^                     pt
V       (pt-1 , St ) = max          y (pt )-(w
                                             ^t nt +rt kt )-                     -1            +Et Mt,t+1 exp(gt+1 )V W (pt , St+1 ) ,
                              ^t Pt
                      pt ,nt ,k                              2            ¯ pt-1

subject to
                                                               ^1-  y (pt ).
                                                     (Ztr nt ) kt

We first solve the cost minimization problem for given output
                                                                    K^
                                                       min w
                                                           ^t nt + rt kt
                                                           ^t
                                                       nt ,k


subject to
                                                                 ^1-  y
                                                       (Ztr nt ) k    ¯.
                                                                  t

We denote the multiplier on the output constraint as mt . Then the FOC are
                                                                -1 ^ 1-
                                            w^t = mt (Ztr ) n t    kt ,
                                            rK = mt (Z r ) (1 - )n k   ^- ,
                                               t                t                 t    t

which implies
                                                                   K^
                                                    (1 - )w
                                                          ^t nt = rt kt ,
and factor demands
                                                                           -               -
                                               y
                                               ¯                                 w^t
                                        nt =                                                   ,
                                             (Ztr )             1-                K
                                                                                 rt
                                                                           1-              1-
                                        ^t =         y
                                                     ¯                            w^t
                                        k                                                          .
                                                   (Ztr )       1-                 K
                                                                                  rt

                                                      ^t
Combining these with the binding constraint (Ztr nt ) k 1-
                                                           =y
                                                            ¯ gives the following expression
for the multiplier, which equals marginal cost
                                                                      1-           
                                          1              1                  1             K 1-
                                   mt =                                                w
                                                                                       ^t (rt ) .
                                        (Ztr )          1-                  

With this solution in hand, we write the profit maximization problem
                                                                                  2
    W                                 pt                              pt
V       (pt-1 , St ) = max y (pt )       - mt -                            -1          + Et Mt,t+1 exp(gt+1 )V W (pt , St+1 ) .
                         pt           Pt        2                   ¯ pt-1



                                                                     56
The FOC for the price is

              pt        y (pt )         pt              1                          V W (pt , St+1 )
0 = y (pt )      - mt +         -            -1             + Et Mt,t+1 exp(gt+1 )                  .
              Pt          Pt          ¯ pt-1         ¯ pt-1                            pt

The marginal value of today's price is given by the envelope theorem

                            V W (pt-1 , St )           pt           pt
                                             =              -1           .
                               pt-1                  ¯ pt-1       ¯ p2
                                                                     t-1

                                                                                          ^t , and
In equilibrium, all firms choose the same price and we have pt = Pt . Therefore y (pt ) = Y
            ^
y (pt ) = - Yt /Pt .
  We can thus write the FOC as
              t    t  ^t (1 - + mt ) + Et Mt,t+1 exp(gt+1 ) t+1 - 1 t+1 ,
                -1   =Y                                                                          (40)
              ¯    ¯                                        ¯       ¯
which is the New Keynesian Phillips curve.


A.5     Aggregate Capital Transition
The aggregate capital stock is a state variable of the economy contained in St . It is needed to
compute adjustment costs, and the aggregate output of intermediate goods. Since K   ^ t-1 = Kt- 1
                                                                                              p ,
                                                                                             Zt
the stationarized law of motion for capital is
                                     p
                             ^t = Z
                             K       t          ^ t-1 + I
                                        (1 - t )K       ^t ,
                                  Ztp+1
                                                       ^ t-1 + I
                                 = exp(-gt+1 ) (1 - t )K       ^t


A.6     Government
A.6.1    Fiscal rules

The fiscal rules are parameterized by the following coefficient matrix
                                          
                                            1 0 -b2
                                                        
                                                      
                                     F = 0 b -b2       .
                                                        
                                                      2
                                            0 b -b

We consider two transformations of output for the fiscal rules. The first below, is a modification
for the implementation of the fading stabilizing rule described in the main body of the text,
and the second is simply the log of detrended output.

                                                           ^t )
                                                     b log(Y
                                    y
                                    ~t = mtanh
                                                        m
                                    y        ^t )
                                    ^t = log(Y

                                                57
  Then we can consider a vector fiscal variables given by
                                                
                                                 y
                                                 ~t
                                         xt = y  ^t  .
                                                   2
                                                z

The fiscal authority follows rules for transfers, and discretionary spending characterized by

                                 t = (Y^t ) = 0 exp ((Fxt ) e1 )                             (41)
                                       ^t ) = 0 exp ((Fxt ) e2 ) .
                                 t =  (Y                                                     (42)

where ei is the basis vector that selects the ith element of a vector. The rule for discretionary
spending, equation (42), gives the fading stabilizer rule shown in the main body of the text.
Given rules characterized by equations (41) and (42), real total spending is:
                                        ^t = t Y
                                        F      ^t + t Y
                                                      ^t .


Active fiscal policy If the spending and transfer rules imply that the government follow
active fiscal policy (i.e. the government actively tries to stabilize the economy by responding
to deviations to the stochastic growth trend), the tax rates on wage income and profits depend
on cyclical output
                                      ~tn = 
                                             n
                                            ~0 exp ((Fxt ) e3 )                            (43)
for n  {w, div }. Real tax revenue is given by

                               ^
                               ~t = 
                               T          ^t + 
                                    ~w wt N    ~tdiv (Div     ^ I ).
                                                       ^ P + Div
                                                          t      t


Given taxes and spending, the real primary surplus is given by S   ^t = T ^
                                                                          ~t - F
                                                                               ^t . Then the
                                    ^
                                    ~ t at the end of the period such that
government needs to issue new debt, W
                                         ^
                                         ~G=W
                                         W      ^
                                                ~t
                                             ^G-S                                            (44)
                                           t  t


                                                                        ^
Passive fiscal policy When the fiscal authority targets the level WtG of end of period debt
as a function of the active issuance in Equation (44), we refer to the fiscal regime as passive.
In this case, tax rates are determined indirectly as a result of the debt issuance target. Passive
                                                                                               G
policy is characterized by profligacy with threshold W G and austerity with threshold W .

Combined tax rule The combination of active and passive fiscal policy can best be described
as an algorithm.

Algorithm 1.                                        ^t under active fiscal policy using fiscal
                 1. Compute desired primary surplus S
    rules (41) ­ (43).
                                            ^
                                            ~ G from (44). Check whether desired issuance
  2. Determine desired active debt issuance W t




                                                 58
       under active policy is within profligacy and austerity bounds:
                                                   ~
                                            ^ G + vW
                                                   ^ G if W  ~
                                                             ^GW   ^G
                                    (1 - v )W        t         t
                           ~                                    G
                                  
                          W^ tG = W  ~
                                     ^G                      ^ >W  ~
                                                                   ^G>W ^G                     (45)
                                       t                  if W        t
                                            ^ G + vW               ^ G.
                                                   ~
                                                   ^ G if W  ^
                                                             ~GW
                                    (1 - v )W
                                  
                                                     t         t


                                                           ^        ~
                                                                    ^ tG , tax rates are determined
    3. If target issuance equals desired active issuance WtG = W
       based on active rule (43). Otherwise, switch to profligacy or austerity regime, with tax
                                                                 ^
       rate determined as implicit function of issuance target WtG given by (45) (i.e., solve for
                                              ^
       the tax rate needed to achieve surplus StG that yields the issuance target for debt).

  In the algorithm above, parameter v in (45) regulates the strength of the profligacy or aus-
terity policy. In particular, v = 1 implies no responsiveness of fiscal policy to debt/GDP, a
case for which the model with active monetary policy does not have a stationary solution since
government debt would be non-stationary. v = 0 implies the most aggressive austerity or profli-
gacy. If tax rates are bounded below at zero, and taxation is distortionary, such a policy may
be infeasible since there is no feasible tax rate to achieve the target surplus. In our calibration,
we choose v = 0.8, a value that guarantees stationary and implies feasible tax rate adjustments
away from the active rule.
  The market value of next period government debt, given fiscal and monetary policy choice is
then

          ~ tG    exp(-gt+1 ) ~ G,s ~ CB,s  ~tG,l  ~tCB,l
          W  +1 =             (Bt - Bt ) + (B     -B      )(c + 1 +  B +  B pL
                                                                             t+1 ) .
                     t+1




B      Data

Our primary data sources are the NIPA data tables provided by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) and Financial Accounts of the United States provided by the Federal Reserve
Board of Governors (BoG). The table below provides the variables we download via FRED, the
associated variable code, and the underlying source of the data.




                                                59
                                           Table 4: Data from the BEA and BoG
Variable                                                                                           FRED Code           Data Source   Release table
Government current tax receipts                                                                    W054RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Gross Domestic Income: Taxes on Production and Imports                                             GDITAXES               BEA          Table 3.1
Government current tax receipts: Taxes on corporate income                                         W025RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Federal government current tax receipts: Taxes from the ROW                                        W008RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Government current receipts: Contributions for government social insurance                         W782RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Federal government current receipts: Contributions for government social insurance: From the ROW   W781RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Government current receipts: Income receipts on assets: Interest receipts                          Y703RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Government current transfer receipts                                                               W060RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
National income: Business current transfer payments (net): to government (net)                     W061RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Personal current transfer payments: to government                                                  W062RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Current surplus of government enterprises                                                          A108RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Government consumption expenditures                                                                A955RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Government current transfer payments                                                               A084RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Federal government current transfer payments: Government social benefits: to the ROW               W016RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Federal government current transfer payments: Other current transfer payments to the ROW (net)     W017RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Government current expenditures: Interest payments                                                 A180RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Government current expenditures: Interest payments: to the rest of the world                       Y712RC1Q027SBEA        BEA          Table 3.1
Gross Domestic Income: Subsidies                                                                   GDISUBS                BEA          Table 3.1
Private Nonresidential Fixed Investment                                                            PNFI                   BEA         Table 1.1.5
Population Level                                                                                   CNP16OV                BLS         Table A-1
Gross private domestic investment: Fixed investment: Nonresidential (implicit price deflator)      A008RD3Q086SBEA        BEA         Table 1.1.9
Personal Consumption Expenditures: Chain-type Price Index                                          PCEPI                  BEA         Table 2.8.4
Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets: Private: Nonresidential: Structures                        K1NTOTL1ST000          BEA          Table 1.1
Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets: Private: Nonresidential: Equipment                         K1NTOTL1EQ000          BEA          Table 1.1
Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets: Private: Intellectual property products                    K1NTOTL1IP000          BEA          Table 1.1
Current-Cost Net Stock of Consumer Durable Goods                                                   K1CTOTL1CD000          BEA          Table 1.1
Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets: Residential                                                K1R53101ES000          BEA          Table 1.1
Personal Consumption Expenditures: Nondurable Goods                                                PCND                   BEA         Table 1.1.5
Personal Consumption Expenditures: Durable Goods                                                   PCDG                   BEA         Table 1.1.5
Personal Consumption Expenditures: Services                                                        PCESV                  BEA         Table 1.1.5
Private Residential Fixed Investment                                                               PRFI                   BEA         Table 1.1.5
Change in Private Inventories                                                                      CBI                    BEA         Table 1.1.5
Personal consumption expenditures: Nondurable goods (implicit price deflator)                      DNDGRD3Q086SBEA        BEA         Table 1.1.9
Personal consumption expenditures: Durable goods (implicit price deflator)                         DDURRD3Q086SBEA        BEA         Table 1.1.9
Personal consumption expenditures: Services (implicit price deflator)                              DSERRD3Q086SBEA        BEA         Table 1.1.9
Gross private domestic investment: Fixed investment: Residential (implicit price deflator)         A011RD3Q086SBEA        BEA         Table 1.1.9
Government consumption expenditures and gross investment (implicit price deflator)                 A822RD3Q086SBEA        BEA         Table 1.1.9
Current-Cost Depreciation of Fixed Assets: Private: Nonresidential: Structures                     M1NTOTL1ST000          BEA          Table 1.3
Current-Cost Depreciation of Fixed Assets: Private: Nonresidential: Equipment                      M1NTOTL1EQ000          BEA          Table 1.3
Current-Cost Depreciation of Fixed Assets: Private: Intellectual property products                 M1NTOTL1IP000          BEA          Table 1.3
Current-Cost Depreciation of Fixed Assets: Residential                                             M1R53101ES000          BEA          Table 1.3
U.S. National Income                                                                               BOGZ1FA086010005Q      BoG             Z.1
Households and Nonprofit Organizations                                                             HNOCERQ027S            BoG             Z.1
Monetary Authority; Total Treasury Securities                                                      BOGZ1LM713061103Q      BoG             Z.1
U.S.-Chartered Depository Institutions; Treasury Securities                                        BOGZ1LM763061100Q      BoG             Z.1
Property-Casualty Insurance Companies; Treasury Securities                                         BOGZ1FL513061105Q      BoG             Z.1
Money Market Funds; Treasury Securities; Asset, Level                                              BOGZ1FL633061105Q      BoG             Z.1
Households and Nonprofit Organizations; Treasury Securities; Asset, Market Value Levels            BOGZ1LM153061105Q      BoG             Z.1
Private Pension Funds; Treasury Securities                                                         BOGZ1LM573061105Q      BoG             Z.1
Rest of the World; Treasury Securities                                                             BOGZ1LM263061105Q      BoG             Z.1
Federal Government; Treasury Bills; Liability, Level                                               BOGZ1FL313161110Q      BoG             Z.1
Federal Government; Treasury Securities; Liability, Level (FGTSL)                                  FGTSL                  BoG             Z.1




                                                                        60
C     Computational Methods
C.1     Numerical Solution Method

We solve the model globally using time iteration. We extend the solution method proposed by
Elenev, Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2021). Since that model is a real model without
monetary policy, the nominal side of the model is new. Methodologically, this paper innovates
by solving for a fixed point in key parameter values, in addition to equilibrium prices and
quantities. This extension is necessary, since New Keynesian models like ours specify policy
rules that characterize the actions taken by the government to stabilize output deviations from
trend. With respect to the solution method, this means that the model contains endogenous
parameters: trend output along the balanced growth path (i.e, the scale of the economy in the
stationarized model) is endogenous, yet the policy rules that are part of the equilibrium system
of equations depend on this trend output parameter. In NK models with small shocks that
are solved using local methods this problem has a simple solution: trend output is given by
the deterministic balanced growth path of the model, which is easy to compute. However, in
our model with large risk premia, trend output is only known once we compute the model's
solution and simulate its ergodic distribution.

  For simplicity, we will use the term "steady state" to refer to deterministic balanced growth
path going forward. To see the additional computational challenge, consider the Taylor-style
monetary policy rule in our model: the central bank adjusts the interest rate based on deviations
of output from trend output. Households in our model have a strong precautionary savings
motive. As a result, the average output in a simulation of the stochastic model is approximately
6.8% higher than the steady state value. If we defined conventional monetary policy and fiscal
policy rules using the deviation of output from steady state, as is usually done when computing
local approximations, these rules would be significantly "off target". The average simulated
time path would cause a contractionary policy response because the economy would appear to
be significantly above trend. Thus, this dependence of policy rules on average output creates
                                                                                          ^t ]
another fixed point: average output in the ergodic distribution of the stochastic model E[Y
                                                                        ^t ]. To solve this
depends on policy rules, and the policy rules must be centered around E[Y
additional fixed point, we extend the solution algorithm to normalize the average scale of


                                                  61
                           ^t ] = 1. Fiscal and monetary policy rules are all centered around
aggregate output to one: E[Y
this value.

  We can choose the disutility of labor 0 to achieve this normalization, while jointly matching
all other targets using the other calibrated parameters. Importantly, once we have found the
correct value of 0 , we keep this value fixed across policy experiments.

  We proceed as follows:

   1. Solve a nonlinear system of equations defining the equilibrium conditions at steady state
      (g = z = 0) assuming the intermediary leverage constraint binds. The system is
                                        (0)                          ¯ = 1.
      augmented by an unknown parameter 0 and an additional equation Y

                                                                 (0)                            Y 
   2. Implicitly differentiate the system with respect to 0 at the solution and solve for        (0) .
                                                                                                0

                                      (i)
   3. Given the guessed value 0 , solve the model using transition function iteration as in
      Elenev et al. (2021). We discretize the exogenous process into Ne = 3 states using the
      Rouwenhorst (1995) method and define rectangular grids for 3 endogenous state variables:
                                              ^ G , aggregate capital K , and intermediary
      log market value of government debt log W
                                 WI                               ^ G is dense in and near profligacy
      wealth share     (M P K +(1- )Q)K +W G
                                             .   The grid for log W
      and austerity regions since many equilibrium quantities, particularly labor and inflation,
      are highly nonlinear around the transitions into those states. We iterate several hundred
      times to convergence.

   4. Simulate the model. We start at the steady state values and simulate N runs of Tini + T
      periods each discarding the first Tini to eliminate the effect of initial conditions. Gov-
      ernment debt / GDP is highly persistent, so one long simulation may not adequately
      sample the true ergodic distribution. To obtain robust simulation results, we set N = 24,
      Tini = 3, 000 and T = 5, 000.

                               ^t ] - 1. If |e| <  , proceed to the next step. Otherwise, update
   5. Compute the error e = E [Y
       (i+1)     (i)      e
      0        = 0 -    Y  /0
                                 using the derivative computed in Step 2, and repeat steps 3 to 5.

   6. Re-solve the model holding 0 fixed at the optimized value and augmenting the discretized
      exogenous states with zero-probability states representing unanticipated shocks and policy
      responses (e.g. QE).

                                                      62
  7. Compute impulse response functions (IRFs) starting from the average exogenous state,
      a fixed level of government debt, and values of the other two endogenous state variables
      consistent with the fixed level of government debt in the simulation. We compute gener-
      alized nonlinear IRFs by simulating 5,000 paths of 25 quarters from this starting point,
      and calculating the mean path for each model variable.


C.2     Numerical Risk Aversion Calculation

Proposition 1 in Swanson (2018) derives the Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion in models
with recursive preferences. Adapting these derivations to our model where V < 0, we find that
the Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion at point xt in the state space can be written as
                          Et [-(-V (xt+1 ))- VW W (xt+1 ) + (-V (xt+1 ))--1 VW
                                                                             2
                                                                               ]
          RRA(xt ) = -                                                           W (xt )
                                       Et [-(V (xt+1 ))- VW (xt+1 )]
where V is the value function, VW is the derivative of the value function with respect to wealth
(i.e. marginal value of wealth), and VW W is the second derivative (curvature) of the value
function. In our model,

                              VW (xt ) = (1 -  )C (xt )-
                                                                C
                            VW W (xt ) = - (1 -  )C (xt )- -1     (xt )
                                                                W
                                                                          C
We approximate the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth           W
                                                                            (xt )   using its steady
state value
                               C             1 - e-(1+ )¯
                                                        g
                                 (¯
                                  x) =                   ¯ - -1
                               W       1 + (1 - 0w 2 2 C
                                                  )w¯ 0 1tN ¯ 1 -1

and compute RRAt at every point in a long simulation using numerical solutions for C (x), W (x)
and V (x). We find that relative risk aversion always lies between 4.2 and 6.8, with the average
value being 5.4.


D     Additional Results
D.1     QE in Normal Times

Permanent QE. To understand the mechanism by which QE affects the aggregate economy
in our model, we first study the transition from the calibrated baseline model to a world with

                                                63
permanent QE, i.e. an economy in which the central bank permanently expands its balance
sheet and shifts the maturity structure of government debt from long- to short-term. We start
this transition in a neutral productivity state and without demand shock, in the economy's
steady state without a concurrent economic crisis. The policy parameters are the same as for
the QE policy in the main experiment: the central bank buys 40% of the stock of outstanding
long-term debt and replaces it with reserves. In addition, regulators exempt reserves from the
SLR constraint. The only difference is that these policies now last permanently, unlike in the
main experiment where the policies mean revert with probability 0.5 each quarter. In this
experiment, the average maturity of debt held by the public changes from 5.28 years before the
policy change to 3.26 years under permanent QE.
                                                                  Figure 12: Permanent QE: Macro Variables

                                                      ST Debt                                                    LT Debt                                                Pol. Rate
                                           100                                                          0                                                     0.6                                                                  0.3
                    Change from Base (%)




                                                                                Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                      Diff. to Base (ann %)




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Diff. to Base (ann %)
                                            80                                                                                                                0.5                                                                 0.25
                                                                                                       -10
                                                                                                                                                              0.4                                                                  0.2
                                            60
                                                                                                       -20                                                    0.3                                                                 0.15
                                            40         QE
                                                       QE + SLR                                                                                               0.2                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                       -30
                                            20                                                                                                                0.1                                                                 0.05

                                             0                                                         -40                                                     0                                                                    0
                                                  0   10          20                                         0   10        20                                       0    10         20                                                   0   10       20


                                                           Y                                                          C                                                   Inv                                                                     N
                                             0                                                         0.2                                                     0                                                        0.005
        Change from Base (%)




                                                                       Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                         Change from Base (%)




                                -0.02                                                                                                                   -0.2                                                                        0
                                                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.005
                                -0.04                                                                                                                   -0.4
                                                                                                       0.1                                                                                                                  -0.01
                                -0.06                                                                                                                   -0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.015
                                                                                               0.05
                                -0.08                                                                                                                   -0.8                                                                -0.02

                                           -0.1                                                         0                                                      -1                                                -0.025
                                                  0   10          20                                         0   10        20                                       0    10         20                                                   0   10       20




     Transition paths from the calibrated baseline to an economy with permanent quantitative easing.


  Figure 12 shows the transition paths of important macro variables to the new ergodic state
with permanent QE. As is immediately obvious, the SLR exemption of reserves has little to no
effect for these transitions (the red line which includes QE and SLR exemption policies almost
perfectly covers the blue line, which includes only QE); unlike for the main experiment with
QE implemented during a crisis, the SLR constraint is not binding in normal times. Therefore,
its relaxation has very little effect. Hence, we can discuss the effects QE and SLR exemption

                                                                                                                           64
jointly, keeping in mind that these effects are driven exclusively by QE.

  The first two panels in the top row show the direct effect of the policy on the supply of short-
and long-term debt. In the bottom row of Figure 12 we can see that permanent QE causes a
transition to an economy with about 0.1% lower output (relative to trend) with roughly 1%
lower investment. This transition to a permanently smaller capital stock leads to a consumption
boom along the transition path. The effect on equilibrium labor is minimal. Since QE causes
a permanent reduction in aggregate supply, it is an inflationary policy (top right panel). As a
result, the central bank sets a higher policy rate.

                                                           Figure 13: Permanent QE: Financial Variables

                                              Cap share I                                                       HH PF % LT                                                        HH PF % K                                                              HH PF % D
                                     0                                                                 0                                                                  5                                                                      5

                                     -1
                                                                                                       -2                                                                 4                                                                      4
                 Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                  Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                      Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Diff. to Base (%)
                                     -2
                                                                                                       -4                                                                 3                                                                      3
                                     -3
                                                                                                       -6                                                                 2          QE                                                          2
                                     -4
                                                                                                                                                                                     QE + SLR
                                     -5                                                                -8                                                                 1                                                                      1

                                     -6
                                                                                                      -10                                                                 0                                                                      0
                                          0     10          20                                              0     10         20                                               0     10          20                                                   0     10        20


                                              Leverage I                                                        Conv Yield                                                        DWL/GDP                                                                Real Wage
                             0.8                                                                       0                                              0.05                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Change from Base (%)
                                                                 Diff. to Base (ann %)




                                                                                                                                                      0.04                                                                  -0.02
         Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                  Diff. to Base (%)




                             0.6
                                                                                         -0.05
                                                                                                                                                      0.03                                                                  -0.04
                             0.4
                                                                                                                                                      0.02                                                                  -0.06
                                                                                                  -0.1
                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                      0.01                                                                  -0.08

                                     0                                                   -0.15                                                                            0                                                   -0.1
                                          0     10          20                                              0     10         20                                               0     10          20                                                   0     10        20




     Transition paths from the calibrated baseline to an economy with permanent quantitative easing.


  Figure 13 reveals the reasons for this shift to a smaller capital stock. As the central bank
floods intermediary balance sheets with reserves (top left panel of Figure 12), intermediaries
expand in size and supply a greater quantity of deposits. Due to liquidity costs of deposit
production (equation (7)) and a smaller equity requirement, reserves are a superior collateral
asset than physical capital for intermediaries. The increase in reserve supply thus leads to a
crowding out effect of intermediary capital holdings, with the share of the aggregate capital
stock held by intermediaries declining by 6% points (top left panel of Figure 13).


                                                                                                                             65
  The expansion in deposit supply and reduction in intermediary capital holdings are reflected
in household balance sheets: households decrease holdings of long-term debt by selling these to
the central bank (QE), and replenish their portfolio with capital purchased from intermediaries
and additional deposits in about equal parts (three rightmost panels in the top row). Since
intermediaries hold a more liquid and less risky portfolio, they increase leverage by 0.7% points.
Deposits are less scarce and thus convenience yields on deposits decline by about 15bp.

  As households must absorb extra capital, their holding costs increase, causing slightly higher
DWL/GDP. However, aggregate welfare increases by over 0.4% on impact of the policy change,
with the positive effects from greater liquidity provision outweighing the negative effects of less
efficient capital allocation. Hence the baseline economy, before the switch to permanent QE,
suffers from a shortage of liquid assets, which inflates intermediary demand for physical capital
as a collateral asset. Relative to the post-QE economy with more ample liquidity, the pre-QE
economy over-accumulates capital. Greater permanent liquidity provision by the central bank
causes a substantial increase in household utility from greater deposit supply, with a temporary
consumption boost and nearly no long-run decline in consumption.

  The experiment in Figures 12 and 13 likely underestimates the welfare benefits of permanent
QE, since during the implementation of QE, the central bank is assumed to not adjust its
long-run output target downward, leading to permanently higher inflation and interest rates. If
the central bank accommodated the smaller scale of the economy in its conventional monetary
policy rule, the welfare gain would likely be larger.


Temporary QE in normal times. The effects of QE in our main policy experiment differ
from those of permanent QE above in two aspects: (1) rather than permanent, the policies in
the main experiment are only temporary, either with the same persistence as the economic crisis,
or with greater persistence in the "long UMP" scenario, and (2) in our main experiment the
policies occur simultaneous with the onset of negative economic shocks that push the economy
into the ZLB constraint. We now study the importance of difference (1) by simulating the
economy's response to a temporary QE policy shock implemented in normal times. The only
difference to the permanent QE case above is the persistence of the policy. Like for the main
experiment, the policy now ends with 0.5 probability each quarter, and we study a specific path


                                                66
during which the policy lasts for 4 periods after which it mean reverts stochastically.

                                                                  Figure 14: Temporary QE: Macro Variables

                                                      ST Debt                                                           LT Debt                                                           Pol. Rate
                                            100                                                                0                                                                0.5                                                 0.1
                                                       QE
                     Change from Base (%)




                                                                                       Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                        Diff. to Base (ann %)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Diff. to Base (ann %)
                                             80        QE + SLR
                                                                                                                                                                                0.4                                                0.08
                                                                                                              -10
                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                                0.3                                                0.06
                                             40                                                               -20
                                                                                                                                                                                0.2                                                0.04
                                             20
                                                                                                              -30
                                              0                                                                                                                                 0.1                                                0.02

                                            -20                                                               -40                                                                0                                                   0
                                                  0   10          20                                                0   10        20                                                  0    10         20                                  0   10       20


                                                           Y                                                                 C                                                              Inv                                                    N
                                        0.08                                                                  0.1                                                     0.05                                                          0.1
         Change from Base (%)




                                                                       Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                       Change from Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Change from Base (%)
                                        0.06                                                                                                                                                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                      0.05                                                                                                                         0.06
                                        0.04
                                                                                                                                                               -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.04
                                        0.02
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                          -0.1                                                     0.02
                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                 -0.02                                                         -0.05                                                           -0.15
                                                  0   10          20                                                0   10        20                                                  0    10         20                                  0   10       20




Response of economy to temporary QE in normal times. Policy parameters are identical to main policy exper-
iment.


  Figure 14 shows the effects of a temporary QE policy in normal times. The magnitude of
the policy in the two leftmost panels in the top row is the same as for the permanent case, yet
the duration is shorter. The qualitative effect on consumption and investment in the bottom
row is the same as for the permanent transition to QE: consumption increases and investment
declines. However, the effects of the temporary policy on GDP and labor are decidedly different.
Equilibrium hours worked increase by about 0.1% and output by 7bp for the duration of the
policy. The simultaneous rise in inflation, output, consumption and hours reveal that short-run
QE triggers a positive aggregate demand shock.

  Figure 15 mirrors the effects of the permanent QE transition in Figure 13, just with temporary
duration. As the central bank sharply increases reserve supply, intermediaries increase the
supply of deposits and sell capital to households. Households shed long-term debt and replace
its value with capital and deposits. Intermediaries increase leverage and convenience yields on
deposits decline. As households absorb more capital, their holdings costs increase, leading to
higher DWL/GDP.

                                                                                                                                  67
                                                            Figure 15: Temporary QE: Financial Variables

                                               Cap share I                                                       HH PF % LT                                                         HH PF % K                                                              HH PF % D
                                      0                                                                 0                                                                   5                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                       QE
                                                                                                                                                                                       QE + SLR
                                                                                                        -2                                                                  4                                                                      4
                  Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                   Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                        Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Diff. to Base (%)
                                      -2

                                                                                                        -4                                                                  3                                                                      3
                                      -4
                                                                                                        -6                                                                  2                                                                      2

                                      -6
                                                                                                        -8                                                                  1                                                                      1

                                      -8                                                               -10                                                                  0                                                                      0
                                           0     10          20                                              0     10         20                                                0     10          20                                                   0     10        20


                                               Leverage I                                                        Conv Yield                                                         DWL/GDP                                                                Real Wage
                              0.6                                                                       0                                              0.05                                                                   0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Change from Base (%)
                                                                  Diff. to Base (ann %)



                              0.5                                                                                                                      0.04                                                                           0.2
          Diff. to Base (%)




                                                                                                                                   Diff. to Base (%)
                              0.4                                                         -0.05                                                        0.03                                                                   0.15

                              0.3                                                                                                                      0.02                                                                           0.1

                              0.2                                                                  -0.1                                                0.01                                                                   0.05

                              0.1                                                                                                                                           0                                                                      0

                                      0                                                   -0.15                                                        -0.01                                                                  -0.05
                                           0     10          20                                              0     10         20                                                0     10          20                                                   0     10        20




Response of economy to temporary QE in normal times. Policy parameters are identical to main policy exper-
iment.


  The key difference to the effects of permanent QE are apparent in the bottom right graph of
Figure 15, which shows that real wages rise by 0.2% during temporary QE. This implies that the
rise in hours worked is due to higher labor demand from firms, consistent with the aggregate
demand shock nature of the economy's response to temporary QE. Intuitively, agents know
that the shift to more consumption and less investment is only temporary. Higher consumption
demand in the short-term triggers the New Keynesian production sector to raise prices, profits,
and demand for both input factors. In summary, temporary QE triggers a small consumption-
driven boom.

  The difference between the output and consumption effects of permanent and temporary QE
are in line with the standard behavior of the New Keynesian model with capital accumulation.
Permanent QE affects the economy like a negative supply shock through decreased investment
and a lower capital stock. Since the shock is permanent, the New Keynesian model elements
play a minor role, and the model essentially behaves like a real neoclassical growth model.
However, short-run QE affects the economy like a positive demand shock (e.g., a temporary
decrease in the discount factor), thus turning on New Keynesian nominal frictions and demand


                                                                                                                              68
effects.


Temporary QE in the crisis. Our main policy experiment studies the effect of QE in a
crisis triggered by a negative aggregate demand shock. We established above that temporary QE
affects the economy like a positive demand shock. Therefore, QE is a well-suited policy in our
model to counteract the negative demand shock that initiates the crisis. The difference between
temporary QE implemented in normal times such as in Figures 14 and 15, and temporary QE
as part of the crisis policy response such as in Figure 9, therefore comes down the consumption
multiplier effect associated with QE during demand-driven recessions at the ZLB. Comparing
the magnitudes in Figures 9 and 14 implies a large multiplier: the same QE+SLR policy causes
a GDP increase of 100bp when enacted during the crisis (Figure 9), but only of 7bp when
implemented in normal times (Figure 14). The multiplier effect of QE is large enough to turn
the 0.1% point decline in investment in normal times into a 2% point increase in investment
in the crisis. In other words, the positive effect on aggregate demand is large enough that the
increased demand for capital by firms overturns the initial decline in investment caused by the
crowding out effect of QE.


D.2        Benefits of Long Lasting UMP

Figure 16 shows the same policy experiments as in the main text, without an increased inflation
target as part of the policy mix. Hence the lines "Combo (QE)" and "Long QE" show the
combination of additional discretionary spending with QE and SLR exemption only. The figure
clearly indicates that adding persistence to QE as in "Long QE" has no benefits in the short
run over the short-duration QE policy that is part of "Combo".

  We conclude that the additional output stimulus of "Long UMP" over "Combo" in Figure 4
is fully due to the higher inflation target component of UMP.




                                              69
                                Figure 16: Main Policy Experiments: No Higher Inflation Target

                                    log(Z)                                             Disc. Shock                                                                                    Pol. Rate
                       0                                                      1                                                                                              3
                                 Autom. Stab.                                                                                    0
                       -2                                                                                                                                                   2.5
Diff. from BGP (%)




                                                        Diff. from BGP (%)




                                 Discretionary                               0.8
                                 Combo (QE)                                                                                      -2
                       -4                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                          Annual %




                                                                                                                                                       Annual %
                                 Combo (QE), Long QE                         0.6                                                 -4
                       -6                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                             0.4                                                 -6
                       -8                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                 -8
                      -10                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                -10
                      -12                                                     0                                                                                              0
                            0       10         20                                  0     10          20                               0   10     20                               0    10         20


                                         Y                                                    C                                            Inv                                              N
                       2                                                      2                                                  0                                           0
Change from BGP (%)




                                                       Change from BGP (%)




                                                                                                          Change from BGP (%)




                                                                                                                                                      Change from BGP (%)
                       0                                                      0                                                  -5                                          -2

                       -2                                                     -2                                                                                             -4
                                                                                                                                -10
                       -4                                                     -4                                                                                             -6
                                                                                                                                -15
                       -6                                                     -6                                                                                             -8

                       -8                                                     -8                                                -20                                         -10

                      -10                                                    -10                                                -25                                         -12
                            0       10         20                                  0     10          20                               0   10     20                               0    10         20




                                                                                                     70
