                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE TREASURY MARKET IN SPRING 2020 AND
                      THE RESPONSE OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE

                                   Annette Vissing-Jorgensen

                                      Working Paper 29128
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29128


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2021




I thank Carol Bertaut, Darrell Duffie, Michael Johannes, Jay Kahn, Anil Kashyap, Andrew
Metrick, Hyun Shin, Kairong Xiao and seminar and conference participants at NBER Monetary
Economics, Society for Financial Econometrics, Columbia University, London School of
Economics, University of California Berkeley, University of Toronto, University of Bonn,
Tinbergen Institute, Bocconi, Vanguard, ECB, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Bank for International Settlements, Bank of Canada,
Bank of England, and the Riksbank for helpful comments. All errors are my own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
NBER Working Paper No. 29128
August 2021
JEL No. E5,G12

                                        ABSTRACT

Treasury yields spiked during the initial phase of COVID. The 10-year yield increased by 64 bps
from March 9 to 18, 2020, leading the Federal Reserve to purchase $1T of Treasuries in 2020Q1.
Fed purchases were causal for reducing Treasury yields based on the timing of purchases (which
increased on March 19), the timing of yield reversal and Fed purchases in the MBS market, and
evidence against confounding factors. Treasury-QE worked more via purchases than
announcements. The yield spike was driven by liquidity needs of mutual funds, foreign official
agencies, and hedge funds that were unaffected by the March 15 Treasury-QE announcement.


Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
vissing@haas.berkeley.edu
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


1. Introduction

In March 2020, as the COVID crisis intensified, stressed emerged in the market for Treasury

securities. Treasury yields spiked sharply, leading the Federal Reserve to buy large amounts of

Treasuries, over $1T in 2020Q1. I seek to contribute new facts and analysis to improve our

understanding of this episode.

       Figure 1, Panel A documents the fact that motivates this paper. It graphs the S&P500 index

level and the 10-year nominal Treasury yield over the first half of 2020. Until March 9, the series

move down together as news about the COVID crisis worsened. This is what one would expect if

negative news about the economy leads bond investors to expect lower short rates or to reduce the

term premium, fleeing to the safety and liquidity of Treasuries in crisis. The surprising part of the

figure is the March 9 to March 18 period during which the 10-year yield spiked sharply by 64 basis

points while the stock market kept falling. What caused the Treasury yield spike over the March

9-18 period? Was the intervention by the Federal Reserve central for bringing Treasury yields back

down? What lessons does this episode provide for investors and for monetary policy?

       I begin my analysis with an asset-pricing decomposition of Treasury yield movements to

show that Treasury yields did not spike because of a loss of confidence in Treasury fundamentals

in the sense of higher expected inflation or increased default risk. Based on market measures,

inflation expectations fell as yields spiked, implying that real yields increase even more than

nominal yields. The 10-year real (and default-adjusted) rate increased by about 100 bps over the

March 9 to 18 period. While liquidity in the Treasury market deteriorated, I estimate that this can

only account for a few basis points of the yield spike, given the price of liquidity (estimated from

the cross-section of Treasuries) and the deterioration in liquidity over time.

       With default risk, inflation and illiquidity unable to explain the increase in Treasury yields,

the natural explanation is a negative demand shock for Treasuries, necessitating a fall in prices for



                                                  2
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


markets to clear. I document large sales of Treasury securities by foreigners, mutual funds, and the

household sector (which includes hedge funds). Sales were large in historical terms, at $287B,

$266B, and $196B respectively for the three groups in 2020Q1. Notably, neither of these sectors

sold many Treasuries at the peak of the financial crisis 2008Q4.

       A central part of my analysis is to study the Federal Reserve's intervention in the Treasury

market in response to the yield spike. I document that Treasury yields started falling on March 19

and March 20, lining up well with a large increase in the Federal Reserve's daily Treasury

purchases on March 19. This is unlike to be due to confounding stabilizing factors. Corporate

yields increased on March 19-20 and the stock market fell. Furthermore, in the MBS market, the

spike in yields started to reverse a day later than in the Treasury markets, and the Federal Reserve

increased its daily MBS purchases a day later than in the Treasury market, consistent with a causal

link from purchases to yields. This further rules out confounding factors since one would expect

these to affect MBS and Treasury markets at the same time.

       The Federal Reserve's Treasury purchases during the COVID crisis thus appear to have

had large effects on asset prices at the time of purchase, as opposed to on announcement dates as

the prior literature has found (e.g. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011)). Large purchase

effects suggest that Treasury sellers had immediate liquidity needs. If liquidity needs do not change

as a result of Fed purchase announcements, then asset prices may not change fully until the

announced purchases are implemented, especially in situations where arbitrage capital is limited

(by prior losses and competing investment opportunities). I emphasize the "if liquidity needs do

not change" part of the argument. In contrast to the importance of large purchases in the Treasury

market, yields on corporate bonds fell (as measured by prices of exchange traded funds) on days

with Federal Reserve corporate bond purchase announcements (Haddad, Moreira and Muir




                                                 3
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


(2020)). 3 This happened without immediate purchases and purchases have been delayed and

modest ($14B, starting on May 12, 2020). Haddad et al (2020) show that the announcements

reduced credit default spreads. Falato, Goldstein and Hortacsu (2021) argue that Fed

announcements helped reverse outflows from mutual funds holding corporate bonds. Therefore,

in the corporate market, announcements did change liquidity needs (of mutual funds in particular).

Corporate announcements improved perceived corporate fundamentals enough to stop the selling

and only a small amount of actual purchases were needed (if any). 4 By contrast, an announcement

on March 15, 2020, that the Federal Reserve would buy at least $500B worth of Treasury securities

was insufficient to stop the Treasury yield increase. The Treasury yield spike was not due to

problems with Treasury fundamentals (credit risk, inflation) but rather driven by massive selling

due to liquidity needs that remained important, Treasury purchase announcement or not. Only

large purchases turned the Treasury market around.

         I seek to understand drivers of selling by each of the sectors mentioned, in order to argue

that urgent liquidity needs were relevant for selling by both mutual funds, foreign official agencies,

and hedge funds. I document large outflows from bond mutual funds in 2020Q1 and link fund

outflows and Treasury selling in the cross-section of bond funds. Increased holdings of Treasury

securities by mutual funds since the financial crisis, especially for bond mutual funds, explain why

funds did not sell Treasuries in 2008Q4, despite them having similar outflows measured in

quarterly data and scaling flows by the size of fund assets. In terms of why investors pulled money

out of bonds (during both crises), I hypothesize that as default risk increases, bond funds seize to

satisfy the demand by unsophisticated investors for safe assets. This "safety effect" ­ investor


3
  Gilchrist, Yue, Wei and Zakrajsek (2020) also document announcement effects of Federal Reserve corporate bond
interventions though these took several weeks after the announcements to fully emerge in the market for individual
corporate bonds, presumably related to infrequent trading of corporate bonds. For identification, they exploit the
maturity restriction on corporate bond eligibility for Fed purchase (bonds with up to 5 year maturity were eligible).
4
  This is similar to the "whatever it takes" comment of ECB President Draghi in 2012, which reversed European
sovereign yields with no purchases ever made under the ECB's Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) program.


                                                          4
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


willingness to pay more for low-risk assets than their default risk and the price of default risk for

higher risk assets would imply ­ was proposed by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012).

I interpret bond fund outflows in crisis as a disappearance of the safety attribute and provide asset

pricing evidence consistent with this idea. Importantly, the negative mutual fund demand shock

for Treasuries ultimately came from disappearing safety of other riskier bonds (corporate bonds,

MBS etc.). The spillover likely arose via funds using Treasuries for liquidity management.

        Turning to foreigners, about 2/3 of Treasury sales by foreigners were from foreign official

agencies (including governments and central banks), with the foreign private sector accounting for

the rest. Foreign official agencies appear to have sold Treasuries both for immediate cash needs

(having net sales of U.S. assets overall), in expectation of future cash needs (increasing holdings

of currency and deposits), and for higher expected returns (buying agency debt, corporate bonds,

as well as stocks and investment fund shares). Consistent with the first motive, in the cross-section

of countries, foreign net purchases of Treasuries are positively related to the change in foreign

reserves. Countries that are hedge fund domiciles sell more Treasuries, suggesting that hedge funds

may be a driver of foreign private sales. I estimate of Treasury sales by U.S. and foreign domiciled

hedge fund that report to the Securities and Exchange Commission of $183B in 2020Q1, enough

to account for a the majority of Treasury sales by the foreign private and the U.S. household sector.

Prior work link hedge fund Treasury selling to unwinding of the Treasury basis trade, see Barth

and Kahn (2020) and Schrimpf, Shin and Sushko (2020). 5

2. Decomposing Treasury yields

Figure 1, Panel B graphs Treasury yields for various maturities. The yield spike is stronger for

longer maturities but visible even for the 2-year bond. To assess possible drivers of the yield spike,



5
 While I focus on Fed purchases and on sectors with large Treasury sales, others have emphasized the role of
broker-dealers not increasing their balance sheets sufficiently, see He, Nagel and Song (2020) and Duffie (2020).


                                                         5
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Figure 1, Panel C provides a yield decomposition. The nominal yield can be decomposed as

                    Nominal yield=Real yield+expected inflation+credit risk                       (1)

I focus on the 10-year maturity. I proxy expected inflation by the rate on inflation swaps and use

the credit default swap (CDS) rate to measure credit risk. The inflation swap rate dropped by 42

bps over the March 9-18 period, while there was little change in the CDS rate. The March yield

spike in Treasury yields was therefore driven by an increase in the real yield. The real yield on 10-

year Treasuries implied by the decomposition, increased by 103 bps from March 9 to 18. This

increase is similar to that for (CDS-adjusted) Treasury inflation-protected securities.

       For comparison, Figure 1, Panel D illustrates the same time series for the second half of

2008 during the financial crisis. There was no sudden spike in the Treasury yield as the stock

market fell sharply in October 2008. A more slow-moving increase in the two measures of the

riskless real yield is visible in the bottom left figure. However, this increase reversed before any

purchases of Treasury securities by the Federal Reserve (announced on March 18, 2009).

       During the COVID crisis, Treasury liquidity deteriorated during around the same time

yields spiked, see Fleming and Ruela (2020) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (May

2020). Deteriorating Treasury liquidity could by itself lead to increased Treasury yields. To

quantify the illiquidity component of yields (part of the real yield in the decomposition), I estimate

the price of liquidity in the cross-section of Treasury securities and multiply this price by the bid-

ask spread for a given security.

       To illustrate the link between liquidity and yields, Figure 2, Panel A, graphs the bid yield

in percent and the bid-ask spread measured in $ per $100 face value across the term structure, as

of March 12, 2020 (using data from Bloomberg). I use March 12 because it is the last day before

the Federal Reserve started purchasing Treasuries but the cross-sectional price of liquidity estimate

is similar if using March 9 or March 18 data. I use the bid-ask spread in dollars to avoid any



                                                  6
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


mechanical correlation between the bid yield and the bid-ask spread that could emerge if scaling

the latter by the price. For readability, I graph Treasuries that have remaining maturities between

1 and 10 years and that are still in their original ``maturity bucket". Securities between 7 and 10

years in the graph were thus all issued as 10-year bonds and have at least 7 years of remaining life.

In the >1 to 10 year range, the Treasury issues securities with initial maturities of 2, 3, 5, 7 and 10

years. 6 The label along the bid yield line indicates the age of the bond in its maturity bucket. The

label 1 denotes the most recently issued security in the bucket (the ``on-the-run"), 2 is the second

most recently issued security in the bucket (the ``first off-the-run"), and so on. The graph

documents a lower bid-ask spread and lower bid yield for on-the-run bonds, and to a lesser extent

for the first off-the-run bonds, relative to other bonds that are close in terms of remaining

maturities. This makes the yield curve very unsmooth and indicates that investors were willing to

pay a substantially higher price for more liquid bonds. This contrasts with Figure 2, Panel B which

graphs the same series for January 6, 2020 (first Monday of the year) and showslower bid-ask

spreads and a smoother yield curve.

         To estimate the cross-sectional price of liquidity, I regress the bid yield on the bid-ask

spread along with a cubic in the remaining time to maturity (results are similar using a Nelson-

Siegel functional form to relate yields to remaining time to maturity). I also control for the coupon

rate (which affects the duration, given the term). Table 1, column 1 estimates this relation for the

sample of 76 bonds graphed in Figure 2, Panel A. The cross-sectional price of liquidity is 0.213

meaning that an increase in the dollar bid-ask spread of $0.1 translates into a bid yield that is 2.13



6
  For bonds issued with an initial term of 30 years, bid-ask spreads and yields are also lower for the on-the-run and
first few off-the-run bonds than for slightly older issues. I exclude 30-year bonds from the liquidity analysis because
they appear to have higher bid-ask spreads than other bonds even controlling for term and coupon, perhaps because
many are held by buy-and-hold investors (including the Fed). I similarly do not include bonds with less that one year
of remaining maturity. For terms close to zero, a given difference between bid and ask prices translates to a very
large difference between bid and ask yields (very high bid yields and very low ask yields).




                                                          7
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


bps higher. The estimated cross-sectional price is a bit higher at 0.299 when I include all bonds

with terms between 1 and 10 years (as opposed to only those still in their original maturity bucket).

Columns 3 and 4 show that differences in liquidity appear to fully explain yield differences across

on and off-the-run bonds. Column (3) includes dummies for being on-the-run, first off-the-run etc.

The coefficient on the on-the-run dummy imply that on-the-run securities have 9 bps lower yields

than securities older than the fourth off-the-run. This coefficient goes to approximately zero in

column 4 when including the bid-ask spread as a regressor (I return to the remaining dummies in

related to futures contracts below). Column 5 repeats the regression from column 1 using data

from January 6, 2020. The cross-sectional price of liquidity is 0.235, similar to that in column (1).

The much larger yield differences between on- and off-the-run securities in Figure 2, Panel A than

Figure 2, Panel B is thus primarily driven by larger liquidity differences across securities in March

than in January, not by a changing cross-sectional price of liquidity.

       Figure 2, Panel C shows the estimated illiquidity component of bid yields on the on-the-

run, first off-the-run and fourth off-the-run 10-year bonds over time. I estimate this component as

0.213 (the cross-sectional price of liquidity from Table 1, column 1) times the bid-ask spread (in

$ per $100 face value). The illiquidity component of the on-the-run bond yield never exceeds more

than few basis points. The illiquidity component is larger for the off-the-run bonds (consistent with

the visible wiggles in Figure 2, Panel A), but does not exceed 10 bps for the first off-the-run and

20 bps for the fourth off-the-run bond. Furthermore, part of the increase in the illiquidity

component for the first and fourth off-the-run bond take place before March 9. Relating back to

the 64 bps yield spike in the 10-year yield in Figure 1, Panel A, the rise in the illiquidity component

of bond yields can only explain a couple of basis points of this spike . The series in Figure 1, Panel

A is from the Federal Reserve's FRED database and comes from the U.S. Department of the




                                                  8
              The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Treasury. This curve is based on bid yields on on-the-run securities. 7

3. Buyers and sellers of Treasuries in 2020Q1

A simple explanation for the yield spike would be a negative demand shock for Treasuries,

necessitating an increase in yields to clear the market. In order for a demand shock to be reflected

in equilibrium quantities, the shock needs to be heterogeneous across groups of investors so

demand changes can be inferred from reallocation of ownership. I exploit data on group level

holdings and transactions from the U.S. Financial Accounts.

           Table 2 documents who owned Treasuries before the COVID crisis hit and how that

changed over the first quarter of 2020. As of the end of 2019Q4, about $19T of Treasuries were

outstanding. Column 4, which is based on the ``flow" table from the U.S. Financial Accounts,

accounts for valuation changes in order to assess net changes in holdings due to purchases and

sales (valuation changes are positive as Treasury yields fell for the quarter as a whole).

           The Federal Reserve purchased $1.019T worth of Treasuries in 2020Q1 ($863B of notes

and bonds, $156B of bills; this detail is not included in the table as it is only available for some

sectors). The only other major buyer of Treasuries was money market funds who bought Treasuries

worth $231B, mostly bills ($36B of notes and bonds, $195B of bills). Figure 3, Panel A illustrates

the unprecedented nature of the Federal Reserve's Treasury purchases in 2020Q1. In just one

quarter, they exceeded purchases under each of the QE1, QE2, and QE3 programs. The earlier

programs are the three sets of positive bars visible in earlier years in the graph. Summing up

quarterly data, purchases were $301B for QE1 (2009Q1-2009Q4), $808B for QE2 (2010Q4-

2011Q2) and $817B for QE3 (2012Q4-2014Q4).

           Accounting for valuation changes, foreigners (the rest of the world) sold $287B worth of




7
    https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/interest-rates/Pages/yieldmethod.aspx



                                                           9
         The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Treasuries in 2020Q1, making them the sector with the largest sales. Foreign sales of notes and

bonds were $300B, while foreigners purchased $13B worth of bills. The second largest sellers

were U.S. mutual funds, with sales of $266B (of which notes and bonds $260B and bills $6B).

The household sector, which includes domestic hedge funds, sold $196B worth of Treasuries. To

compare sales in 2020Q1 to typical time series fluctuations, Figure 3, Panel B graphs time series

of quarterly net purchases by sector back to 2000Q1. For foreigners and mutual funds, the 2020Q1

treasury sales exceeded sales in any prior quarter by large amounts. For the household sector, net

purchases are more volatile, likely because this category is calculated as the residual in the U.S.

Financial Accounts. Nonetheless, net sales by the household sector are also at their largest value

in 2020Q1. Comparing COVID to the financial crisis, foreigners and households were net buyers

of Treasuries in 2008Q4 (buying $278B and $75B worth, respectively) while mutual funds had

close to zero net sales in 2008Q4 (selling $4B worth).

       I next argue that Federal Reserve purchases were essential for reversing the yield spike and

then seek to understand what drove the negative demand shocks for Treasuries for foreigners,

mutual funds, and the household sector.

4. The role of Federal Reserve purchases in reversing the Treasury yield spike

As the COVID crisis intensified, the Federal Reserve took a series of steps to stabilize financial

markets and the economy. Table 3 lists the main policy changes and programs announced during

March and April of 2020. The Federal Reserve reduced the Federal funds target, the primary credit

rate, and the rate on its dollar swap lines with five foreign central banks (Bank of Canada, Bank

of England, Bank of Japan, ECB and the Swiss National Bank). It also restarted/introduced

facilities to stabilize money and bond markets following outflows from prime money market funds




                                                10
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


and bond funds. 8 In addition, a series of bond purchases was announced, covering Treasuries,

MBS, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and ABS. On March 15 at 5 p.m. (a Sunday before the

open of futures markets), the Federal Reserve announced that it would buy at least $500B of

Treasuries and at least $200B of mortgage-backed securities. On March 23 at 8 a.m., the Federal

Reserve announced that it would "purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed

securities in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning and effective transmission

of monetary policy to broader financial conditions and the economy". Furthermore, bond

purchases were expanded to include investment grade corporate bonds. On April 9 at 8:30 a.m., it

was announced that corporate bond facilities would be expanded in size and extended to fallen

angels (bonds that were investment grade as of March 22, but were since downgraded below

investment grade) and high yield ETFs with broad corporate bond market exposure. Purchases

were also expanded to include municipal bonds.

4.1 Announcements do not line up with the yield spike reversal

Figure 4, Panel A, adds vertical lines to Figure 1, Panel A to indicate the three dates with bond

purchase announcements. Since March 15 was a Sunday it is not possible to assess whether this

announcement helped lower Treasury yields as markets reopened after the weekend. However, it

is clear that the announcement was insufficient to stop the yield spike. The 10-year yield rose by

45 bps on March 17 and 18 combined. Then, on March 19 and 20, it dropped by 26 bps, dropping

a further 16 bps on March 23. Evidence from Treasury futures markets, which were open around

the 8 am announcement, suggest that the majority of the March 23 yield decline was not right at

the announcement, see Appendix Figure 1, Panel A. This contrasts with experiences from earlier



8
 Prime money market funds invest in short-maturity assets (weighted average maturity of 60 days or less), including
assets with credit risk such as commercial paper and certificates of deposits. See Baklanova, Kuznits and Tatum
(2021) for analysis of prime money market fund outflows.




                                                        11
              The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


QE announcements where the literature has documented large yield changes following

announcements. For Federal Reserve Treasury QE, the most dramatic announcement effect for the

Treasury market occurred following the Federal Reserve's March 18, 2009 announcement which

stated that Treasuries would be included in QE1. This episode is illustrated in Appendix Figure 1,

Panel B which is taken from Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). The 10-year Treasury

yield drops over 30 basis points in the minutes after the announcement.

4.2 The yield spiked reversed as Fed purchases were sharply increased

These facts do not mean that the Federal Reserve's Treasury purchases were unimportant for

reversing the Treasury yield spike. If some investors are selling due to immediate liquidity needs,

an announcement of purchases by itself (the March 15, 2020 announcement) may have little effect

on yields. An announcement effect on yields emerges if liquidity seeking investors stop selling, or

others start buying, in expectation of later being able to sell the securities at a profit to the Federal

Reserve. However, if liquidity needs are immediate and potential buyers are constrained (or see

better opportunities elsewhere), the policy may only lower yields as announced purchases are

implemented. Evidence from the cross-section of Treasury securities is consistent with strained

balance sheet capacity in March 2020. In Table 1, I include dummy variable for securities being

cheapest to deliver (CTD) into Treasury futures contracts (a given futures contract allows for

delivery of one of a set of securities). On March 12, 2020, CTD securities trade at yields that are

10-20 bps lower than other securities, controlling for maturity, suggesting that the CTD securities

were pushed up by high prices of Treasury futures contarcts. 9 Long Treasury futures positions

allow buyers exposure to Treasury yields, without a need for balance sheet capacity (aside from

margin posted). High futures prices ­ and therefore high CTD Treasury prices ­ are thus an




9
    I obtain information on which securities are cheapest to deliver from Bloomberg.



                                                          12
            The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


indicator of tight balances sheets. 10

         An alternative mechanism for yields to move at the time of Federal Reserve purchases is

that the purchase turned out larger than expected based on prior announcements, with the purchase

thus containing an unspoken announcement element. This may have played a role but probably

only modestly so. The Federal Reserve was far from the initially announced $500B of Treasury

purchases when it increased purchases on March 19 and the $500B was "at least", not "at most".

4.2.1 Exploiting time series variation in Fed Treasury purchases

To document how yields fell at the time of purchase, Figure 4, Panel B graphs the 10-year yield

along with daily Treasury purchases by the Federal Reserve. I calculate daily Treasury purchases

by summing purchases across Treasury auctions held on a given day, using data from the website

of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Federal Reserve's daily Treasury purchases were

minor until March 13, then around $40B/day on March 13, 16, 17 and 18, before increasing to

around $70B/day from March 19 to April 1. The increase in daily purchase amount on March 19

lines up perfectly with the yield spike starting to reverse and yields revert to almost their March 9

level by April 1. In total, $672B of the Federal Reserve's quarterly net purchases of $1.019T were

purchased over 10 trading days from March 19 to April 1.

         To argue that Federal Reserve Treasury purchases were causal for reversing the yield spike

it is important to rule out potential confounding factors. Perhaps other events calmed the market.

Counter to this possibility, across March 19 to 20, the yield on investment grade corporate bonds

went up 53 bps, as illustrated in Figure 4, Panel C, while high yield corporate bond yields increased

78 bps, and the S&P500 index lost 3.9%.

         Another central piece of evidence for arguing causality from the Fed's bond purchases to


10
  Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020) argue that the Treasury futures market is way for balance-sheet constrained
investors to effectively rent a Treasury security from the institution taking the short side of the futures trade (and
buying the CTD Treasury security to hedge the short position).


                                                           13
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


yields is that in the MBS market, yields start falling and Fed purchases increase one day later than

in the Treasury market. Facts about the MBS market are shown in Figure 5. Panel A shows the

yield on the Bloomberg Barclays US MBS Index (for fixed-rate agency-backed MBS) and the

corresponding option-adjusted spread (OAS), a measure of the risk-premium required by MBS

investors. Both peak on March 19, a day later than the peak in the 10-year Treasury yield. Panel B

lines up the reversal in MBS OAS (and yield) starting on March 20 with a sharp increase in daily

MBS purchases by the Federal Reserve on March 20. The fact that yields fall and Fed purchases

increase a day later in the MBS market provides one more example linking yield reversal to Fed

purchases and suggests that confounding factors are not driving the Treasury and MBS yield

reversal. Stabilizing factors would be expected to affect both the Treasury and MBS market on the

same day.

         Liquidity provided by the Fed's dollar swaps lines may have played a complementary role

to the Fed's Treasury purchases in stemming market dislocations. The first auctions of dollar

liquidity to foreign financial institutions via dollar swap lines with foreign central banks settled on

March 19, as illustrated in Appendix Figure 2. A total of $162B was borrowed, of which $112B

through the ECB. It is difficult to assess how many foreign Treasury sales may have been averted,

by foreign financial institutions borrowing dollars rather than having to sell dollar-denominated

assets. In terms of where the substantial foreign demand for dollars came from, it may relate to

large outflows from prime money market funds in the US, who had net outflows of $139B in

March 2020 (Table 5). 11

4.2.2. Exploiting cross-sectional variation in Fed Treasury purchases




11
   The Federal Reserve was able to reduce its daily purchases on April 2 without yields rebounding. The Fed
introduced a repo facility for foreign central banks (to prevent Treasuries selling to obtain dollars) on March 31 and
removed Treasuries and reserves from leverage calculations under the Supplementary Leverage Ratio on April 1. It
is difficult to assess how much these changes mattered as markets had already improved materially by March 31.


                                                          14
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Exploiting cross-sectional variation in Fed Treasury purchases for identification is difficult. First,

it is not clear how local purchase effects should be. Yields of bonds far from those purchased may

be affected if purchases change in the price of duration risk. By contrast, if preferred habitat demand

results in some degree of market segmentation across maturities one could see disproportionate

impact on bonds with maturities close to that of bonds purchased. Second, there is little exogenous

cross-sectional variation in Fed Treasury purchases. For a given day, the planned purchase amount

for the day is announced along with a schedule of auctions stating the time and maturity range for

each auction. 12 There is no set amount for each maturity range or security. Realized purchases are

affected by which securities dealers' are more eager to sell.

        Across notes and bonds, the Fed bought on average 4.3% of outstanding, with a range from

0 to 22%. The Fed generally does not buy "securities trading with heightened scarcity value in the

repo market for specific collateral, newly issued nominal coupon securities, and securities that are

cheapest to deliver into active Treasury futures contracts" though the latter were eligible for

purchase between March 13 and April 17, 2020. 13 These exclusions do not provide good variation

for documenting a causal effect of Fed purchases. For example, yields of on-the-run securities may

move differently from yields on other Treasuries on for reasons unrelated to Fed purchase

eligibility. Instead, I exploit an additional restriction in purchases: The maximum amount the Fed

will purchase of a given security is 70%. As a result, the Fed was unable to buy some securities due

to large purchases made in the past and may have been constrained in purchase amounts for

securities with close to 70% Fed ownership.

        Figure 6, Panel A shows the histogram of the percent of the nominal Treasury issues owned


12
   https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/domestic-market-operations/monetary-policy-implementation/treasury-
securities/treasury-securities-operational-details
13
   Federal Reserve Bank of New York, "FAQs: Treasury Purchases", April 29, 2020
https://web.archive.org/web/20200508071013/https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/treasury-reinvestments-
purchases-faq




                                                     15
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


by the Fed on March 18, 2020, the day before the Fed sharply increased its Treasury purchases. For

15 securities (of which 12 with remaining maturity above one year), the Fed is at the 70%

maximum. These are all bonds issued with original maturity of 30 years ("30-year bonds" in what

follows). Figure 6 Panel B focuses on 30-year bonds. The left figure shows the fraction owned by

the Fed across the term structure, along with the fraction purchased during the period of the yield

spike reversal from March 19 to April 1. Fed ownership is low for the longest bonds issued after

then end of QE3 but high for most bonds in the 17-22 year remaining maturity range as well as for

some of the shorter bonds. Purchases are highest (as a percent of outstanding) for bonds with 23-

26 years of remaining maturity, perhaps to compensate for the lack of ability to buy aggressively

(or at all) for bonds in the 17-22 year range.

        Figure 6 Panel B (right) plots the series for the fraction owned on March 18 along with the

yield change from March 18 to April 1. The two series appear positively related. Notably, the yield

reduction over this period is smaller for bonds around the 20-year point than for bonds around the

10-year point or bonds around the 25-year point, consistent with high Fed ownership constraining

Fed purchases in the 17-22 year range. 14 This evidence should only be viewed as suggestive. It is

focused on 30-bonds only and it cannot be ruled out that the oddly shaped term structure of the

yield decline could be driven by factors other than Fed purchases. That said, to put some magnitudes

and t-statistics on the relation, Table 4, column (1) shows the result of regressing the yield change

from March 18 to April 1, 2020, on a dummy for Fed ownership being at 70% and a dummy for

Fed ownership being at or above 59% but below 70% intended to capture securities for which the

Fed may be constrained it its buying (the Fed does not buy more than 1% of an issue in a given

auction if initial ownership is above 59%). Both dummies enter with positive and significant signs.


14
  To focus on exogenous variation in Fed ownership and purchases, Figure 6 Panel B and Table 4 omit the two
bonds that are cheapest to deliver into the 30-year and ultra 30-year future contracts. These bonds were hit by a
negative demand shock due to the Treasury basis trade unwind, leading to large but not exogenous Fed purchases.


                                                        16
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Yields decline 6 bps less for bonds with 70% initial Fed ownership. 15 Column 2 controls for the

size of the March 9 to 18 yield spike. If Fed holdings were cross-sectionally correlated with the size

of the spike and the spike reversed for reasons unrelated to Fed purchases, this could bias the

estimated effect of Fed purchases. Adding this control results in smaller but still significant dummy

variables. Column 3 and 4 takes an instrumental variables approach, regressing the March 18 to

April 1 yield change on the fraction purchased by the Fed, instrumented with the two dummies.

Column 3 (first stage) shows that the dummies have strong negative explanatory power for the

fraction bought. Column 4 (second stage) shows a coefficent of -0.535 on the fraction bought,

implying that an increase of 0.1 (buying 10% of supply) leads to a 5.35 bps larger decline in yields.

        I next consider each of the three sectors selling large amount Treasuries. Bond mutual funds

faced large outflows leaving them little choice but to liquidate securities (with Treasuries being

among the most liquid ones). Foreign official holders faced immediate liquid needs from FX

intervention (leading to reduced dollar reserves) and precautionary liquidation of Treasuries in

case of future need for intervention. Foreign private holders include hedge funds who, like the

domestic hedge funds included in the U.S. household sector, faced liquidity needs from the

unwinding of trades related to the Treasury futures market. 16

5. Drivers of mutual fund Treasury selling in 2020Q1

This section documents the extent of outflows from bond mutual funds in the first quarter of 2020,

links Treasury selling to the outflows and lays out a possible reason behind the outflows.

5.1 Fund outflows



15
   I control for term, term squared and term cubed as well as coupon. Results are similar omitting term cubed. One
cannot allow for a fully general term structure shape since the treatment varies mainly by maturity.
16
   MBS selling was driven by mortgage real estate investment trusts (REITs) who are levered investors using repo
funding to invest in mortgage-related securities. They faced losses on their assets and sold $124B of agency & GSE
backed securities in 2020Q1, reducing their repo funding accordingly. See U.S. Financial Accounts Table FU.129.m
and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2020).


                                                       17
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Table 4 documents mutual fund flow using monthly data from the Investment Company Institute.

The same data source is used for mutual funds in the U.S. Financial Accounts. Bond funds faced

outflows in March 2020 of $257B, corresponding to 5.6% of total net assets (TNA). Outflows

were also substantial for hybrid funds (investing in a mix of stocks and bonds), at 3.1% of TNA.

Equity funds faced only modest fund outflows relative to their large size, with outflows of 0.4%

of TNA. Within bond funds, all subsectors had outflows. The investment grade sector accounted

for the largest dollar outflows at $89B. In contrast to mutual funds, money market funds saw large

inflows of $688B, with prime funds the main exception. Figure 7 graphs the time series of fund

flows to assess how abnormal March 2020 was. Panel A shows fund flows as a percent of total net

assets, monthly back to 2000M1. The 5.6% outflows in March 2020 were the largest over this

sample, but bond funds also faced outflows at the peak of the financial crisis, with outflows of

2.7% of TNA in October 2008. Accounting for events moving slower during the financial crisis,

Figure 7, Panel B (left) shows that in quarterly data, bond fund outflows were similar as a percent

of TNA in 2008Q4 and 2020Q1. For bond funds, what stood out in the COVID crisis was the

speed of outflows. Figure 7, Panel B (right) shows in weekly data how the bond fund outflows

during the COVID crisis were concentrated over just a couple of weeks, with outflows of $93B in

the week ending March 18, 2020 and $91B in the following week.

5.2 Linking outflows to Treasury sales

The large bond fund outflows in the weeks ending March 18 and 25 line up with the period of the

Treasury yield spike and large Fed intervention. However, as we have seen (Figure 3), mutual

funds did not sell substantial amounts of Treasuries in 2008Q4, despite the fact that this was also

a period of large fund outflows. Three simple arguments link outflows to Treasury sales in March

2020. First, funds facing outflows had many more Treasuries to sell than during the financial crisis.

Second, the extent to which funds sold their Treasuries depended on outflows. Third, Treasury



                                                 18
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


sales by fixed income index funds were substantial and are mechanically linked to flows.

        Providing more detail, Figure 8 shows mutual fund holdings of Treasuries and other bonds

over time. The left graph illustrates dollar amounts and documents a large increase in mutual fund

holdings of corporate bonds, Treasury bonds, and municipal bonds after the financial crisis. Over

this period, the supply of corporate bonds and especially of Treasuries grew dramatically (middle

graph). The right graph illustrates mutual fund holdings as a percent of supply, showing sharp

increases for corporate bonds, Treasury bonds, and municipal bonds. Falato, Goldstein and

Hortacsu (2020) document the increase in total bond fund assets relative to the size of the corporate

market. Figure 8 expands on that fact by showing that increased bond fund assets led to increased

holding not only of corporate bonds but also of Treasuries, a central fact for Treasury market

dislocations in March 2020. By the end of 2019, funds had Treasury holdings of $1.311T, more

than five times the holdings of just $173B at the end of 2008Q2 going into the financial crisis.

        Linking mutual fund Treasury sales in 2020Q1 to fund outflows, Table 6 studies the

relation between Treasury selling, initial Treasury holdings, and fund flows. I use data from the

CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free US Mutual Fund Database. I aggregate different share classes for a

given fund into one and perform the analysis at the level of a fund. 17 I manually code whether a

given fund holding is a Treasury security based on security names and include STRIPS securities

(but not long positions in Treasury futures since these do not represent ownership of any particular

security). I omit exchange-traded funds since the prior analysis reveals large Treasury sales by

mutual funds but not ETFs. Panel A documents Treasury holdings and selling in this database.

Total Treasury holdings at the end of 2019 were $1.085T, somewhat lower than the $1.311T in

the U.S. Financial Accounts. 18 Net sales of Treasuries by mutual funds of $132B in 2020Q1 in the


17
  The CRSP data uses "funds" for share classes and "portfolios" for funds. I use more standard terminology here.
18
  Total fund outflows are fairly similar across datasets with outflows of $347B in the CRSP data and $290B in the
ICI data (that underlie the US Financial Accounts) in 2020Q1.


                                                        19
              The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


CRSP data are lower than sales of $266B in the U.S. Financial Accounts. With that qualifier, Panel

B decomposes mutual fund Treasury selling in 2020Q1. Consistent with outflows driving Treasury

selling, funds with inflows were overall buyers of Treasuries while funds with outflows had net

sales of $140B of Treasuries. As noted, while Treasuries were less liquid than usual during this

time, they were likely still more liquid than most other securities funds held. For funds with

outflows, Treasury sales not in excess of outflows amounted to $103B. If funds sold Treasuries

first to meet outflows, most Treasury sales may thus have been directly flow-driven. 19 For funds

with outflows, even the $54B Treasury sales in excess of the outflows could indirectly be due to

outflows since funds may sell to prepare for potential future outflows. Schrimpf, Shim and Shin

(2021) document a negative relation between investor flows and funds' change in cash holdings

(in percent of total net assets) in March 2020 and argue that this is due to managers anticipating

possible future outflows. Panel C takes a regression approach to link fund Treasury sales to flows.

Focusing on funds with positive Treasury holdings at the end of 2019, I estimate this relation:
                                                20201
              
                                                                      20194                20201
                             = 0 + 1                                                               
                                                         20194                         20201
                        +2                                        + 3                           +     (2)
                          20201
where                              equals one for funds with outflows and f denotes a given fund. The

coefficient of interest is 1 . It measures whether funds with outflows were more or less likely to

sell their Treasuries than funds without outflows. In the baseline in column 1, 1 is significant and

estimated to be -0.18 meaning that funds facing outflows sold 18 cents more of Treasury securities

per dollar of initial Treasury holdings than funds with similar Treasury holdings that did not face

outflows. Column 2 shows that the coefficient on the interaction term is similar when weighting

observations by funds' initial Treasury holdings (to understand how the typical mutual fund


19
     See Ma, Xiao and Zeng (2021) for an analysis of funds' liquidation preferences.


                                                           20
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Treasury dollar reacted, as opposed the typical mutual fund). Column 3-5 show that the negative

coefficient on the interaction term is present for bond funds (taxable), hybrid funds and equity

funds, though not for a smaller set of various other funds in column 6 (these account for only $27B

of initial Treasury holdings). These regressions fund flows and Treasury sales. For index funds,

this link is even clearer, as funds have little flexibility in what they sell in response to outflows. In

the CRSP database, Treasury sales by bond index funds (taxable) in 2020Q1 amount to $25B.

5.3 Who sold bond funds and why?

According to the U.S. Financial Accounts (Table FU.122), mutual fund outflows were $290B in

2020Q1 (a bit smaller than the $350B outflow for March 2020 in Table 5 due to inflows earlier in

the quarter). Households accounted for most of these outflows, withdrawing a total of $280B from

mutual funds in 2020Q1. 20 Separate data by fund type are not available, but based on Investment

Company Institute (2020, Table 60), households own over 90% of both equity funds, hybrid funds

and bond funds, making it likely that most bond fund outflows were also from households.

        It is unlikely that households sold bond funds mainly because of liquidity needs (even

though their fund sales of course led to liquidity needs for the funds). Household increased their

investment in money market funds by $214B over the quarter 2020Q1 in addition to increasing

holdings of time and savings deposits by $346B (U.S. Financial Accounts, Table FU.101).

Household sales of mutual funds in 2020Q1 thus appears to be part of a reallocation to safe, short-

maturity assets as opposed to a liquidity crunch. What is puzzling is that this de-risking involved

disproportionate sales of bond funds compared to stock funds.

        A possible explanation is what I label a "disappearing safety effect". Krishnamurthy and

Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) argue that investors are willing to pay extra for very safe and liquid



20
  The $280B is comprised of redemptions of $236B from mutual funds held outside retirement accounts (FU.101)
and $46B from mutual funds held in defined contribution retirement plans (tables FU.118.c, FU.120.c).


                                                     21
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


assets. Figure 9, Panel A illustrates the idea. The security price is a decreasing function of default

risk but with a higher slope for very low risk, as illustrated by the curved segment from A and B.

The safety effect addresses yield spreads between similar-maturity bonds with different credit risk.

Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) documented this effect for Treasuries, showing that

yield spreads between Aaa-rated corporate bonds and Treasuries tend to be large, despite Aaa's

having only slightly higher default risk. Furthermore, changes in Treasury supply are negatively

related to the Aaa-Treasury yield spread, thus effectively tracing out a demand curve for the

safety/liquidity of Treasuries. The safety effect appears to be present to some extent also for Aaa

corporate bonds, since the spread between Baa and Aaa-rate corporate bonds also relates

negatively to Treasury supply (a liquidity price premium is less relevant for corporate bonds which

all tend to be much less liquid than Treasuries). For households, a willingness to accept lower

yields (higher prices) on low-risk bonds (beyond what their low credit risk and credit risk pricing

for riskier securities would imply) could stem from saved information costs. For example,

investing in a bond mutual fund with low initial risk and daily liquidity does not require a

sophisticated understanding of credit risk.

        A possible explanation for large household redemptions from bond funds in 2020Q1 is that

these funds initially had safety attributes but (temporarily) lost these as their risk increased. I have

illustrated this hypothesis in Figure 9 Panel A with a bond fund sliding down the price-risk curve

from point 1 to 2. The framework applies to the COVID crisis to the extent that the bond funds

with withdrawals were funds with low but increasing credit risk. From Table 5, about half of bond

mutual funds (by total net assets) are investment-grade funds and these account for 35% of

outflows. Multisector, world and municipal bond funds are harder to classify in terms of credit risk

as are government funds which hold Treasuries but also MBS. Less than 10% of bond mutual

funds are high-yield funds that are unlikely to have any safety attributes.



                                                  22
              The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


           Testing the disappearing safety hypothesis based on flows is difficult. While a disappearing

safety attribute may be one reason for mutual fund withdrawals, households may also reallocate

funds out of bonds that had lost their safety attribute even before COVID (high-yield funds).

Instead, I provide evidence from asset prices that is consistent with the nonlinearity in the price-

credit risk relation. Figure 9, Panel B graphs corporate bond yield spreads over 5-year Treasury

yields and 5-year corporate credit defaults swap rates. The yield spread for investment grade bonds

increases more than one-for-one with the investment-grade CDS rate, consistent with the

nonlinearity of the safety demand framework. By contrast, for high yield bonds, the yield spread

and CDS rates move by similar amounts, consistent with such bonds not having a safety attribute. 21

Table 7 presents results from regressing corporate bond yield spreads on CDS rates. For 2020H1,

the regression coefficient for investment grade bonds is 2.6, much above one and thus consistent

with such bonds sliding down the steep part of the price-default risk curve describing the safety

effect. By contrast, the regression coefficient is close to one for high yield bonds. Results are

similar for a longer period going back to 2013 (with the sample determined by data availability).

6. Drivers of Treasury selling by foreigners in 2020Q1

Turning to sales by the rest of the world, I decompose these into foreign official sales and private

sales and study drivers of Treasury sales by each of these groups.

6.1 Foreign official and foreign private Treasury sales

Foreigners sold $287B of Treasuries in 2020Q1 thus exceeding even the large Treasury sales by

mutual funds. Table 8 uses data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to decompose

foreign sales into sales by foreign official agencies (including foreign central banks and

governments) and foreign private sales. 22 About 2/3 of Treasury sales were from foreign official


21
     Haddad et al. (2020) also document corporate spreads and CDS rates but do not link these to the safety effect.
22
     I thank Carol Bertaut from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve for help with this table.


                                                           23
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


agencies and 1/3 from the foreign private sector. The BEA calculates foreign net purchases of US

securities from changes in holdings (using Treasury International Capital (TIC) data), combined

with assumptions about returns earned on the asset category. The assumed return is based on

market indices, weighted to account for the portfolio composition of foreign holdings (known from

reporting in the TIC data, including information about maturity structure). 23 Exploiting higher

frequency data, Figure 10 Panel A graphs a proxy for weekly foreign official selling of Treasury

securities: The weekly change (Wednesday data) in the face value of U.S. Treasury securities

owned by foreign official and international accounts and held in custody at the Fed. 24 The two

largest reductions are for the weeks ending March 18 and 25, exactly as for mutual fund flows and

lining up well with the yield spike and subsequent period of large Fed Treasury purchases.

6.2 Foreign official agencies' holdings and portfolio changes

Focusing on foreign official agencies, Table 9 Panel A documents how their portfolio of U.S.

holdings changed from just before the financial crisis to just before the COVID crisis. Like mutual

funds, foreign official agencies increased their reliance on Treasuries. Their total U.S. holdings

increased by about $3T of which $2.1T was an increase in Treasury holdings. The portfolio weight

for Treasuries increased from 45% to 56%. 25 Equity and investment fund shares increased by

$0.9T, likely via sovereign wealth fund investments since most central banks do not hold stocks.

Table 9, Panel B documents net purchases of U.S. assets overall and by asset class. In 2020Q1,


23
   Calculating foreign net purchases from TIC holdings data and returns is preferable to using TIC data on
transactions. As described by Bertaut and Judson (2014), TIC transactions data are recorded according to the
country of the first cross-border counterparty, not the country of the ultimate buyer or seller of the security. This
leads to a bias toward financial centers in the transactions data and the TIC transactions data gives the opposite (and
incorrect) conclusion about the relative importance of foreign official and foreign private sales.
24
   The majority of foreign official Treasury holdings are held at the Fed. From my Table 9 Panel A, foreign official
Treasury holdings of notes, bonds and bills were $4.077T at the end of 2019. From the FRED database, custody
holdings of Treasuries were $2.957T as of January 1, 2020, implying that 72.5% was held in custody at the Fed.

25
   As a percent of total Treasuries outstanding, the foreign official agency share decreases since Treasury supply
increased by a factor of three over this period.


                                                          24
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


foreign official agencies had net sales of $51B overall, suggesting that their sales of Treasuries

was partly motivated by a need for dollars for foreign exchange intervention. Currency and

deposits increase by $60B, likely in expectation of possible future need for cash. Of the total

Treasury sales by foreign official agencies of $182B, the $111B ($51B plus $60B) are thus likely

due to liquidity needs. A smaller part was used to reallocate portfolios toward higher yielding

assets, with purchases of $43B of mortgage-related securities and corporate bonds and purchases

of $36B worth of equities and investment fund shares.

       As described above, foreigners did not sell Treasuries at the peak of the financial crisis in

2008Q4. In fact, they purchased $278B worth of Treasuries in that quarter driven mainly by

purchases of $214B of Treasuries by foreign official holders, almost all Treasury bills (Table 9,

Panel B). This was funded by sales of long and short-term agency securities for a total of $174B.

The contrast between foreign official Treasury purchases in 2008Q4 and foreign Treasury sales in

2020Q1 thus appears to be driven by a four factors: (1) a larger cash need in 2020Q1, leading to

net sales of U.S. holdings overall, (2) increased reliance on Treasuries in foreign portfolios,

resulting in sales of Treasuries rather than mortgage-related securities in the face of liquidity needs,

(3) "precautionary" reallocations going into currency and deposits in 2020Q1 rather than Treasury

bills in 2008Q4, and (4) Treasury sales for return-seeking purposes in 2020Q1.

6.3 Insights into foreign private sales from the cross-section of countries

To gain insights into the $105B of foreign private Treasury sales, it is informative to study the

cross-section of countries. In Appendix Table 1 documents Treasury holdings and net purchases

by country for foreign and private holders combined (country-level data does not distinguish). I

calculate net purchase of Treasuries in 2020Q1 from the change in holdings from 2019Q4 to

2020Q1 and assumed returns. The table is based on Treasury International Capital (TIC) data,

which divides Treasury holdings into securities with below one year maturity and securities above



                                                  25
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


one year maturity. I use the return on Bloomberg Barclays Treasury Indices for these two maturity

groups for 2020Q1. 26 Appendix Table 1 also tabulates the changes to currency reserves using IMF

data. The largest seller is China, selling $75.9B, partly driven by a $42.4B reduction in reserves.

Brazil and Saudi Arabia also have large sales and large reductions in reserves. The Cayman

Islands, Ireland and Luxembourg have large Treasury sales, despite changes in reserves close to

zero. These three countries are domiciles for a large part of the world's hedge funds. According to

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2020), 51.4% of US hedge fund assets were domiciled

in the US at the end of 2019, while 34.6% were domiciled in the Cayman Islands, 4.6% in Ireland,

3.2% in Luxembourg, and just above 1% in each of British Virgin Islands and Bermuda. For

European hedge funds, Preqin (2017) states that 56% of European hedge funds are domiciled in

Luxembourg and 26% in Ireland. Large sales from hedge fund domiciles suggest that hedge fund

Treasury selling was a driver of the $105B of foreign private Treasury sales. Figure 10 shows a

cross-country scatter plot of foreign net purchase of Treasuries in 2020Q1 against the change in

reserves in 2020Q1. The relation is positive, consistent with FX intervention being one motive for

foreign official Treasury sales, but the large sales by the Cayman Island, Ireland and Luxembourg

are also visible. 27 Table 10 takes a regression approach to assess magnitudes and statistical

significance, regressing net purchases on the change in reserves and a dummy for hedge fund

domiciles. Both are significant with changes in reserves translating about one-for-one to net

purchases of Treasuries and hedge fund domiciles selling about $17B more each, on average.

7. Hedge fund Treasury sales

Barth and Kahn (2020) and Schrimpf, Shin and Sushko (2020) discuss the unwind of levered hedge



26
   The return is 0.84% for securities with below one year maturity (Bloomberg variable LT12TRUU) and 8.20% for
securities with above one year maturity (Bloomberg variable LUATTRUU).
27
   The UK is an outlier with purchases of $49.7B despite little change in reserves. UK purchases are driven by
purchases in January 2020, prior to the Brexit date of January 31, 2020 and thus unrelated to the COVID crisis.


                                                      26
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


fund trades in March 2020. The trade most discussed is the Treasury basis trade. The trade seeks

to profit from price difference between Treasury securities ("cash" Treasuries) and Treasury

futures. When futures are expensive relative to cash Treasuries, the basis trade consists of a short

position in the Treasury future (promising delivery of one of the eligible Treasury securities in

return for cash) and a long position in a Treasury security that can be delivered into the futures

contract (the cheapest to deliver among those eligible). The long position is typically financed

using repo financing. The trade is often highly levered to increase returns. Barth and Kahn (2020)

document the increased popularity of this trade especially since 2018 and the unwind of the trade

in the COVID crisis. As the COVID crisis intensified in March, the difference between futures and

cash prices widened, with futures becoming even more expensive relative to cash Treasuries than

before the COVID crisis. That led to losses on the basis trade and a need for increased margin to

be posted. As a result, many hedge funds unwound their basis trades. This would be expected to

lead to a sale of Treasury securities to close out the repo borrowing.

       In Table 11, I estimate Treasury sales by hedge funds of $183B in 2020Q1. This number

covers hedge funds that report to the Security Exchange Commission (SEC) whether foreign

domiciled or domiciled in the U.S. Hedge funds with at least $150 million in private fund assets

under management must report to the SEC on Form PF. Funds domiciled abroad must report if

they have U.S. investors. Form PF asks filers for total long and short Treasury exposure, combining

exposure form cash Treasuries and derivatives (including futures). The Form PF data are not

publicly available but total long Treasury exposure can be extracted from Figure 61 of Office for

Financial Research (2020) and is stated in the first row in Table 11. Futures positions are available

from the CFTC's Commitment of Traders reports. Subtracting long futures positions from total

long exposure, I estimate that hedge funds held Treasuries worth $991B and the end of 2019Q4

and $889B at the end of 2020Q1. Assuming a return equal to that on the Bloomberg Barclays



                                                 27
           The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


Treasury Indices for Treasury securities with >1 year remaining maturity (8.20% for 2020Q1),

hedge fund net purchases of Treasuries were 991-1.082*889=-$183B in 2020Q1. Hedge funds

sales by domestic and foreign funds reporting to the SEC are thus large enough to account for

around 60% of the combined sales by the foreign private sector $105 and the US household

(including US hedge fund) sector of $194B. Since only hedge funds selling to US investors report

to the SEC, total hedge fund selling is likely larger than the $183B. The $183B estimated Treasury

sales are larger than the reduction in short Treasury futures positions of $127B, suggesting that

levered trades other that the Treasury basis trade may have been relevant, perhaps related to risk-

parity trades (see European Central Bank (2020)). 28

        Barth and Kahn (2020) (and my Table 1) show that yields of the securities that were

cheapest to deliver (CTD) into futures contracts were abnormally low at the peak of the COVID

crisis in March, the opposite of what one may expect from large-scale liquidation of these

particular securities. However, hedge fund Treasury sales likely contributed to the spike in

Treasury yields form March 9 to 18, despite the CTDs securities having low yields. To the extent

that the Treasury market remained an integrated market, as opposed each security trading in a

segmented market, hedge fund Treasury selling added to the negative demand shock from mutual

funds and foreign official agencies. Lower yields on CTD Treasury securities reflect their extra

value above other Treasuries for arbitrageurs with short futures positions.

8. Policy discussion and conclusion

The paper has studied the spike in Treasury yields in March 2020. It was not driven by higher

expected inflation or government credit risk but rather a negative demand shock from three groups

of investors with urgent liquidity needs: Mutual funds facing outflow, foreign official agencies


28
  Weekly changes in short futures positions of levered investors (hedge funds) are graphed in Appendix Figure 2.
Large negative changes start in February and remain large until the week ending April 7. They are thus more spread
out around the yield spike than mutual fund outflows and foreign official Treasury selling.


                                                        28
          The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


needing to reduce their currency reserves and reallocate them toward cash in preparation for

additional future cash needs, and hedge funds unwinding levered trades. In hindsight, it should not

come as a surprise that some holders of Treasuries want to sell in crisis. Treasuries are more liquid

than other bonds and mutual funds and foreign official holders buy them partly for this reason.

       The Federal Reserve's purchases of Treasury securities were central for reversing the yield

spike and appear to have affected asset prices upon purchase more than upon announcement. The

March 15 purchase announcement had little effect on the liquidity needs of sectors that were heave

sellers of Treasuries. As a result, it took large actual purchases to stabilize the Treasury market.

This contrasts with the Fed's corporate bond purchases programs during COVID where

announcements stemmed outflows from mutual funds and thus reduced liquidity needs, resulting

in few actual purchases being necessary. Should the Fed stand ready to support the Treasury market

on demand, effectively doing maturity transformation on a grand scale when investors want cash

rather than bonds? As a tax payer one may be tempted to say yes, to keep government borrowing

costs low. Furthermore, the Treasury market is sufficiently important for financial markets ­

including for the pricing of corporate and household debt -- that supporting it is likely to have

broader economy-wide effects. However, market interventions create moral hazard, not just higher

hedge fund leverage but also a risk of excessive government debt accumulation.

       Given the pros and cons of Fed Treasury purchases, various ideas have been put forward

to reduce the need for Fed intervention. Duffie (2020) argues for central clearing to reduce the

need for dealer (and Fed) balance sheet space. Liang and Parkinson (2020) propose removing

reserves permanently from the supplementary leverage ratio to increase banks' ability to buy

assets. To reduce mutual fund selling in crisis, Falato et al (2020) mention the use of swing pricing

to reduce run dynamics at mutual funds by penalizing investors for withdrawing when many others

withdraw. Other possibilities include making the repo facility for foreign central banks permanent,



                                                 29
         The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


introducing a repo facility with broad access (G30 (2021)), or addressing high hedge fund leverage.

References

Baklanova, V., I. Kuznits and T. Tatum, 2021 "Prime MMFs at the Onset of the Pandemic: Asset

Flows, Liquidity Buffers, and NAVs", SEC working paper.

Barth, D. and J. Kahn, 2020, "Basis Trades and Treasury Market Illiquidity", Office of Financial

Research Brief Series, 20-01.

Bertaut, C. and R. Judson, 2014, "Estimating U.S. Cross-Border Securities Positions: New Data

and New Methods", Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance

Discussion Papers, Number 1113.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 2020, "Financial Stability Report", May.

Duffie, D., 2020, "Still the World's Safe Haven?", Hutchins Center Working Paper No. 62.

European Central Bank, 2020, "Financial Stability Review", May.

Falato, A., I. Goldstein, and A. Hortacsu, 2021, "Financial Fragility in the COVID-19 Crisis: The

Case of Investment Funds in Corporate Markets", forthcoming, Journal of Monetary Economics.

Fleckenstein, M., and F. A. Longstaff, 2020, "Renting Balance Sheet Space: Intermediary

Balance Sheet Rental Costs and the Valuation of Derivatives", Review of Financial Studies, 33,

5051-5091.

Fleming, M. and F. Ruela, 2020, "Treasury Market Liquidity during the COVID-19 Crisis",

Liberty Street Economics blog, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

G30, 2021, "U.S. Treasury Markets. Steps Toward Increased Resiliance", report.

Gilchrist, S., B. Wei, V. Z. Yue, and E. Zakrajsek, 2020, "The Fed Takes on Corporate Credit

Risk: An Analysis of the Efficacy of the SMCCF", NBER working paper No. 27809.

Haddad, V., A. Moreira and T. Muir, 2020, "When Selling Becomes Vital: Disruptions in Debt

Markets in the COVID-19 Crisis and the Fed's Response", Review of Financial Studies,



                                                30
         The Treasury Market in Spring 2020 and the Response of the Federal Reserve


forthcoming.

He, Z., S. Nagel, and Z. Song, 2020, "Treasury Inconvenience Yields during the COVID-19

Crisis", Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Investment Company Institute, 2020, "60th edition, Investment Company Fact Book".

Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on

Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

Fall 2011, 215-265.

Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, "The Aggregate Demand for Treasury

Debt", Journal of Political Economy, 120, 2, 233-267.

Liang, N. and P. Parkinson, 2020, "Enhancing Liquidity of the U.S. Treasury Market under

Stress", Hutchins Center Working paper No. 72.

Ma, Y., K. Xiao, and Y. Zeng, 2021, "Mutual Fund Liquidity Transformation and Reverse Flight

to Liquidity", working paper.

Office of Financial Research, 2020, "Annual Report to Congress".

Preqin, 2017, "Preqin Special Report: Hedge Funds in Europe".

Schrimpf, A., I. Shim, and H. S. Shin, 2021, "Liquidity Management and Asset Sales by Bond

Funds in the Face of Investor Redemptions in March 2020", BIS Bulletin, No 39.

Schrimpf, A., H. S. Shin, and Vladyslav Sushko, 2020, "Leverage and Margin Spirals in Fixed

Income Markets during the COVID-19 Crisis", BIS Bulletin, No 2.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2020, "Private Funds Statistics", Fourth Calendar

Quarter 2019.




                                              31
Figure 1. Treasury yields
Treasury yields and the S&P500 index are from the Federal Reserve's FRED database. The inflation swap
series is from Bloomberg and the credit default swap rate from Datastream. All yields are in percent.
Panel A. Treasury yields spiked in mid-March as the S&P500 index kept falling




                                                                                                3500
                   2
  10-year Treasury yield (nominal)




                                                                                                            3000
                       1.5




                                                                                                  S&P500 index
                                                                                                2500
          1




                                                                                                2000
                   .5




                 01jan2020                  01mar2020            01may2020               01jul2020


                                                10-year Treasury yield (nominal)
                                                S&P500 index



Panel B. Treasury dislocations were mostly in longer yields

                                                      Nominal yields
                         2.5
                         2
                         1.5
                         1
                         .5
                         0




                      01jan2020              01mar2020             01may2020                01jul2020


                                     30yr      20yr       10yr         5yr         2yr        1yr




                                                                                                                   32
Panel C. Yield spike driven by higher real yield, not expected inflation or credit risk

              2
              1
              0
              -1                                         10-year




             01jan2020                    01mar2020                                 01may2020                 01jul2020


                                       Treas yield                                 Infl Swap
                                       Govt CDS                                    Treas yield-Infl swap-CDS
                                       TIPS-CDS


Panel D. Comparison to 2008
                                                              800 1000 1200 1400




                                                                                                            10-year
   2 2.5 3 3.5 4




                                                                                         4
      Treas yield




                                                                  S&P500




                                                                                         3
                                                                                         2
                                                                                         1
                                                                                         0




           01jul2008 01sep2008 01nov2008 01jan2009                                       01jul2008   01sep2008 01nov2008 01jan2009

                                       Treas yield                                                    Treas yield         Infl Swap
                                       S&P500                                                         Govt CDS


                                      10-year
                3
                2
                1
                0
                -1




                    01jul2008   01sep2008 01nov2008 01jan2009


                                  Treas yield-Infl swap-CDS
                                  TIPS-CDS




                                                                                                                                      33
Figure 2. Cross section of Treasury yields and bid-ask spreads
The figure is based on data from Bloomberg. Sample graphed: Bonds with 1 to 10 year maturity that are
still in the same maturity bucket they were issued in (e.g., 10-year bonds with remaining term of at least 7
years). Blue line label: Age rank within maturity bucket, 1=on-the-run, 2=first off-the-run etc.
Panel A. March 12, 2020




Panel B. January 6, 2020




                                                                                                         34
Panel C. Illiquidity component of yields implied by cross-sectional price of illiquidity and time
series of bid-ask spreads
The illiquidity component of the bid yield is in percent. It is estimated as 0.213 times the bid-ask spread
(in $ per $100 face value). The factor 0.213 is from Table 1, column 1. The vertical lines indicate March 9
and March 18, 2020.




                                                                                                        35
Figure 3. Quarterly net purchases of Treasuries, 2000Q1-2021Q1, U.S. Financial Accounts
Source: U.S. Financial Accounts, Table FU.210 (not seasonally adjusted), June 2021 data release.
Panel A. Net purchases by the Federal Reserve
                                         Monetary authority (Federal Reserve)
          1200
          900600
      Billion
   300    0
          -300




                   2000                 2005            2010                    2015               2020



Panel B. Net purchases by the sectors with the largest sales in 2020Q1

                           Rest of the world                              Mutual funds                        Households, incl. hedge funds
            300




                                                         300




                                                                                                      300
            200




                                                         200




                                                                                                      200
            100




                                                         100




                                                                                                      100
      Billion




                                                      Billion




                                                                                                   Billion
         0




                                                         0




                                                                                                      0
            -100




                                                         -100




                                                                                                      -100
            -200




                                                         -200




                                                                                                      -200
            -300




                                                         -300




                                                                                                      -300




                   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020             2000   2005   2010   2015   2020             2000   2005   2010   2015   2020




                                                                                                                                                36
Figure 4. Federal Reserve purchase effects on the Treasury market
Panel A is similar to Figure 1, Panel A, but adds vertical lines to indicate the three Federal Reserve bond
purchase announcements during the COVID crisis. Panel B lines up the timing of the Treasury yield
reversal to the size of Federal Reserve Treasury purchases, using data from the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York. Panel C graphs the 10-year Treasury yield and the yield on investment grade corporate bonds.
Panel A. Treasury yields and S&P500

                                                      Vertical lines mark 3/15, 3/23, 4/9




                                                                                                                                      3500
                                 1.6
  10-year Treasury yield (nominal)
                           1.4




                                                                                                                                                3000
                                                                                                                                       S&P500 index
             1     1.2




                                                                                                                                      2500
      .8            .6




                                                                                                                                      2000
                 01feb2020                            01mar2020                       01apr2020                    01may2020


                                                                   10-year Treasury yield (nominal)
                                                                   S&P500 index



Panel B. Daily Fed Treasury purchases and 10-year Treasury yield
                                                                                                                                                                 80
                    2




                                                                                                                               Daily Fed Treasury purchases, $ B
  10-year Treasury yield (nominal)




                                         5                                       19
                                                                                  20 23 26
                                                                                         27 30
                                                                                             31
                                                                                              1
                                        4 67 1112
                                                13                                     25
                                                                                      24
                                             10 14 18
                                                    19
                           1.5




                                       3
                                                                                                                                                        60




                                                     20
                                                      21
                                                           24                                 23
                                                            25
                                                             26
                                                              27                                   7
                                                                                                    8
                                                                                 18
                                                              28 2                19
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                  34            17
                1




                                                                    5       13 16
                                                                                17 20
                                                                           12 18 24     25           9
                                                                          11             26                14
                                                                      6 10 16         23 27        78     13
                                                                                                           14
                                                                                             31 6 9
                                                                                            30              15         27
                                                                                              123         131517 2022     30
                                                                                                                         29
                                                                                                             16   21 24 28
                                                                                                                    23
                                                                        9
                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                    23
      .5




                                                                                                                  21
                                                                                                                 20       30
                                                                                                                     24 28
                                                                                                                         29
                                                                                                                   22 27
                                       34567 10      1820 24
                                                           25 28 23
                    0




                                                                                                                               0




                                              11
                                               12
                                                13
                                                 14 171921 2627 456 910
                                                                      112
                                                                       1                             10

                 01feb2020                            01mar2020                       01apr2020                   01may2020


                                                              10-year Treasury yield (nominal)
                                                              Daily Fed Treasury purchases, $ B




                                                                                                                                                                      37
Panel C. Treasury yields and investment grade corporate bond yields




                                                                      38
Figure 5. Federal Reserve purchase effects on the MBS market
Panel A graphs the MBS yield and OAS using data from Bloomberg. Panel B lines up the timing of the
MBS yield and OAS reversals to the size of Federal Reserve MBS purchases, using data from the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
Panel A. MBS yield and option-adjusted spread

                                        Vertical lines mark 3/15, 3/23, 4/9
         3
         2
         1
         0




        01feb2020                        01mar2020                     01apr2020                    01may2020


                                                    US MBS Fixed Rate Yield
                                                    US MBS Fixed Rate OAS




Panel B. Daily Fed MBS purchases and MBS option-adjusted spread


                                                                              27
                                                                                                                                                  40
             2




                                                                            25
                                                                                                                      Daily Fed MBS purchases, $ B




                                                                       20 2426
  US MBS Fixed Rate OAS
                 1.5




                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                           23
                                                                                    1
                                                                      19
                                                                                     2
                                                                       20
                                                                 13                      78
                                                                                   30 3 6
                                                                                                                                 20
         1




                                                                12 18               31
                                                               11 16                       9
                                                                          23
                                                                    17                            14 17
                                                             910      19
                                                         6                          1                   21
                                                                                                    16 20
                                                                                                   15
                                                       45                          3123          13
                                                                                                  14 17 22
                                                                                                    16 20  24
                                                                                                          23  27
                                                  28 23
                                                 27                          26                    15      24 28
                                                                                                                        10
  .5




                          34                    26
                                               25                          24
                                                                            25            6      13      22     29
                            567 10      18
                                    14 17 20
                                         1921 24
                                 1113
                                  12                                16        27           78910        2123 27 30
                                                                      18                                       28
                                                                                                                29
                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                   30
                                                                     17
                          34567 10
                                 11       20    2628 23456 910
             0




                                                                                                                      0




                                   13
                                  1214 1719
                                        18     25
                                           21 24 27          112
                                                              113                            10

           01feb2020                       01mar2020                       01apr2020                     01may2020


                                                    US MBS Fixed Rate OAS
                                                    Daily Fed MBS purchases, $ B




                                                                                                                                                       39
    Figure 6. The cross-section of Federal Reserve Treasury holdings and purchases
    Panel A is based on all 312 notes and bonds outstanding on March 18, 2020 (TIPS excluded). Panel B is
    based on 70 bonds with 30-year maturity at issue and remaining term of at least one year. It omits the two
    bonds that are cheapest to deliver into the 30-year and ultra 30-year futures contracts.
    Panel A. Histogram of fraction of issue owned by the Federal Reserve on March 18, 2020




Panel B. Relating fraction owned to fraction purchased and yield curve changes, 30-year bonds only




`




                                                                                                            40
Figure 7. Mutual fund flows
Source: Investment Company Institute data downloaded from Bloomberg. Flow (net new cash flow) is
defined as new fund sales less redemptions plus net exchanges. Panel B (right) is based on Wednesday data.
The dashed vertical line indicates March 18, 2020, the peak of the Treasury yield spike.
Panel A. Mutual fund flows as percent of total net assets, monthly, 2000M1-2020M6
                        Bond funds                                                              Hybrid funds
      4




                                                                           4
      2




                                                                           2
  Percent




                                                                      Percent
  -2 0




                                                                      -2 0
      -4




                                                                           -4
      -6




                                                                           -6
      01jan2000        01jan2009          01jan2020                        01jan2000           01jan2009              01jan2020


                        Equity funds                                                         Money market funds

                                                                      5 10 15 20
      4
      2
  Percent




                                                                      Percent
  -2 0-4




                                                                           0
      -6




                                                                           -5




      01jan2000        01jan2009          01jan2020                        01jan2000           01jan2009              01jan2020




Panel B. Measures of bond fund flows
                  Quarterly, % of TNA                                              2020, Weekly, $ Billion
                                                             40
    6




                                                             20
    4




                                                             0
    2




                                                                -20
                                                        $ Billion
 Percent
 0




                                                      -40
    -2




                                                             -60
    -4




                                                             -80
                                                             -100
    -6




           2000         2010            2020                    January              March        May          July




                                                                                                                                  41
Figure 8. Mutual fund bond holdings
Data are from the U.S. Financial Accounts, Table L.122 and L.208.




                                                                    42
Figure 9. Safety effects
Panel A. The safety effect of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)




Panel B. Corporate bond yield spreads and CDS rates
The figure shows yield spreads of corporate bond yields over Treasuries to credit default swap (CDS) rates
on corporate bonds. Data for the investment grade and high yield corporate bond indices are from the
Federal Reserve's FRED database as are Treasury yields (I use the 5-year Treasury yield to approximately
match the duration of the corporate bond indices). CDS rates are from Bloomberg and refer to the 5-year
maturity.

              Investment Grade                                      High Yield
                                                  12
6




                                                  10
4




                                                  8
                                                  6
2




                                                  4
                                                  2
0




                                                  0




01jan2020   01mar2020 01may2020       01jul2020   01jan2020   01mar2020 01may2020       01jul2020


              Yield spread (IG - 5y Treas)                      Yield spread (HY - 5y Treas)
              CDS (IG, 5y)                                      CDS (HY, 5y)




                                                                                                       43
Figure 10. Timing and drivers of foreign Treasury sales
Panel A graphs the weekly change (Wednesday data) in the face value of U.S. Treasury securities held in
custody by the Fed for foreign official and international accounts (data are from FRED). The dashed
vertical line indicates March 18, 2020, the peak of the Treasury yield spike. Panel B uses quarterly data
and graphs net purchases by country (official and private) against the change in reserves (data sources are
as for Appendix Table 1). Some country labels are omitted for readability.
Panel A. Change in the face value of U.S. Treasuries held in custody by the Fed




Panel B. Relating foreign Treasury sales to currency reserves




                                                                                                         44
Table 1. The cross-section of Treasury yields
This table is based on data from Bloomberg. Sample used: Bonds with 1 to 10 year maturity. CTD stands
for cheapest to deliver. t statistics in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                                                Dept. var.: Bid yield (pct)
                                                           March 12, 2020                         January 6, 2020
                                              (1)         (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)
 Bid-ask spread ($ per $100 face value)   0.213***     0.299***                    0.269***           0.235*
                                            (4.42)      (11.03)                      (8.98)           (1.70)
 D(On the run)                                                     -0.0919***     -0.00876
                                                                     (-6.52)       (-0.59)
 D(1st off the run)                                                 -0.0349**      0.00539
                                                                      (-2.44)       (0.43)
 D(2nd off the run)                                                 -0.0266**      0.00369
                                                                      (-2.05)       (0.33)
 D(3rd off the run)                                                 -0.0269**     -0.00669
                                                                      (-2.10)      (-0.62)
 D(4th off the run)                                                 -0.00525      -0.00762
                                                                     (-0.41)       (-0.72)
 D(CTD in 2yr futures contract)                                     -0.194***     -0.167***
                                                                      (-7.07)       (-7.30)
 D(CTD in 5yr futures contract)                                     -0.142***     -0.120***
                                                                      (-5.13)       (-5.19)
 D(CTD in 10yr futures contract)                                    -0.101***    -0.0811***
                                                                      (-3.64)      (-3.52)
 D(CTD in ultra 10yr futures contract)                               -0.0376       -0.0277
                                                                     (-1.10)       (-0.98)
 Coupon                                   0.0173**     0.00124      0.00686        0.00166              0.0007
                                            (2.13)      (0.28)       (1.49)         (0.43)              (0.28)
 Constant, Term, Term2, Term3
 included                                    Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes                 Yes
 N (securities)                              76          186           186           186                 76
 R-squared                                  0.908       0.855         0.862         0.906               0.989




                                                                                                   45
Table 2. Ownership of US Treasuries, US Financial Accounts
Column 1-3 shows amounts held based on table L.210 in the U.S. Financial Accounts. Column 4 shows
ownership changes (flows) and is based on table FU.210. Data is from the June 2021 release of the U.S.
Financial Accounts.

                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)                (4)
                                                Holdings      Holdings     Holdings change     Net purchase
                                                  2019Q4        2020Q1     2020Q1-2019Q4         2020Q1
                                                                            $B
 Total liabilities                                  19,019        19,518         500                500
 Total assets                                       19,422        20,737        1,314               500
 Discrepancy                                           403         1,218         815                 0
 Sectors buying Treasuries in 2020Q1
 Monetary authority                                  2,541         3,757         1,217             1,019
 Money market funds                                  1,037         1,268          231               231
 Nonfinancial corporate business                        64            92          29                23
 Exchange traded funds                                 214           263          49                21
 Private pension funds                                 421           472          52                17
 State and local governments                           850           912          63                10
 Federal government retirement funds                 2,151         2,158           7                 5
 U.S. chartered depository institutions                704           724          20                 3
 Government sponsored enterprises                      176           195          19                 2
 Property casualty insurance companies                 153           163          10                 1
 Sectors selling Treasuries in 2020Q1
 Rest of the world                                   6,691         6,950          259               -287
 Mutual funds                                        1,311         1,114         -197               -266
 Household sector, incl. hedge funds                 1,963         1,500         -463               -196
 State and local govt retirement funds                 341           334           -7                -36
 Foreign banking offices in U.S.                       121           116           -5                -15
 Brokers and dealers                                   230           266          36                 -12
 Holding companies                                      58            54           -4                 -9
 Nonfinancial noncorporate business                     74            77           2                  -4
 Banks in U.S. affiliated areas                         17            15           -2                 -3
 Credit unions                                          38            39           1                  -2
 Life insurance companies                              215           233          18                  -2
 ABS issuers                                            33            32           -1                 -1
 Closed end funds                                        3             3           -1                 -1




                                                                                                     46
Table 3. Federal Reserve announcements in March and April, 2020

 Date               Announcement                                                       Detail
 3/3, 10 a.m.       Federal funds target lowered 50 bps to 1-1.25%

 3/15, 5 p.m.       At least: $500B Treasury purchases, $200B MBS purchases
                    Federal funds target lowered 100 bps to 0-0.25%
                    Primary credit rate lowered 150 bps to 0.25%                       Discount window borrowing encouraged
                    Rate on dollar swap lines lowered 25 bps to OIS+0.25%              BoC/BoE/BoJ/ECB/SNB are counterparties
 3/17, 10:45 a.m.   Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) restarted                 Buying 3-month A1/P1 commercial paper
                                                                                       $10B credit protection from Treasury
 3/17, 6 p.m.       Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) restarted                    Up to 90 day borrowing at primary credit rate

 3/18, 11:30 p.m.   Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF)                 Lends funds to banks to buy assets from prime money market funds
                                                                                       $10B credit protection from Treasury
 3/19, 9 a.m.       Temporary dollar liquidity arrangements w/other central banks
 3/20, 10 a.m.      Dollar swap lines goes from weekly to daily operations
 3/20, 11 a.m.      MMLF expanded to municipal bonds
 3/23, 8 a.m.       Unlimited Treasury and MBS purchases                               Agency CMBS now included in MBS purchases

                    $300B in lending via:                                              $30B credit protection from Treasury

                    1. Primary market (PMCCF), secondary market (SMCCF)
                                                                                       Corporate bond purchases: Investment grade issuers only
                     corporate bond facilities
                    2. Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF)               Fed lending against asset-backed securities
                    3. CPFF, MMLF expanded with more muni debt
                    4. Main Street Lending Program (MSLP), details to be announced
 3/31, 8:30 a.m.    Repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities   Objective is to support Treasury (and other) markets
 4/1, 4:45 p.m.     Temporary change to Supplementary Leverage Ratio (SLR) for banks   Treasuries and reserves excluded from SLR
 4/6, 2 p.m.        Fed will provide term financing backed by PPP loans
 4/9, 8:30 a.m.     Corporate bond purchases (plus TALF) expanded                      Up to $850B, $85B credit protection. Fallen angels added.
                    Main Street Lending Program                                        Up to $600B, $75B credit protection
                    Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF)                                 Up to $500B, $35B credit protection

 4/27, 4/30         Term sheets updated for MLF, MSLP, PPPLF


                                                                                                                                                   47
Table 4. The cross-section of Federal Reserve Treasury purchases: Effects on yields, 30-year bonds only

                                                        Reduced form                1st stage       2nd stage
                                   Dept. var.                                       Fraction
                                                Yield on 4/1 -   Yield on 4/1 -   bought from     Yield on 4/1 -
                                                Yield on 3/18    Yield on 3/18     3/19 to 4/1    Yield on 3/18
                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
 D(Fraction owned on 3/18 = 0.7)                 0.0634***        0.0396***       -0.0733***
                                                    (5.71)           (5.33)          (-5.46)
 D(0.59  Fraction owned on 3/18 < 0.7)           0.0330***        0.0175***       -0.0359***
                                                   (3.42)           (2.77)          (-3.15)
 Fraction bought from 3/19 to 4/1                                                                   -0.535***
                                                                                                      (-4.09)
 Controls:
   Coupon                                         0.0164**         0.0109**         0.00679         0.0144**
                                                    (2.15)           (2.25)          (0.77)           (2.34)
    Yield on 3/18 - Yield on 3/9                                  -0.661***         -0.0967         -0.711***
                                                                    (-9.80)         (-0.79)           (-8.45)
Constant, Term, Term2, Term3 included                Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
N (securities)                                       70               70              70               70
R-squared                                           0.811            0.926           0.474            0.872
t-statistics in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                    48
Table 5. Mutual fund and money market fund flows, by fund type
The table is based on data from the Investment Company Institute (via Bloomberg). Flow is net new cash
flow, defined as new fund sales less redemptions plus net exchanges. Monthly data frequency.

                                                      Total net          Net new cash flow,
                                                 assets (TNA),                March 2020
 Type of fund                                       end of Feb                          % of Feb
                                                      2020, $B            $B           2020 TNA
 Equity mutual funds                                     10,381           -46             -0.4
 Hybrid mutual funds                                      1,500           -47             -3.1
 Bond mutual funds                                        4,581          -257             -5.6
     Inv. grade (govt, MBS, corp, ABS etc.)               2,258           -89             -3.9
     High yield                                             328           -22             -6.6
     Government (incl MBS)                                  364           -16             -4.5
     Multisector                                            519           -42             -8.1
     World                                                  556           -44             -7.9
     Municipal                                              859           -42             -4.9
 Money market funds                                       3,647           688             18.9
     Treasury & Repo                                        794           327             41.2
     Treasury & Agency                                    1,927           507             26.3
     Prime                                                  791          -139            -17.6
     Tax-Exempt                                             135            -6             -4.8




                                                                                                    49
Table 6. Mutual fund selling of Treasuries in the CRSP mutual fund data
The table uses data from the CRSP mutual fund database (excluding ETFs). All share classes for a given
fund are aggregated into one observation. Panel A and B are based on all 9,234 mutual funds in the
database as of the end of 2019. Panel C is based on the 2307 mutual funds with positive Treasury
holdings at the end of 2019.
Panel A. Summary statistics on Treasury holdings and selling

                                           End of 2019, $B                     2020Q1, $B
                                         Total net    Treasury          Net new     Net purchase
 Type of fund                          assets (TNA) holdings           cash flow    of Treasuries
 Equity                                        13,668       64                -111         -9
 Hybrid                                         2,170      105                 -56        -22
 Bond, taxable                                  3,815      889                -132        -99
    Of which core bond funds                    1,558      465                 -50        -72
 Bond, municipal                                  807        0                 -22          0
 Other (MBS, currency funds)                      405       27                 -26         -4
 Sum                                           20,865    1,085                -347       -132


Panel B. By fund in/outflow status in 2020Q1

                                                       End of 2019, $B                  2020Q1, $B
                                                     Total net                    Net new        Net
                                                       assets   Treasury           cash      purchase of
 Type of fund                                         (TNA)     holdings           flow      Treasuries
 Funds with outflows                                    14,273       767              -615      -140
      Funds selling Treasuries                            3663       672              -204           -157
             Treasuries sold up to outflow                                                           -103
             Treasuries sold in excess of outflow                                                     -54
      Funds buying Treasuries                          10,609          95             -410             16
 Funds with inflows                                     6,592         318              267        8
                                                       20,865      1,085              -347      -132
Note: Sales are indicated with negative sign and purchases with positive signs.




                                                                                                            50
Panel C. Drivers of Treasury buying/selling by mutual funds

                                              Dependent variable: Net purchase of Treasuries, 2020Q1, $B
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                              Bond
                                      All funds   All funds funds,          Hybrid        Equity      Other
                                                              taxable       funds         funds       funds
 Treasury holdings (end of 2019)      -0.180*** -0.208*** -0.212*** -0.273*** -0.285***                 0.220*
 *D(Outflows in 2020Q1)                (-30.32)    (-64.06)     (-42.51)      (-4.04)      (-11.56)     (1.67)
 Treasury holdings (end of 2019)       -0.00335    0.0143***     0.0158***    0.0118     -0.0588**    -0.424***
                                        (-0.78)      (6.69)        (4.80)     (0.17)       (-2.39)      (-3.28)
 D(Outflows in 2020Q1)                  -0.0121     0.871***     1.231***    -0.0181     -0.0520*         0.200**
                                        (-0.57)       (5.78)       (4.95)     (-0.14)     (-1.82)          (1.26)
 Constant                               0.0114      -0.670***    -0.811***    0.0352     0.0781***        0.0720
                                        (0.65)        (-5.19)      (-3.86)    (0.29)       (3.05)         (0.52)
 Weighted by Treasury holdings
 (end of 2019)                            No           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes

 N (funds)                               2307         2307         1032        364          722            189
 R2                                        0.470       0.754       0.753      0.904        0.992           0.332
 t-statistics in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                     51
Table 7. The disappearing safety effect
Daily data frequency. Data sources are as for Figure 9. Yield spreads are relative to the 5-year Treasury
yield. Coefficients are estimated by OLS. Standard errors account for AR(1) autocorrelation and are
estimated using the bootstrap after bootstrap approach of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015).

                                               Dependent variable: Yield spread
                                              2020H1                 2013-2020H1
                                           IG        HY              IG         HY
 Investment grade CDS index            2.626***                  2.325***
                                         (5.89)                    (13.78)

 High yield CDS index                              1.205***                   1.486***
                                                    (13.08)                    (14.18)

 Constant                               0.0398      0.281          -0.0101    -0.851*
                                        (0.11)      (0.59)          (-0.08)    (-2.11)

 N (days)                                   125        125        1868          1868
 R-squared                                 0.832      0.943       0.770         0.819
 Note: Yield spreads are corporate yields minus 5-year Treasury yields.
 t statistics in parentheses. * p<0.05, **p<0.01, *** p<0.001.




                                                                                                        52
Table 8. Foreign holdings and net purchases of Treasuries
The table is based on data from the Bureau of Economics Analysis (BEA) International Data (March 2021
release), which relies on the same underlying data as the U.S. Financial Accounts. Data for all foreigners
are from BEA Table Table 1.2 (U.S. Net International Investment Position at the End of the Period,
Expanded Detail) for holdings and Table 7.1 (U.S. International Financial Transactions for Portfolio
Investment) for net purchases. Data for foreign official agencies are from BEA Table 3.1 (U.S. International
Investment Position for Liabilities to Foreign Official Agencies) for holdings and Table 9.1 (U.S.
International Financial Transactions for Liabilities to Foreign Official Agencies) for net purchases. I
calculate data for the foreign private sector as the difference between values for all foreigners and foreign
official agencies. The BEA calculates the net purchase based on the change in holdings combined with an
assumed return.

                                        HOLDINGS ($B)                        NET PURCHASES ($B)
                                   2019Q4   2020Q1 Pct change                      2020Q1
 All foreigners
           Treasuries in total     6,691         6,950         3.9                     -287
                Notes/bonds        5,985         6,220         3.9                     -301
                         Bills       706           730         3.3                      13
 Foreign official
           Treasuries in total     4,077         4,118         1.0                     -182
                Notes/bonds        3,808         3,835         0.7                     -196
                         Bills       269           283         5.4                      15
 Foreign private
           Treasuries in total     2,614         2,832         8.3                     -105
                Notes/bonds        2,176         2,385         9.6                     -104
                         Bills       438            446        2.0                      -1




                                                                                                          53
Table 9. U.S. liabilities to foreign official agencies
The table is based on data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) International Data (March 2021
release). Panel A is based on Table 3.1 (U.S. International Investment Position for Liabilities to Foreign
Official Agencies) and Panel B on Table 9.1 (U.S. International Financial Transactions for Liabilities to
Foreign Official Agencies). The category "other" refers to loans, trade credit and advances and special
drawing rights allocations. The table underlying Panel A does not separately identify agency debt and
corporate bonds within the other long-term securities category.

Panel A. Foreign official agency holdings

                                                                $B                        Percent
                                                         2008Q2    2019Q4              2008Q2     2019Q4
 Total U.S. liabilities to foreign official agencies       3,751     6,763               100.0      100.0
 Long term debt securities
     Treasury bonds and notes                             1,690     3,808                 45.0        56.3
     Other long-term securities                           1,073       848                 28.6        12.5
     (agency debt and corporate bonds)
 Short term debt securities
     Treasury bills and certificates                       228        269                  6.1         4.0
     Other short-term securities                           150         32                  4.0         0.5
 Equity and investment fund shares                         363      1,216                  9.7        18.0
 Currency and deposits                                     100        391                  2.7         5.8
 Other                                                     149        200                  4.0         2.9



Panel B. Foreign official agency net purchases

                                                                                   $B 2008Q4 2020Q1
 Net U.S. incurrence of liabilities to foreign official agencies                          15     -51
 Long term debt securities
      Treasury bonds and notes                                                               20     -196
      Federally sponsored agency securities                                                -107        31
      Corporate bonds and notes                                                               3        12
 Short term debt securities
      Treasury bills and certificates                                                       194        15
      Federally sponsored agency securities                                                 -67         0
      Negotiable certificates of deposit                                                     -6         2
      Commercial paper and other securities                                                  -6         2
 Equity and investment fund shares                                                           11        36
 Currency and deposits                                                                       12        60
 Other                                                                                      -38       -13
 Note: Corporate bonds and notes include a small amount of transactions in state and local government
 securities and negotiable CDs.




                                                                                                        54
Table 10. The cross-section foreign Treasury sales across countries
Reserve data are from the IMF. Other data is as for Table 8. The table shows country-level regressions of
net purchase of Treasuries regressed against the change in reserve, a dummy for being a hedge fund
domicile (and a UK dummy to capture UK Treasury purchases prior to Brexit).

                                                   Dept. variable:
                                       Net purchase of Treasuries, 2020Q1 ($B)
 Change in reserves, 2020Q1 ($B)          0.934***         0.941***    0.970***
                                            (5.40)           (5.79)      (7.30)
 D(Hedge fund domicile)                                    -17.77**    -16.83***
                                                            (-3.09)      (-3.58)
 D(United Kingdom)                                                     58.04***
                                                                        (5.70)
 Constant                                  -5.506**        -4.157*     -5.094***
                                            (-3.40)         (-2.62)      (-3.91)
 N (countries)                                66              66            66
 R2                                          0.31            0.40          0.61




Table 11. Hedge fund selling
Total long Treasury exposure is from hedge fund Form PF reporting to the Securities and Exchange
Commission, extracted from Figure 61 in Office of Financial Research (2020). Long and short positions in
Treasury note and bond futures are from the CFTC's Commitment of Traders reports. To estimate net
Treasury purchases from holdings changes I assume a return equal to that on the Bloomberg Barclays
Treasury Indices for Treasury securities with >1 year remaining maturity (8.20% for 2020Q1).

                                                      $B     2019Q4     2020Q1
 Total long Treasury exposure                                 1297       1164
 Long positions in Treasury note/bond futures                  306        275
 Estimated Treasury holdings                                   991        889
 Estimated net purchase of Treasuries                                    -183

 Short positions in Treasury note/bond futures                 746         618
 Change in short positions in Treasury note/bond futures                  -127




                                                                                                       55
Appendix Figure 1. Intraday QE announcement effects on yields
Panel A graphs the cumulative return on 10-year and 30-year Treasury futures (with data from kibot.com)
from March 16 to 23, measured from the start of the day on March 16. The vertical lines indicate the March
23, 8 a.m. Federal Reserve announcement. A yield spike corresponds to a futures return trough. The figure
shows the reversal of the return trough on March 19 and 20, with only a modest positive return on the 10-
year future around the March 23 announcement and only a short-lived positive return spike on the 30-year
future around that announcement. Panel B graphs the 10-year Treasury yield around the March 18, 2009
Federal Reserve QE announcement (the figure source is Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011)).
Panel A. Treasury futures, minute-level data, March 16 to March 23, 2020




Panel B. 10-year Treasury yield around March 18, 2009 QE announcement




                                                                                                       56
Appendix Figure 2. Dollar swap lines
The figure illustrates the 10-year Treasury yield and the daily change in the amount outstanding on dollar
liquidity swap lines with foreign central banks.




                                                                                                                          Daily change in USD liq swap outstanding, $ B
                                                                                                                          -25 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                 2
  10yr Treasury yield (nominal)




                                    5                                       19
                                   4 67 1112
                                           13
                                        10 14 18
                                               19
                         1.5




                                  3             20
                                                 21
                                                      24
                                                        26
                                                       2527
                                                                           18
                                                         28 2               19     26
                                                             34           17
               1




                                                               5      13     20
                                                                     12           25
                                                                                 24
                                                                    11             26
                                                                6 10     16     23 27        789      14
                                                                                                     13
                                                                                       31
                                                                                      30    6                     27
                                                                                        123            1517 2022     30
                                                                                                                    29
                                                                                  25           9
                                                                                                        16   21 24 28
                                                                                                               23
                                                                  9
     .5




                                                                                       31
                                                                                                        16    23
                                                                                       27 30                         30
                                                                                  24                    17 20
                                                                                                            21 24 2729
                                                                     11
                                                              3456 910 13 16
                                                                      12    18
                                                                           17 20 23          3 6 10 13       22    28
                                                                                           1     8   14
                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                7
                 0




               01feb2020                         01mar2020                       01apr2020                   01may2020


                                                10yr Treasury yield (nominal)
                                                Daily change in USD liq swap outstanding, $ B




Appendix Figure 3. Weekly change in short Treasury futures positions of levered investors
Data are weekly (Tuesday) from the CFTC and aggregated across all Treasury futures contracts. The
dashed vertical line indicated March 18, 2020, the peak of the Treasury yield spike.




                                                                                                                                                                          57
Appendix Table 1. Treasury holdings, Treasury net purchases and change in currency reserves, by
country
Net purchases by country are for both official and private holders. I calculate them from Treasury
International Capital data on holdings combined with assumptions about returns based on Bloomberg
Barclays Treasury Indices for securities with >1 and <1 year remaining maturity. Data on currency reserves
are from the IMF. I classify the Cayman Islands, British Virgin Island, Bermuda, Ireland, Luxembourg, and
Belgium as hedge fund domiciles. See text for detail. I set reserves to zero for Bermuda and British Virgin
Islands who both use the US dollar.
                                                                     Net purchase     Change in      Hedge
                          Abbre-
 Country                                  Holdings ($B)              of Treasuries     reserves       fund
                          viation
                                                                         ($B)            ($B)       domicile
                                                            Pct
                                    2019Q4    2020Q1                   2020Q1          2020Q1
                                                          change
 China                    CHN        1069.9    1081.6         1.1        -75.9          -42.4
 Cayman Islands           CYM         238.2     209.4       -12.1        -41.2            0.0         Yes
 Brazil                   BRA         281.8     264.4        -6.2        -40.3          -13.7
 Saudi Arabia             SAU         179.8     159.1       -11.5        -32.2          -26.2
 Ireland                  IRL         281.9     271.6        -3.6        -29.4            0.1         Yes
 Luxembourg               LUX         254.6     246.1        -3.3        -25.6            0.0         Yes
 Canada                   CAN         143.3     131.5        -8.2        -22.2            0.8
 South Korea              KOR         121.9     110.8        -9.1        -20.8           -8.7
 India                    IND         162.0     156.5        -3.4        -18.5          17.9
 Belgium                  BEL         207.4     206.1        -0.6        -16.8            0.7
 United Arab Emirates     ARE          40.7      28.0       -31.2        -15.0           -1.1
 Thailand                 THA          90.5      81.8        -9.6        -14.9            2.1
 Sweden                   SWE          48.7      39.5       -19.0        -13.2            0.0
 Hong Kong                HKG         249.7     256.0         2.5        -13.0           -3.7
 Indonesia                IDN          32.2      23.3       -27.7        -11.4           -8.2
 Bermuda                  BMU          71.3      64.2        -9.9        -11.3             0          Yes
 Spain                    ESP          50.4      43.8       -13.2        -10.6           -0.2
 Switzerland              CHE         237.5     244.6         3.0        -10.0           -4.1
 Singapore                SGP         147.9     151.5         2.4         -7.9           -0.3
 Mexico                   MEX          45.3      40.9        -9.8         -7.7            6.8
 Germany                  DEU          78.3      77.3        -1.3         -6.8          10.3
 Russia                   RUS          10.0       3.9       -61.4         -6.5            9.1
 Kuwait                   KWT          43.3      40.1        -7.4         -6.3           -0.4
 Israel                   ISR          43.1      41.1        -4.7         -5.2           -0.1
 Colombia                 COL          31.4      29.3        -6.6         -4.6            0.2
 Taiwan                   TWN         193.1     205.0         6.2         -3.8            2.2
 Italy                    ITA          45.3      44.8        -1.0         -3.8            7.2
 Iraq                     IRQ          32.9      30.7        -6.7         -3.6           -0.2
 Kazakhstan               KAZ           8.7       5.7       -35.2         -3.2            0.8
 Chile                    CHL          30.8      30.1        -2.0         -2.8           -2.7
 Malaysia                 MYS          14.3      13.2        -7.9         -2.3           -1.9
 British Virgin Islands   VGB          39.2      40.0         1.8         -2.0             0          Yes
 Bahamas                  BHS           8.9       7.4       -17.5         -2.0            0.3
 Finland                  FIN           6.6       5.6       -14.5         -1.5           -0.3
 Denmark                  DNK          16.9      16.8        -0.2         -1.4          -11.7
 Oman                     OMN           7.1       6.4        -9.8         -1.3           -0.3
 Netherlands              NLD          65.1      69.1         6.2         -1.2            1.6
 Peru                     PER          19.3      19.9         3.2         -0.9         no data




                                                                                                        58
Guatemala            GTM      6.9      6.5    -5.3   -0.9      0.5
Morocco              MAR      4.7      4.3    -9.1   -0.8     -0.7
Argentina            ARG      6.6      6.0    -9.8   -0.8     -1.4
Portugal             PRT      5.3      5.0    -4.8   -0.7      2.1
Panama               PAN      3.6      3.2   -10.8   -0.5     -0.7
Barbados             BRB      2.1      1.7   -19.0   -0.5      0.0
Costa Rica           CRI      1.9      1.7   -13.2   -0.4     -0.9
Austria              AUT      4.6      4.6     0.0   -0.3      2.3
Trinidad & Tobago    TTO      3.2      3.2     2.2   -0.1     -0.3
Bolivia              BOL      0.3      0.2   -24.4   -0.1     -0.4
Venezuela            VEN      0.3      0.3   -10.7   0.0    no data
Jamaica              JAM      0.7      0.7     3.9   0.0       0.1
Haiti                HTI      0.3      0.2    -2.0   0.0    no data
Algeria              DZA      0.7      0.7     0.0   0.0      -3.8
Liberia              LBR      0.1      0.1     5.2   0.0       0.0
Ecuador              ECU      0.3      0.3     6.6   0.0      -1.4
New Zealand          NZL      7.1      7.6     7.7   0.0       5.7
Cyprus               CYP      0.2      0.3    26.1   0.0       0.1
Bahrain              BHR      1.3      1.5    15.2   0.2      -1.8
Uruguay              URY      9.3     10.1     8.2   0.3       0.8
Turkey               TUR      2.0      2.5    25.9   0.4     -13.5
Norway               NOR     90.1     98.0     8.8   0.5       4.1
Honduras             HND      1.8      2.4    39.4   0.5       0.3
Paraguay             PRY      0.6      1.2   105.0   0.6       0.2
Australia            AUS     41.8     46.3    10.9   1.5      -2.8
South Africa         ZAF     13.8     16.5    19.4   1.6      -2.6
Dominican Republic   DOM      0.4      3.3   771.5   2.9       0.5
Philippines          PHL     34.8     43.1    24.0   5.6       1.0
France               FRA    127.7    156.0    22.2   19.0      9.8
Japan                JPN   1155.2   1272.6    10.2   27.3    42.4
United Kingdom       GBR    392.1    469.7    19.8   49.7     -3.4




                                                                      59
