                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE OPIOID SAFETY INITIATIVE AND VETERAN SUICIDES

                                       Joshua C. Tibbitts
                                      Benjamin W. Cowan

                                      Working Paper 29139
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29139


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2021




This research was supported by the Institute for Research and Education to Advance Community
Health (IREACH) at Washington State University. We thank Jonathan Zhang, David Bradford,
Jill McCluskey, Shanthi Manian, and seminar participants at the NBER spring Health Economics
meeting, 2021 ASHEcon annual conference, Washington State University, and the Health
Education Action Lab at Southern Utah University for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joshua C. Tibbitts and Benjamin W. Cowan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Opioid Safety Initiative and Veteran Suicides
Joshua C. Tibbitts and Benjamin W. Cowan
NBER Working Paper No. 29139
August 2021
JEL No. I12,I18

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the relationship between opioid diverting policy and suicides among the veteran
population. The opioid epidemic of the past two decades has had devastating health consequences
among U.S. veterans and military personnel. In 2013, the Veterans Health Administration (VA)
implemented the Opioid Safety Initiative (OSI) with the goal of discouraging prescription opioid
dependence among VA patients. Between 2012 and 2017, prescription opioids dispensed by the
VA fell 41% (VA, 2018). Because this involved the aggressive curtailing of opioid prescriptions
for many VA patients, OSI may have had a detrimental effect on veterans' mental health leading
to suicide in extreme cases. In addition, because rural veterans have much higher rates of VA
enrollment, more prescription opioid use and abuse, and lower rates of substance abuse and
mental health treatment utilization, we expect any effect of OSI on veteran suicides to be
concentrated in rural areas. We find that OSI raised the veteran suicide rate relative to the non-
veteran ("civilian") rate with rural veterans suffering the lion's share of the increase. We estimate
that OSI raised the rural veteran suicide rate by a little over one-third between 2013 and 2018.


Joshua C. Tibbitts
525 S. Center St.
Rexburg, ID 83460
United States
joshua.tibbitts@wsu.edu

Benjamin W. Cowan
School of Economic Sciences
Washington State University
103E Hulbert Hall
Pullman, WA 99164
and NBER
ben.cowan@wsu.edu
1. Introduction:

Over the last few decades, the United States has seen a surge of substance abuse disorders related to
opioids. From 1999 to 2018, almost 450,000 people died from an opioid-related drug overdose; of the
67,367 fatal drug overdoses in 2018, 70 percent were opioid-related (WONDER, 2020). The broad
detrimental effects of this crisis have been heterogeneous. For example, individuals living in the most
rural areas are 87 percent more likely to receive an opioid prescription than individuals in urban areas
(García, 2019); opioid-related poisonings of rural residents have increased at three times the rate of
those who live in metropolitan areas (Keyes, et al., 2014). Veterans have also been particularly
susceptible to this crisis with rural veterans faring worse than their urban counterparts (Baser et al.,
2014; Finlay et al., 2021).
        In response to the opioid epidemic, policymakers have implemented measures to limit the
supply of prescription opioids by deterring patients from "doctor shopping" and enhancing physician
accountability in their opioid prescribing practices. These measures, of which state-level Prescription
Drug Monitoring Policies (PDMP's) are a prominent example, have indeed resulted in reductions of
prescription opioids in recent years (Bao et al., 2016; Deyo et al., 2018; Haffajee et al., 2018; Kilby,
2015; Moyo et al., 2017; Suffoletto et al., 2018). Buchmueller and Carey (2018) find that "must-access"
PDMP's reduce opioid misuse among Medicare recipients. However, there is also evidence that
supply-side restrictions have led to an increase in illicit opioid abuse and fatalities (Alpert, Powell, and
Pacula, 2018; Delcher et al., 2016; Meinhofer, 2017).
        The Veterans Health Administration (VA)--which includes roughly half of the total veteran
population, including 93 percent of service-connected veterans (i.e., those injured during their service)
(NCVAS, 2020), as well as many current military personnel--oversaw a staggering increase in the
number of individuals treated with opioids from the turn of the century until it hit a peak in 2012 (see
Figure 1). From 2004 to 2012, the percentage of veterans prescribed an opioid increased from 18.9 to
33.4 (Mosher et al., 2014). Of all veterans receiving opioid prescriptions in 2012, more than one-third
were for longer than 90 days ("chronic use") (VA, 2015). The high percentage of long-term opioid
prescriptions among veterans is associated with a high incidence of opioid use disorder (OUD) and
opioid-related mortality (Baser et al., 2014; Bohnert et al., 2011; Axelrod, 2013).
        In an attempt to combat the growing opioid crisis among veterans, in 2013, the VA
implemented the Opioid Safety Initiative (OSI), which was primarily designed to curtail opioids
prescriptions, especially high dose prescriptions (a daily dose of more than 100 morphine milligram


                                                     1
equivalents, or MME's), long-term prescriptions (greater than 90 days), and concomitant prescriptions
(e.g., opioids and benzodiazepines) for comorbid maladies (Sandbrink, 2019; GAO, 2018; Good,
2017). 1 Curtailment initiatives included establishing a database of patients' prescription histories (with
a "clinical leader" at each facility tracking metrics to promote safer prescribing; see Lin et al., 2017),
increasing drug screening among patients, and encouraging physicians to substitute toward alternative
pain management practices through VA-instituted education programs and directives. Additional
directives have been added over time. 2 Coinciding with the rollout of the policy, the number of opioids
dispensed immediately began to diminish. From 2012 to 2017, the number of unique VA patients
prescribed an opioid decreased by 41 percent (VA, 2018); as of the third quarter of 2020, the decrease
was 64 percent compared to 2012 (VA, 2021), indicating that the VA continues to aggressively limit
the use of prescription opioids among veterans.
         In this paper, we examine the effects of OSI on veteran and military personnel suicides.
Despite the policy's apparent success in reducing the number of opioids dispensed, there have been
accusations from within and without the VA Health System that OSI policy encouraged physicians to
"cut off" veterans from their pain medications. 3 The curtailment of opioid prescriptions may increase
the risk of suicide due to mental and physical anguish related to withdrawal and physical pain
(Borgschulte, Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall, 2018; Demidenko et al., 2017; Kuramoto et al., 2012).
Because of the high incidence of chronic pain with corresponding large quantities of prescription
opioids dispensed among veterans, this population is acutely susceptible to these increased suicide
risks (Oquendo and Volkow, 2018; Johnson et al., 2015; Toblin et al., 2014; Johannes et al., 2010;
Cesur, Sabia, and Bradford, 2019; Baser et al., 2014; Kang et al., 2015).
         Other studies point to the discontinuance of prescription drugs as a risk factor for suicide and
overdose, but these studies do not establish a causal link between these variables (Demidenko et al.,
2017; Kuramoto et al., 2012; Oliva et al., 2020). We investigate the question of whether OSI led to an
increase in veteran suicides with a triple difference (DDD) empirical model. Our outcome is county-
level suicide rates per 100,000 individuals in both non-veteran ("civilian") and veteran/military


1 OSI was piloted in 2012 in five small regions in Minnesota, which is a state that is not included in our dataset.
2
  See Figure 2, which shows a timeline of OSI implementation and additional directives.
3 In 2011, prior to national OSI implementation, the Minneapolis, St. Cloud, and Fargo VAs pioneered OSI, resulting in

reduced high-dose opioid prescriptions by 90% prior to 2014; long-term opioid prescriptions were reduced by 78%.
The Star Tribune, a Minneapolis newspaper published "Cut Off ­ Veterans Struggle to Live with VA's New Painkiller
Policy," which quotes several addiction specialists accusing the VA of creating addicts and then cutting off their supply.
Additionally, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) alleged that the VA failed to establish "safe" tapering
programs: https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/692061.pdf.

                                                            2
personnel populations. OSI only affected VA users, so civilians serve as a control group in our analysis.
We note, however, that opioid prescription among the general population also peaked in 2012 and
began falling thereafter. 4 Nevertheless, because of veterans' underlying health conditions, high initial
per-capita opioid use rates, and other factors discussed in detail below, we expect the curtailment of
opioid prescriptions via OSI to have unique effects on the veteran population relative to civilians.
           We further differentiate civilian and veteran populations by urban-rural status. This distinction
is made due to the vast differences in health care options, treatment availability, opioid prescription
rates, and cultural norms between these populations, which should result in differential impacts of
OSI on suicide rates among rural and urban veterans, as we argue in Section 1.3. We exploit the
national implementation of OSI in 2013 to identify the effects of OSI on rural and urban veterans
relative to their civilian counterparts.
           We first show that prior to the implementation of OSI, trends in suicides are similar between
veterans/military personnel and civilians. However, after the implementation of OSI, the suicide rate
for veteran/military personnel increases relative to the civilian rate, and this effect is concentrated
among rural veterans. In the year of implementation (2013), rural veteran suicides increased roughly
one-third of the pre-treatment mean relative to the base group (urban civilians); this effect was 37%
in 2018. Urban veterans also experienced statistically significant increases in suicides starting in 2015
on the order of 13-21 percent. These findings are robust to controlling for different sets of time-
variant explanatory variables and modeling choices, as we show in Section 5.
           We also show how OSI is related to other forms of "violent" death (according to the CDC's
definition) in Section 5.3. Other violent death types are generally not affected by OSI (as expected),
but because suicides compose a large fraction (about 75%) of all violent deaths, OSI has similar effects
on all violent deaths to the ones it has on suicides. Because accidental overdose deaths are not classified
as violent according to the CDC, our data does not contain them. Thus, one concern is that suicides
take the place of accidental overdose deaths that would have occurred had veterans not been restricted
in their opioid use. For reasons discussed in Section 5.5, we view this as improbable, particularly
because veteran overdose deaths rose substantially over our sample period. Since other papers have
found that prescription opioid restrictions have led to increases in overdose deaths in the general
population (e.g., Alpert, Powell, and Pacula, 2018), it is possible that our results understate the full
effect that OSI has had on veteran mortality through 2018.


4   See, for example, https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/maps/rxrate-maps.html.

                                                         3
2.1      Background: Veterans and Opioids
Opioid-related overdose mortality rates for veterans are nearly twice as high as for civilians (Bohnert
et al., 2011) and the prevalence of substance abuse disorders for veterans is almost seven times higher
(Baser et al., 2014). In 2015, it was estimated that approximately 68,000 veterans suffered from OUD
(Childress, 2016; Connolly, 2018) and the overall overdose rate per 100,000 veterans had risen 50
percent compared to 2010 (Lin et al., 2019).
         Physical and psychological trauma stemming from stressful simulations and combat
operations appears to contribute to the opioid crisis among veterans (Bennett et al., 2013; Cesur, Sabia,
and Bradford, 2019). 5 Veterans are 40% more likely to suffer severe pain than non-veterans
(Sandbrink, 2019), and among those treated at VA facilities, over 50% suffer from chronic pain
(Daigh, 2015). As of 2011, half of the veteran population diagnosed with chronic non-cancer pain
were prescribed an opioid; 57% of those prescriptions were for long-term use (Edlund et al. 2014).
         Because many veterans suffer from comorbid physical and mental maladies (e.g., physical
trauma and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, or PTSD), especially those veterans who have combat
experience, concurrent use of prescription opioids and Central Nervous System (CNS) depressants
are relatively common; 27% of veterans who were prescribed opioids were also jointly prescribed
benzodiazepines, a CNS depressant (Park et al. 2015). The joint use of opioids and benzodiazepines
increase the probability of emergency room visits and inpatient admission due to opioid overdose
(Sun et al., 2017). The presence of both types of medications has been present in roughly half of all
veteran opioid overdose deaths (Park et al. 2015).
2.2      Background: The Opioid Safety Initiative (OSI)
To mitigate the destruction caused by overprescribing opiate-derived analgesics to millions of
veterans, the VA instituted the Opioid Safety Initiative (OSI) nationwide in 2013. This was followed
by "Academic Detailing" initiatives in 2014, which provided opioid prescribing education for
physicians affiliated with the VA. 6 Next came the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act
(CARA) in 2016, which mandated that all physicians within the VA conduct inquiries into state PDMP
databases at least once a year for their patients (GAO, 2018). Training for all VA opioid prescribers
became mandatory in that year as well (Good, 2017).


5
  Although approximately 2.1 million troops have been deployed to and withdrawn from the Middle East since 2001
(Wenger et al., 2018), overall U.S. force sizes in the Middle East began to decline starting in 2007; the decline was
particularly rapid from 2010 to 2012 (Kane, 2016).
6 Good (2017) writes that physicians who engaged in Academic Detailing decreased their prescribing of high-dose

opioids by 58 percent compared with a 34 percent reduction among physicians who did not.

                                                            4
        The mechanisms by which the VA may have reduced prescribed opioids includes national
opioid databases ("OSI Dashboards"), which utilize the VA's Electronic Health Records and includes
state PDMP databases. Physicians are able to track their patients' medication history, urine drug
screening, and alternative forms of chronic pain therapy (Petzel, 2014). The VA tracks "key clinical
indicators," which include the number of unique patients dispensed an opioid, the number of patients
on concomitant prescriptions of benzodiazepines and opioids, unique patients prescribed long-term
opioid therapy, and mean daily opioid dosages. Using these metrics, high-risk patients are identified
(Petzel, 2014).
        Since the implementation of OSI, VA physicians were strongly encouraged, through newly
instituted pain management guidelines, to use alternative means to treat pain and to avoid opioid
prescriptions where possible (GAO, 2018; Westanmo et al., 2015; VA, 2020). Physicians within the
VA who do not apply the prescribing guidelines initiated by OSI are identified and may be subject to
VA counseling, education, or other actions (Petzel, 2014). There is concern within and without the
VA that patients who are rapidly tapered from opioids could experience adverse outcomes
(Demidenko et al., 2017; Dubin et al., 2017). Some physicians have apparently set arbitrary dose limits
for stable patients who were on chronic opioid treatments (Good, 2017). Notably, as published in the
VA/Department of Defense (DOD) Clinical Practice Guideline for Management of Opioid Therapy
for Chronic Pain, physicians were initially instructed to taper opioid therapy patients at a rate of 20-
50 percent per week (VA, 2010; Westanmo, 2015), which is a much higher rate than the 10 percent
per month suggested by the CDC (CDC, 2016).
        OSI has been highly successful at reducing opioid prescriptions within the VA. Since its
rollout, opioid-related prescription measures, including high dose prescriptions, long-term
prescriptions, concomitant prescriptions, and the number of unique patients dispensed an opioid have
steadily decreased (Sandbrink, 2019; see Figure 1).
2.3     Background: Veterans and Suicides
Over the same time period as the U.S. opioid epidemic grew, suicides also increased at a troubling rate
(Curtin, et al., 2016; Hedegaard, 2018; Case and Deaton, 2015). Suicides involving opioids, i.e.
intentional fatal opioid poisonings, were twice as high in the year 2014 as they were in 1999 (Braden
et al., 2017). As with the opioid epidemic, the population of veterans and military personnel are acutely
vulnerable to the current suicide crisis. Compared to the general population, veterans' risk of suicide
is 41 to 61 percent higher (Kang et al., 2015; see also Bryan et al., 2015; Maguen et al., 2011; Kim et
al., 2012; Ilgen et al., 2013).

                                                   5
         Individuals who suffer from OUD are 13 times more likely to die by suicide (Wilcox et al.,
2004) and prescription opioid misuse is significantly associated with suicidal ideation, suicide planning,
and suicide attempts (Ashrafioun et al., 2017). Thus, opioid use and abuse may have a causal link to
suicides. Indeed, Eichmeyer and Zhang (2020) find that VA patients who are assigned to primary care
providers with a high tendency to prescribe opioids experience an increase in the likelihood of
attempted suicide over the next three years. However, forced opioid discontinuation may exacerbate
the risk of suicide for vulnerable patients, especially within the first three months of discontinuation
(Oliva et al., 2020; Talari and Yara, 2020). 7
         Citing evidence from an "alarming increase in reports of patient suffering and suicide" due to
forced opioid tapering within the VA, the International Stakeholder Community of Pain Experts and
Leaders recommend that policies aimed at prohibiting or minimizing forced opioid tapering be
enacted (Darnall et al., 2019).          OSI encourages physicians to reduce opioid prescriptions and
implement tapering programs (VA, 2010); those veterans with mental health and substance use
disorders are more likely to endure opioid tapering and discontinuation within the VA (Oliva et al.,
2020; Vanderlip et al., 2014). An estimated 75 percent of all clinician-initiated opioid discontinuations
within the VA were the result of substance abuse-related aberrant behavior exhibited by the patient
(Lovejoy et al., 2017). 8 Additionally, there are concerns that physicians have initiated forced opioid
tapers to get patients under a dosage threshold for the primary purpose of improving OSI
performance measures (Gellad et al., 2017).
2.4      Background: Rural-Urban Differences in Potential Impacts of OSI
Almost 25 percent of the total veteran population live in rural communities (VA's ORH, 2014), while
19 percent of all Americans do (VA's ORD, 2020). 9 Rural veterans also have comparatively high VA
utilization rates: nearly 60 percent receive their health care through the VA (VA's ORH, 2014) whereas




7 Oliva et al. (2020) show that the risk of suicide following opioid discontinuation increases with the length of time
engaged in opioid treatment. The hazard ratios for committing suicide after stopping opioid treatment ranged from 2.02
for patients on opioids less than 30 days to 7.99 for patients on opioids 400 days or more. The risk of suicide does not
appear to stabilize until 6 to 12 months following opioid discontinuation.
8 85 percent of all veterans who discontinued long-term opioid therapy did so for clinician-initiated reasons (Lovejoy et

al., 2017).
9 NOSORH (2014) states that 30% of veterans lived in rural areas and 36% of all enrolled VA veterans were rural

veterans (https://nosorh.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/NOSORH-Rural-Veterans-Health-Guide-for-SORH.pdf).

                                                            6
only 37 percent of urban veterans do (VA's ORD, 2020). 10 This is one reason we expect VA policy
to disproportionately affect rural veterans compared with urban veterans.
          Rural veterans have also been more adversely affected by the concurrent opioid and suicide
crises.   When compared to their urban counterparts, veterans living in rural communities are
prescribed over 30 percent more opioids per capita; most of this difference is accounted for by long-
term use (Lund et al., 2019), which OSI has focused on curtailing. Higher per capita opioid
prescription rates and rural dwelling are both risk factors for opioid use disorder and opioid-related
mortality (Chou et al., 2015; Von Korff et al., 2011; Keyes et al., 2014; Turvey et al., 2020). Despite
their higher rates of opioid use, rural veterans receive medication-assisted treatment and other
evidenced-based treatments for addiction at a lower rate than urban veterans (Edmonds et al., 2020;
GAO, 2019; Smalley et al., 2010).
          In terms of suicide, the rural veteran population is at higher risk (by 20 - 22 percent) compared
to urban veterans, even after controlling for availability of mental health services, such as distance to
mental health treatment centers (McCarthy et al., 2012). Several studies have shown that high rates
of suicide and comparatively low rates of treatment for rural veterans are a result of not just treatment
availability but also factors like economic circumstances, comparatively lower quality of life, and rural
culture (McCarthy et al., 2012; Mohamed et al., 2009 Teich et al., 2017; Wallace et al., 2006). 11 Oliva
et al. (2020) found that rural veterans are at a greater risk of suicide following opioid discontinuation
than urban veterans. In sum, the rural veteran population has higher VA utilization rates, opioid
prescription rates (which have dramatically decreased following the implementation of OSI), rates of
suicide, and lower addiction and mental health treatment utilization rates compared with their urban
counterparts. For these reasons, we allow for different estimates of the effects of OSI on suicides by
urban-rural status in our regression analysis.


3. Data
For our main dependent variable of interest, suicides, we obtained data from the Center for Disease
Control's National Violent Death Reporting System's Restricted Access Database (CDC-NVDRS-
RAD) which links data from vital records, coroner/medical examiners, and law enforcement agencies

10Of the rural veteran population, 56 percent suffer from at least one service-connected condition. The rate of VA
enrollment among service-connected disabled veterans is over 93 percent (VA, 2017; see
https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/Quickfacts/VA_Utilization_Profile_2017.pdf).
11Many of these studies show that rural veterans are less likely than their urban counterparts to utilize mental health
services, which includes services for substance abuse disorders.

                                                             7
in participating states. This dataset is the most comprehensive data available for violent deaths,
including suicides, homicides, unintentional firearm-related deaths, and violent deaths in which intent
cannot be determined (NVDRS, 2018). 12 We examine how OSI affects these other forms of violent
death in a supplementary analysis in Section 5.3.
         The NVDRS restricted-access database includes veteran status and county of residence for all
reported violent deaths. For our analysis below, we aggregated data on individual suicide incidents to
the county-year level for veterans and non-veterans separately, as described in the next section. 17
states began participating in NVDRS prior to OSI implementation in 2013, and these are the ones we
include in our sample (other states' data became available only after OSI was implemented and are left
out). 13 We have data on 16 states starting in 2010 and data on Ohio starting in 2011. When we leave
Ohio out of our analysis to have a perfectly balanced panel, our results are very similar to those shown
in the paper (available upon request). A map depicting the states in our sample is included in Appendix
Figure A1. The NVDRS codes a death as a suicide if intent can be determined. Because this dataset
only includes "violent" deaths, accidental overdoses are not accounted for; thus, suicides may be
undercounted to the extent that some overdoses are purposeful but intent cannot be determined.
         We gather population, demographic, and socio-economic variables for each county-year for
both veterans and non-veterans from the American Community Survey (ACS). These variables are
discussed in the next section. Prior literature on opioid supply shocks and suicide (Borgschulte,
Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall, 2018) shows that policies aimed at reducing the supply of opioids,
when combined with geographical proximity to addiction treatment centers, act to reduce suicide. 14
Therefore, following Borgschulte, Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall (2018) and Swensen (2015), we
used NAICS codes 621420 and 623220 from the Consumer Business Patterns (CBP) to identify
inpatient and outpatient treatment centers in each county-year.
         We use the rural-urban continuum code developed by the US Department of Agriculture
Economic Research Service (USDA, 2013) to distinguish urban and rural counties in our analysis.
Counties are classified based on 9 categories that are determined by their population size and whether


12 Klugman, Condran, and Wray (2013) find that elected coroners are associated with slightly lower official suicide rates
than appointed coroners or medical examiners. However, this does not affect estimates of the social determinants of
suicide in their analysis. In our setting, even if rural counties are more likely to have elected coroners, this would likely
only affect our estimates of OSI on suicide rates if there were differences by veteran status that changed over time.
13
   States in our sample include Alaska, Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New
Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Utah, Virginia, and Wisconsin.
14 See also Corredor-Waldron and Currie (2021), who show that drug-related ER visits are sensitive to the opening and

closing of substance abuse treatment facilities and that these effects are largest in under-served areas.

                                                              8
they are adjacent to a metropolitan county. As in Kaplan et al. (2012), we assigned counties as urban
for classification codes 1-3 (metropolitan counties) and rural for codes 4-9 (non-metropolitan
counties).
        Finally, to control for other prescription opioid policy supply shocks over our sample period,
we gathered user access date data for Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs from Borgschulte,
Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall (2018), the Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System (PDAPS), and
the National Alliance for Model State Drug Laws (NAMSDL). For must-access PDMP information,
we use data published by Borgschulte, Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall (2018), Buchmueller and
Carey (2018), and the New Jersey Prescription Monitoring Program (NJPMP).


4. Empirical Strategy
Due to the large share of veterans and military personnel who suffer from comorbid ailments (i.e.,
chronic pain and PTSD) leading to substance abuse disorder, our hypothesis is that veteran opioid
users' suicide choices will be affected by the negative supply shock to prescription opioids due to OSI.
For reasons described above, we expect that rural veterans will be more affected by OSI than urban
veterans. To investigate these possibilities, we use a generalized triple difference (DDD) regression
model. Our treatment group is veterans and military personnel, and our control group is non-
veterans/civilians. The treatment policy is OSI, which only affects those who receive healthcare
through the VA. The vast majority of these are veterans/military personnel, though a tiny fraction of
civilians receive care through the VA, such as immediate family members (VA, 2017). Some veterans
do not receive healthcare through the VA, but we do not observe source of healthcare in our suicide
data, and the choice to receive care through the VA may be endogenous with respect to OSI. Thus,
we estimate the effect of OSI on the incidence of suicide among all veterans/military personnel
relative to non-veterans/civilians (we refer to the former group simply as "veterans" and the latter
group as "civilians" below). We then allow the effect of OSI to also vary by whether a suicide victim
lived in a rural county.
        The specific regression equation in our analysis is as follows:


 
             =  +  + 1   + 2     + 2018
                                   =2011(   ) +
 100 

2018         2018
=2011(   ) + =2011(     ) +   +  .                                                   (1)




                                                   9
The unit of observation in our study is a county by year by veteran status (that is, for each county-
year, there are two observations: one is the suicide rate among veterans, the other is the rate among
civilians).  and  represent county and year fixed effects, respectively; county fixed effects
control for time-invariant differences by county, and year fixed effects control for secular changes
underlying the determinants of suicide. The coefficients 1 and 1 + 2 measure baseline (2010)
differences in the suicide rate of urban and rural veterans, respectively, relative to civilians. The 
terms measure how the suicide rate evolves for urban veterans, relative to urban civilians, over time
(2011-2018). The  terms measure how the suicide rate evolves for rural civilians relative to urban
civilians over time. Finally, the  term measures how the suicide rate evolves for rural veterans
relative urban veterans, all relative to the same urban-rural difference in civilian suicide rates. The
treatment year is 2013, which is the year that OSI was nationally implemented; we are interested in
how the parameters  ,  , and  evolve prior to and after 2013. Prior to 2013, we can observe
whether there are differential pre-treatment trends by (rural) veteran status, which would cast doubt
on whether post-treatment effects are truly due to OSI.

        We again note that we are identifying the effects of OSI on veterans relative to a civilian
population that also experienced a peak in opioid prescriptions in 2012 and then saw a continuous
drop starting in 2013. We reason that the effects of opioid diversion should have a stronger effect
on veteran than civilian suicides due to: 1) veterans' higher opioid consumption to begin with; 2)
veterans' more severe underlying health conditions (some of which contribute to opioid
consumption in the first place); and 3) the fact that opioid prescribing (particularly of the long-term
variety) among VA patients declined more rapidly after 2012 than it did in the general population
(Minigeshi and Frakt, 2018).

        In Equation (1),  represents a vector of time-variant controls including an indicator for
whether a county is located in a state with a PDMP and a separate one for a mandatory PDMP, the
number of addiction treatment centers (sum of outpatient and inpatient) in a county, interactions
between PDMP indicators and the number of treatment centers; and ACS estimates for both
veteran and civilian populations within the county for: percent of the population aged 18-34 (the age
group for which the risk of suicide is greatest), percent female, percent black, the unemployment
rate, median income, and percent that have some college experience. We also include a full set of
interactions between veteran status as well as rural county status and all other controls in the


                                                   10
model. 15 All regressions are weighted by total county population and standard errors are clustered
by county.

         In addition to a linear specification, like Borgschulte et al. (2018), we estimate our model using
a Poisson Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimator (QMLE), where the dependent variable is the count
of suicides for each county and year (with veteran/military and civilian suicides offset by their
respective populations). Santos-Silva and Tenreyro (2006, 2011) lay out the attractive properties of
this estimator, including that it relies only on the correct specification of the conditional mean and its
strong performance under a variety of simulations including data-generating processes with many
zeros for the dependent variable.


5. Trends and Descriptive Statistics
Graphical analysis in Figure 3 based on raw suicide rates shows that although the suicide rate is roughly
twice as high for urban (rural) veterans as for urban (rural) civilians, trends in suicide rates for all
groups are similar prior to 2013. This suggests that civilians offer a reasonable counterfactual for
veterans and military personnel in a DD framework. Trends for these groups begin to diverge in
2013, the year of national OSI implementation; in particular, there is a large jump in the suicide rate
of rural veterans compared with other groups, and starting in 2015, the gap between urban veterans
and both civilian groups also widens. 16 We return to these points below when discussing the results
of our formal regression models.
         Table 1 provides pre-treatment descriptive statistics for veterans and non-veterans by
rural/urban status. The differences in suicides per 100,000 between veterans and civilians shown in
this table are consistent with the literature (Castro and Kintzle, 2014; Kang et al., 2015; Sher and
Yehuda, 2015). 17 The vast majority of veterans are male, and as a group they are much older than
civilians. Bachelor's completion rates are similar across groups, and veterans fare somewhat better on
average in terms of labor-market indicators (the unemployment rate and median income), likely owing
somewhat to their age and gender profile. 18




15
   Veteran median income was missing for 380 counties in 2015. These missing values were replaced by the average
veteran median income in 2014 and 2016 in their respective counties.
16 In Appendix Figure A2, we show raw suicide trends for these four groups going back to 2004.
17 Suicide rates for VA-enrolled veterans are higher than non-VA veterans (VA, 2019).
18 Poorer economic conditions are associated with higher suicide rates (Denney et al., 2009; Tondo et al., 2006), but at

least based on raw averages this would not seem to be the dominant explanation for the veteran-civilian suicide gap.

                                                            11
            When looking at veterans and civilians across urban-rural status, we see that rural
veterans/military personnel and civilians have worse outcomes in terms of suicide, economic well-
being, and addiction treatment availability (at least in terms of the number of treatment facilities in
their county) when compared to their urban counterparts. For example, the mean suicide rate per
100,000, median income, and unemployment for rural veterans is 32.74, $30,955, and 8.09 percent,
respectively; in comparison, urban veterans suffer from 28.02 suicides per 100,000, earn $41,787 in
median income, and have a 7.28 percent unemployment rate. These differences are consistent with
the literature cited above.
       Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for both veterans and civilians differentiated between
periods prior to and post-OSI implementation. The veteran suicide rate per 100,000 prior to OSI was
28.81 and increased to 33.62 after implementation (a 17 percent increase), whereas the civilian suicide
rate increased from 13.55 prior to OSI to 15.11 after OSI (a 12 percent increase). Additionally, the
large increase in the suicide rate among veterans does not at first blush appear to be a product of
declining economic circumstances, as there is little change in average income and unemployment that
occurred from before to after OSI implementation. This suggests there are other factors driving the
relative increase in veteran/military suicides.



6. Results
6.2         Baseline Results
Our main regression results are displayed in Table 3, where we present the comparative impact of OSI
on suicides among veterans/military personnel and civilians. Column 1 in this table shows OLS
estimates without any additional controls ( ) included in the regression equation and column 2
shows the coefficient estimates with the additional controls described in Section 3. Estimates for each
of our four groups (urban/rural, civilian/veteran) are plotted for the specification with controls in
Figure 4. 19
            OLS estimates without controls show no consistent trend in urban civilian (base group)
suicides until after 2013, when suicides increase modestly relative to 2010. When controls are included
(column 2), these yearly differences shrink and largely become statistically insignificant. Rural civilians
(see the coefficients on year*rural) experience somewhat elevated suicide rates in the years following



19   Difference-in-differences estimates for rural residents only are displayed in Appendix Table A2.

                                                              12
2010 relative to urban civilians when controls are not included. When controls are included, coefficient
signs switch from positive to negative but there is no clear trend in magnitudes after 2010.
         With respect to the differential evolution for urban veteran suicides relative to urban civilian
suicides, estimates with and without controls tell a very similar story: veteran suicides are elevated in
all post-2010 years, but after 2014 the effects jump in magnitude substantially and become statistically
significant at the 5% level or better. In the case of column 2 (controls included), the effect in 2015 is
3.68 suicides per 100,000 (a 13% increase relative to the pre-treatment mean); by 2018, the effect is
4.62 (16%). We note that we do not see immediate effects of OSI (implemented in 2013) when it
comes to urban veteran suicides. Because of lower VA enrollment and opioid prescription rates among
this group, it may be that effects of OSI become evident only after the policy has had a chance to
grow in scope, which it did from 2013 to the present as opioid-related prescribing has continually
decreased coinciding with Academic Detailing and the implementation of CARA. 20
         Our triple difference estimates, which measure any difference in suicides that rural veterans
experience with respect to OSI compared to urban veterans, all relative to the same difference among
civilians, are displayed at the end of Table 3. In this case, the findings are quite stark: while year effects
prior to 2013 are small and statistically insignificant, they jump greatly in magnitude in 2013 and remain
similar through 2016 before waning somewhat in 2017 and 2018. In 2013, the difference in suicides
between rural and urban veterans (relative to the urban-rural civilian difference) increased by 11.26
per 100,000 compared with 2010. This represents an increase of 34% relative to the pre-treatment
mean for rural veterans. Effects in subsequent years are similar (albeit somewhat smaller) in both
specifications through 2016. It is important to note that these effects are on top of estimated effects
for all veterans, which increase themselves from 2015 to 2017 and remain relatively large in 2018. This
is evident in Figure 4, which shows that rural veteran suicides continue an upward trajectory after 2013
and stabilize after 2016.
         The immediate, large effect of OSI on rural veteran suicides in 2013 occurs even though the
policy was officially implemented only in August of that year. We believe the reason for this is twofold:
first, OSI was chartered by the Under Secretary for Health in August of the previous year after being
piloted by several regions in Minnesota (Clancy, 2015). Therefore, physicians were aware that OSI
was to be implemented nationwide in 2013. Additionally, from Figure 2, we see that unique patients


20
  From 2012 to 2020, the VA has reduced overall patients dispensed an opioid by 64%, co-prescriptions of opioids and
benzodiazepines by 87%, patients on long-term opioids by 70%, and patients on high dose opioid regimens (greater than
or equal to 100 MED) by 80% (VA, 2020).

                                                         13
dispensed an opioid reached a maximum point in the fourth quarter of 2012. Starting in the first
quarter of 2013, we begin to see reductions in VA opioid prescribing that pre-dated the national
implementation of OSI. Hence, it appears that VA physicians were aware of the policy and likely
began changing their opioid prescribing behavior in anticipation of OSI throughout the first 7 months
of 2013. Second, as described above, suicide risks following opioid discontinuation are highest within
the first three months (Demidenko et al., 2017). Furthermore, veterans who were initially forced to
taper or discontinue their opioid prescriptions were often the most vulnerable: those with unstable
addictions or who had displayed substance-abuse aberrant behavior (Lovejoy et al., 2017). These
factors combined suggest the immediate impact of the policy we observe for rural veterans is plausible.
        The growing effects of OSI on both urban and rural veteran suicide rates over most of our
sample period may be due to the evolution of OSI policy over time. After implementation of OSI in
2013, VA prescription opioid rates, including unique patients receiving opioids, high-dose prescription
opioids, concomitant prescribing of opioids and benzodiazepines, and long-term prescription opioids,
decline in each successive year; the drastic decrease in these opioid-related metrics, which the VA
monitored after OSI implementation, coincide with a greater emphasis on Academic Detailing, which
educates VA physicians on VA norms for opioid-related prescribing. As opioid prescriptions
continued to decrease, including by way of more tapering and discontinuation programs, an increasing
number of veterans likely became affected by the policy, which resulted in a greater number of veteran
suicides.
        A countervailing force is that the number of veterans exposed to both the lax opioid regime
from before OSI and the much stricter one after it should diminish over time. Since the post-OSI
regime could help prevent suicides by making it less likely that veterans become dependent on opioids
in the first place, suicides could decrease in the long run. This is consistent with the stabilizing of
veteran suicides we observe in the last few years (2017-18) of our sample, but more data is needed to
evaluate this possibility. We revisit this issue in the Conclusion.
6.3     Poisson Results
Table 4 shows the estimation results from the Poisson QMLE specification both without additional
controls (column 1) and with additional controls (column 2) as discussed in Section 3. In this
specification, urban civilians (base group) do not see an increase in suicides prior to 2014. Starting in
2014, the suicide trend for urban civilians is upward throughout the remainder of our sample, which
is similar to what we find in our baseline OLS specification with no additional controls. When it
comes to rural civilians, column 1 shows little different relative to urban civilians but column 2 (with

                                                    14
additional controls) suggests that rural civilian suicides are declining relative to urban civilian ones
over the course of our sample period.
         The main difference between our OLS and Poisson QMLE results is for urban veterans.
Whereas we see distinct increases in suicides for urban veterans (relative to civilians) starting in 2015
with our OLS specification, we see no such effects in the Poisson results. However, the triple
difference estimates for the Poisson QMLE, which measure any difference in suicides that rural
veterans experience compared to urban veterans, all relative to the same difference among civilians,
are quite similar to their OLS counterparts. Starting in 2013 and continuing through 2016, these effects
are large and statistically significant at the 5% level or better, ranging between 40-45 percent depending
on the year and whether additional controls are included. After 2016, as with the OLS results, the
coefficients decrease slightly. One caveat is that differences between 2012 and 2013 are smaller and
only statistically significant at the 5% level in the Poisson QMLE, whereas they are significant at the
1% level in our baseline OLS results.
6.4      Other Violent Deaths
We have argued that veteran suicides are likely to be affected by OSI due to a high prevalence of
serious underlying health conditions and opioid use disorder among this population. However, we do
not expect OSI to have first-order effects on other forms of violent deaths, including homicides, "legal
intervention" deaths (i.e., involving law enforcement), unintentional firearm deaths, and deaths of
undetermined intent. Thus, examining how OSI affects these forms of violent death serves as a
falsification check in our analysis. In other words, if OSI is truly responsible for the relative rise in
veteran suicides, we would not expect to see OSI associated with a rise in these other forms of violent
death. The one potential exception is deaths of undetermined intent, which could contain some
overdose deaths that were not ruled a suicide or an unintentional overdose as well as suicides for
which not enough evidence was present to label it as such. 21
         Results on other types of violent deaths are contained in Table 5. There are few statistically
significant coefficients and no clear trends or patterns for the veteran-by-year or veteran-by-year-by-
rural effects in the first three columns of the table (homicides, legal intervention deaths, and
unintentional firearm deaths). In the case of deaths of undetermined intent (last column), we do see a
few positive and statistically significant DDD coefficients, though we note again that this category of
deaths may include some overdose or suicide deaths that would be directly affected by OSI.

21NVDRS does not contain data on overdose deaths that were ruled to be unintentional (i.e., these deaths are not
classified as "violent" deaths).

                                                          15
        In Table 6, we show how OSI affects all violent deaths excluding suicides (column 1) as well
as all violent deaths aggregated together (column 2). In the first column, we see that there are no
significant pre- or post-OSI year effects for urban veterans. In the case of the triple difference
estimates, we see two significant and positive coefficients (in 2014 and 2017) but not the stark and
sustained increase starting in 2013 that we observe in the case of suicides. Because suicides make up
the lion's share (roughly 75%) of all violent deaths, we expect that the effects of OSI on all violent
deaths (including suicides) will mirror those for suicides specifically. This is borne out in the second
column of Table 6, where see very similar results to those observed in Table 3.
6.5     Threats to Identification
A potential threat to our identification strategy is the possibility that veteran migration across
urban/rural areas coincides with or is caused by OSI. For example, rural veterans may seek additional
healthcare services (including substance abuse treatment) to deal with the loss of opioids by migrating
to urban areas. Or, as OSI is an opioid diverting policy, it is feasible that rural veterans may migrate
to urban communities to access a more robust illicit drug market as a substitute for lost prescription
opioids. If such migration occurred according to underlying factors that affect suicide risk, it would
call into question our interpretation of results.
        To investigate this phenomenon, we regress the percentage of each county's population who
are veterans on time and year fixed effects and the interaction between year and rural indicators; the
regression was weighted by county veteran population and the standard errors were clustered by
county (see Table 7). The results indicate that although veteran populations are declining over time
in general (likely due to their much higher age than the civilian population, on average), this decline is
no larger in rural areas, as all year by rural interaction terms are essentially zero. This suggests that
differential migration across the urban-rural divide is not driving our results.
        Lastly, we note that a potential weakness of the results we have presented so far is that the
pre-treatment period is relatively short, making it difficult to tell whether the parallel trends
assumption is likely to hold in our context. To extend our analysis to an earlier year (2004), we must
leave out additional county and state-level covariates from our model due to a lack of data in these
years, and we must also interpolate county veteran and non-veteran population numbers between the
year 2000 (for which we have Census data) and 2010 (our first year of ACS data). With these caveats,
we present the results of our model extending back to 2004 graphically in Figure 5 (full results are
available in Appendix Table 1). The rural veteran suicide rate jumps above the others in 2005, but the
difference between this and either the rural civilian rate or the urban veteran rate does not change

                                                    16
much until 2010, when it falls back to about zero (temporarily). The urban veteran suicide rate grows
modestly relative to the urban civilian rate until the last four years in our sample (starting in 2015),
when the gap widens as discussed above. Overall, we view the results of our analysis with a long pre-
treatment period to be consistent with our earlier findings.
6.6    Discussion
In this sub-section, we attempt to place our results in the literature on opioid policy and suicides.
Borgschulte, Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall (2018) found that state PDMP policies have not
increased suicides among the white non-Hispanic population over 30 years old. Furthermore, the
authors found that when PDMP policy was paired with greater treatment center availability, suicides
actually decreased. In contrast to the results of Borgschulte, Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall (2018),
we find that opioid diverting policy, specifically OSI, has increased suicides among the rural veteran
population substantially and perhaps the urban veteran population more modestly.
       We posit that the differences in our results with those in Borgschulte, Corredor-Waldron, and
Marshall (2018) are due both to the different populations analyzed as well as the mechanisms of each
policy (PDMP's versus OSI). First, as mentioned above, U.S. veterans are perhaps the population
that has been most adversely affected by the opioid epidemic. This is due to their higher rates of
chronic pain, greater access to prescription opioids, higher rates of substance abuse disorder, lower
treatment utilization, and higher rates of suicide; comparing these adverse consequences between
urban and rural veterans, rural veterans fare worse still. Second, OSI went beyond creating a database
for patients' prescription histories or even mandating that physicians access that database (as was
typically the case with PDMP's); it introduced additional measures that led to opioid tapering and
discontinuation programs that have been shown to increase the risk of suicide among a vulnerable
population.
       Bounthavong et al. (2017) find that when VA providers were exposed to Opioid Overdose
Education and Naloxone Distribution (OEND) via academic detailing, their prescribing of Naloxone
increased, and Bounthavong et al. (2021) find a similar result with respect to a decline in opioid-
benzodiazepine co-prescribing. Thus, provider education via academic detailing appears to affect VA
provider behavior. Though the purpose of academic detailing was to inform and encourage providers
to follow evidence-based practices in managing patients' pain, we know that VA guidelines as of the
early part of our sample period were for much more aggressive tapering than is currently
recommended by the either the VA or the CDC.



                                                  17
         Whatever the reason, tapering among patients who were already on opioid therapy--including
long-term and/or high dose prescriptions--has increased under OSI (see, for example, Minegishi et
al., 2020). Any negative consequences of this policy must be weighed against the positive effects of
reducing the number of veterans exposed to dangerous opioid regimens to begin with. Indeed,
Barnett, Olenski, and Jena (2017) and Zhang and Eichmeyer (2021) find that exposure to a high-
intensity opioid prescriber in an emergency room setting has long-run effects on opioid use, and the
latter study finds effects on the eventual development of an opioid use disorder (OUD) and opioid
overdose mortality among VA patients. Thus, there may be long-term benefits of OSI that must be
weighed against the cost of increased illicit drug use (including overdose) and suicide risk for
vulnerable patients who experience tapering or discontinuation, which tend to be manifest within a
short period of time (FDA, 2019; Oliva et al., 2020). We return to this point in the Conclusion.
         Lastly, we aim to put our results in context by approximating the ratio of suicides caused by
OSI to opioid prescriptions foregone as a result of OSI. This involves a back-of-the-envelope
calculation based on our results as well as several figures taken from other papers in the literature. At
the peak of VA opioid prescribing in 2012, the number of unique veterans dispensed a prescription
opioid was 1,017,826 (Hadlandsmythe et al., 2018). Using estimates from Hadlandsmythe et al. (2018),
which uses VA prescription data through 2016, we estimate that 696,919 unique veterans received an
opioid prescription from the VA in 2018, which represents an annual average decrease of 53,485
unique veterans receiving an opioid prescription. 22
         Because an estimated 2.7 million rural veterans are enrolled in the VA while 5.2 million urban
veterans are (VA's ORH, 2014), and because rural veterans are prescribed 30 percent more opioids
per capita, we estimate that 44 percent of the decrease in opioid patients was composed of rural
veterans. Furthermore, our own results indicate that rural veteran suicides increased an average of
12.58 per 100,000 from the years 2013 to 2018 as a result of OSI (this figure is obtained from summing
the average of the coefficients on the veteran-by-year effects and the rural-by-veterans-by-year effects
for 2013-2018). Because there are approximately 4.7 million rural veterans overall (VA's ORH, 2014),
average annual suicides among the rural veteran population as a result of OSI is just over 591, or 3,548
suicides as a result of OSI from 2013 to 2018. Therefore, for every 100 rural patients who were not


22
   Using Hadlandsmythe et al. (2018), we calculated average annual decreases for the number of unique veterans
receiving an opioid prescription and extrapolated that number to 2017 and 2018 to calculate a total number of unique
veterans receiving an opioid prescription in 2018. Of course, this methodology operates under the assumption that VA
opioid prescriptions decreased at a constant rate, which is why we consider these estimates "back-of-the-envelope"
approximations.

                                                         18
prescribed opioids as a result of OSI, we estimate that there were almost 3 suicides. Following the
same methodology for urban veterans (average increase in suicides per 100,000 following OSI of 3.76,
representing a total of 3,181 urban veteran suicides from 2013-2018), the ratio of urban veteran
suicides to urban opioid patients foregone is approximately 0.02. 23
         Lastly, we address the possibility that some of the additional suicides attributed to OSI are
substituting for overdose deaths that would have occurred otherwise during our period of study.
Unfortunately, as described earlier, we do not have data on accidental overdose deaths in our data;
thus, we cannot examine this question directly. However, we note a few reasons we believe this cannot
account for our results. First, Lin et al. (2019) show that the overall opioid overdose death rate among
veterans increased by 50 percent from 2010 to 2016, with the entire increase coming from heroin and
synthetic opioid (e.g., fentanyl) deaths. This is consistent with the pattern observed in other studies
for some individuals to turn to "street" forms of opioids when prescription opioids become harder to
obtain; these are often more potent with higher accompanying overdose risk. 24 By comparison, the
opioid overdose death rate in the United States as a whole increased by 33% from 2010 to 2015 (Rudd
et al., 2016).
         Finally, even if some overdose deaths were avoided as a result of the estimated 53,845 veterans
not receiving opioids each year in the post-OSI period, it is very likely a small fraction of our estimated
increase in suicides. For example, Zhang and Eichmeyer (2021) estimate that exposure to prescription
opioids in the emergency room increases the chances of an opioid overdose within 3 years of 0.75
percentage points. If the entire reduction of 53,845 veterans receiving opioids was due to foregone
initial prescriptions, this would result in about 40 additional overdose deaths avoided in each year
(compared to an increase of 591 suicides). Of course, many of these veterans not receiving opioids
would have already been prescribed opioids in the past; for some of these individuals, losing their
prescription may very well increase in the risk of overdose due to diversion into illicit opioids, as
described above.


7. Conclusions
In this study, we investigate the link between VA supply-reducing opioid policy (OSI) and suicide
among veterans and current military personnel. We find evidence that OSI resulted in an increase in

23
   The number of total urban veteran suicides as a result of OSI is obtained by taking the product of the mean
coefficient values for urban veteran suicides per capita from 2013 through 2018 and the total number of urban veterans
(14.1 million) in 2014.
24 https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/deaths/synthetic/index.html.


                                                          19
veteran suicides. These effects appear to have grown through 2016 before leveling off in the last few
years of our sample period. Our results show that rural veterans specifically have been particularly
affected by OSI, with suicides increasing by a little over one-third between 2013 and 2018. These
differences are consistent with higher rates of VA enrollment, opioid use, and suicide risk among rural
veterans as we have discussed.
        The opioid crisis has had tremendous negative consequences among veterans; lower-bound
estimates for annual health care costs for veterans with combat exposure alone are upwards of $1.04
billion for prescription painkiller use and $470 million for heroin use (Cesur, Sabia, and Bradford,
2019); the total opioid-related economic burden for the general population in the United States in
2013 was an estimated $78.5 billion (Florence et al., 2016). OSI, which reduced opioid prescribing for
both those who entered the VA under the looser former opioid regime as well as newer veterans, may
have long-term benefits if it prevents opioid use disorders from occurring in the first place. However,
our results suggest there are large benefits of effective countermeasures among rural veterans in the
shadow of OSI. The most successful interventions would reduce veteran suicides while continually
exposing fewer veterans to potentially dangerous pain mitigation strategies via opioid prescriptions.
        Although it is beyond the scope of this paper, we surmise that successful treatment
interventions may occur through enhanced addiction treatment and mental health networks. The rural
veteran population may especially benefit from this, as they face significant barriers to treatment,
which results in lower rates of treatment utilization compared to their urban counterparts (Cully et al.,
2010; Edmonds et al., 2020; GAO, 2018; McCarthy et al., 2012; Mohamed et al., 2009; Possemato et
al., 2018; Teich et al., 2017). Leung et al. (2019a) find that integration of mental health specialists into
primary care clinics (the PC-MHI initiative) increased use of mental health services but that those
living farther from their VA clinic were less likely to see a PC-MHI provider. Leung et al. (2019b) find
that in small community-based primary care clinics located far from affiliated VA hospitals, same-day
mental health services and "warm hand-offs" between primary care providers and mental health
specialists are much less likely than in large clinics or small clinics located near VA hospitals.
        In 2016, the VA's Office of Connected Care, which focuses on improving rural veteran health
care through technology, began distributing video-enabled computer tablets to veterans who suffer
from mental health disorders and faced barriers to mental health care due to their place of residence.
Using the tablets to conduct telehealth appointments, veterans who were given these tablets had higher
psychotherapy utilization rates and managed their medications more effectively compared to veterans
who did not receive them (VA, 2018). Borgschulte, Corredor-Waldron, and Marshall (2018) find that

                                                    20
with a sufficient number of treatment centers in a county, suicides decline after the implementation
of PDMP's. These results hint at strategies to prevent veteran suicides in the wake of opioid-diverting
policy.




                                                  21
References

Alpert, A., Powell, D., & Pacula, R. L. (2018). Supply-side drug policy in the presence of substitutes:
        Evidence from the introduction of abuse-deterrent opioids. American Economic Journal:
        Economic Policy, 10(4), 1-35.
Ashrafioun, L., T. M. Bishop, K. R. Conner, and W. R. Pigeon. 2017. Frequency of prescription
        opioid misuse and suicidal ideation, planning, and attempts. Journal of Psychiatric Research
        92:1­7.
Axelrod, Jim. 2013. "Veterans Dying from Overmedication," CBS News. Available at:
        https://www.cbsnews.com/news/veterans-dying-from-overmedication/
Bao, Y., Pan, Y., Taylor, A., Radakrishnan, S., Luo, F., Pincus, H. A., & Schackman, B. R. (2016).
        Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs Are Associated With Sustained Reductions In
        Opioid Prescribing By Physicians. Health affairs (Project Hope), 35(6), 1045­1051.
        https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1673
Barnett, M. L., Olenski, A. R., & Jena, A. B. (2017). Opioid-Prescribing Patterns of Emergency
     Physicians and Risk of Long-Term Use. New England Journal of Medicine, 376(7), 663­673.
     https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1610524
Baser, Onur, Lin Xie, Jack Mardekian, David Schaaf, Li Wang, and Ashish V. Joshi. 2014.
        "Prevalence of Diagnosed Opioid Abuse and its Economic Burden in the Veterans Health
        Administration," Pain Practice 14(5): 437-445.
Bennett, A. S., Elliott, L., & Golub, A. (2013). Opioid and other substance misuse, overdose risk,
        and the potential for prevention among a sample of OEF/OIF veterans in New York
        City. Substance use & misuse, 48(10), 894­907.
        https://doi.org/10.3109/10826084.2013.796991
Bohnert, Amy SB, Mark A. Ilgen, Sandro Galea, John F. McCarthy, and Frederic C. Blow. 2011.
        "Accidental Poisoning Mortality Among Patients in the Department of Veterans Affairs
        Health System," Medical Care 393-396.
Borgschulte, M., Corredor-Waldron, A., and Marshall, G. (2018) A path out: Prescription drug
        abuse, treatment, and suicide. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Volume 149, Pages
        169-184, ISSN 0167-2681, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2018.03.006.
Bounthavong, M., Harvey, M. A., Wells, D. L., Popish, S. J., Himstreet, J., Oliva, E. M., Kay, C. L.,
     Lau, M. K., Randeria-Noor, P. P., Phillips, A. G., & Christopher, M. L. D. (2017). Trends in
     naloxone prescriptions prescribed after implementation of a National Academic Detailing
     Service in the Veterans Health Administration: A preliminary analysis. Journal of the American
     Pharmacists Association, 57(2, Supplement), S68­S72.
     https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.japh.2016.11.003
Bounthavong, Mark PharmD, PhD, Marcos K Lau, PharmD, MS, BCPS, Chad L Kay, PharmD,
     BCPS, Daina L Wells, PharmD, MBA, BCPS, BCPP, Sarah J Popish, PharmD, BCPS, BCPP,
     Michael A Harvey, PharmD, BCPS, Julianne E Himstreet, PharmD, BCPS, BCPP, Andrea
     Grana, JD, MPH, Blake A Freeman, MPP, MBA, Christina M Morillo, BPA, Melissa L D
     Christopher, PharmD, Impact of Implementing an Academic Detailing Program on Opioid-
     Benzodiazepine Co-Prescribing Trends at the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Pain
     Medicine, 2021;, pnaa475, https://doi.org/10.1093/pm/pnaa475
Braden JB, Edlund MJ, Sullivan MD. Suicide Deaths With Opioid Poisoning in the United States:
        1999-2014. Am J Public Health. 2017;107(3):421-426. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2016.303591
Bryan, C. J., Griffith, J. E., Pace, B. T., Hinkson, K., Bryan, A. O., Clemans, T. A. and Imel, Z. E.
        (2015), Combat Exposure and Risk for Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors Among Military

                                                  22
         Personnel and Veterans: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. Suicide Life Threat Behav,
         45: 633-649. doi:10.1111/sltb.12163
Buchmueller, Thomas C., and Colleen Carey. 2018. "The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring
         Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10
         (1): 77-112.DOI: 10.1257/pol.20160094
Case, A. and Angus Deaton Rising midlife morbidity and mortality, US whites, Proceedings of the
         National Academy of Sciences Dec 2015, 112 (49) 15078-15083; DOI:
         10.1073/pnas.1518393112
Castro CA, Kintzle S. Suicides in the military: the post-modern combat veteran and the Hemingway
         effect. Current Psychiatry Reports. 2014 Aug;16(8):460. DOI: 10.1007/s11920-014-0460-1.
Cesur, Resul and Sabia, Joseph and Bradford, W. David, Did the War on Terror Ignite an Opioid
         Epidemic? (September 2019). NBER Working Paper No. w26264, Available at
         SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3454365
Childress, Sarah. (March 28, 2016). Veterans Face Greater Risks Amid Opioid Crisis. PBS Frontline.
         https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/veterans-face-greater-risks-amid-opioid-crisis/
Chou, Roger, Turner, Judith A., Devine, Emily B., et al. The Effectiveness and Risks of Long-Term
         Opioid Therapy for Chronic Pain: A Systematic Review for a National Institutes of Health
         Pathways to Prevention Workshop. Ann Intern Med.2015;162:276-286. [Epub ahead of
         print 7 March 2020]. doi:10.7326/M14-2559
Clancy, Dr. Carolyn, M.D. 2015. Statement of Dr. Carolyn Clancy M.D. Interim Under Secretary
         For Health Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
         Before the Committee on Veterans' Affairs United States Senate. 2015 March; 1-10.
         https://www.veterans.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/VA%20Clancy%20Testimony%203.26.2
         0151.pdf
Connolly, Beth. (November 9, 2018). How the VA is Battling Opioid Use Disorder. PEW Trusts.
         https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/articles/2018/11/09/how-the-va-is-
         battling-opioid-use-disorder
Corredor-Waldron, A., & Currie, J. (2021). Tackling the Substance Abuse Crisis: The Role of Access to
         Treatment Facilities (No. w28862). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cully, J.A., Jameson, J.P., Phillips, L.L., Kunik, M.E. and Fortney, J.C. (2010), Use of Psychotherapy
         by Rural and Urban Veterans. The Journal of Rural Health, 26: 225-233.
         doi:10.1111/j.1748- 0361.2010.00294.x
Curtin SC, Warner M, Hedegaard H. Increase in suicide in the United States, 1999­2014. NCHS
         data brief, no 241. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2016.
Daigh, John D. Jr., MD. (March 26, 2015). A Opioid Prescription Policy, Practice, and Procedures.
           Hearing Before the Committee on Veterans' Affairs. United States Senate. 114th Session of
           Congress. First Session. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-
           114shrg94295/html/CHRG-114shrg94295.htm
Darke, S. and Ross, J. (2002), Suicide among heroin users: rates, risk factors and methods.
         Addiction, 97: 1383-1394. doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.2002.00214.x
Darnall, Beth B., David Juurlink, Robert D Kerns, Sean Mackey, Brent Van Dorsten, Keith
         Humphreys, Julio A Gonzalez-Sotomayor, Andrea Furlan, MD, Adam J Gordon, Debra B
         Gordon, Diane E Hoffman, Joel Katz, Stefan G Kertesz, Sally Satel, Richard A Lawhern,
         Kate M Nicholson, Rosemary C Polomano, Owen D Williamson, Heath McAnally, Ming-
         Chih Kao, Stephan Schug, Robert Twillman, Terri A Lewis, Richard L Stieg, Kate Lorig,
         Theresa Mallick-Searle, Robert W West, Sarah Gray, Steven R Ariens, , Jennifer Sharpe
         Potter, Penney Cowan, Chad D Kollas, Danial Laird, Barby Ingle, J Julian Grove, Marian

                                                 23
       Wilson, Kashelle Lockman, Fiona Hodson, Carol S Palackdharry, Roger B Fillingim, PhD,
       Jeffrey Fudin, Jennifer Barnhouse, Ajay Manhapra, Steven R Henson, Bruce Singer, PhD,
       Marie Ljosenvoor, Marlisa Griffith, Jason N Doctor, PhD, Kimeron Hardin, Cathleen
       London, Jon Mankowski, Andrea Anderson, Linda Ellsworth, Lisa Davis Budzinski, Becky
       Brandt, Greg Hartley, Debbie Nickels Heck, Mark J Zobrosky, Celeste Cheek, Megan
       Wilson, Cynthia E Laux, Geralyn Datz, Justin Dunaway, Eileen Schonfeld, RN, Chaplain,
       Melissa Cady, Thérèse LeDantec-Boswell, Meredith Craigie, John Sturgeon, Pamela Flood,
       Melita Giummarra, Jessica Whelan, Beverly E Thorn, Richard L Martin, Michael E
       Schatman, Maurice D Gregory, Joshua Kirz, Patti Robinson, James G Marx, Jessica R
       Stewart, Phillip S Keck, Scott E Hadland, Jennifer L Murphy, Mark A Lumley, Kathleen S
       Brown, Michael S Leong, Mechele Fillman, James W Broatch, Aaron Perez, Kristine
       Watford, Kari Kruska,, Dokyoung Sophia You, Stacy Ogbeide, Amy Kukucka, Susan
       Lawson, James B Ray, PharmD, T Wade Martin, James B Lakehomer, Anne Burke, Robert I
       Cohen, Peter Grinspoon, Marc S Rubenstein, Stephani Sutherland, Kristie Walters, Travis
       Lovejoy, International Stakeholder Community of Pain Experts and Leaders Call for an
       Urgent Action on Forced Opioid Tapering, Pain Medicine, 20, Issue 3, March 2019, Pages
       429­433, https://doi.org/10.1093/pm/pny228
Delcher C, Wang Y, Wagenaar AC, Goldberger BA, Cook RL, Maldonado-Molina MM. Prescription
       and illicit opioid deaths and the prescription drug monitoring program in Florida
       [Letter] Am J Public Health. 2016;106:e10­1. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2016.303104.
Demidenko MI, Dobscha SK, Morasco BJ, Meath THA, Ilgen MA, Lovejoy TI. Suicidal ideation
       and suicidal self-directed violence following clinician-initiated prescription opioid
       discontinuation among long-term opioid users. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2017;47:2935.
       doi:10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2017.04.011
Denney, J.T., Rogers, R.G., Krueger, P.M. and Wadsworth, T. (2009), Adult Suicide Mortality in the
       United States: Marital Status, Family Size, Socioeconomic Status, and Differences by Sex*.
       Social Science Quarterly, 90: 1167-1185. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6237.2009.00652.x
Deyo RA, Hallvik SE, Hildebran C, Marino M, Springer R, Irvine JM, O'Kane N, Van Otterloo J,
       Wright DA, Leichtling G, Millet LM, Carson J, Wakeland W, McCarty D. Association of
       Prescription Drug Monitoring Program Use With Opioid Prescribing and Health Outcomes:
       A Comparison of Program Users and Nonusers. J Pain. 2018 Feb;19(2):166-177. doi:
       10.1016/j.jpain.2017.10.001. Epub 2017 Oct 18. PMID: 29054493; PMCID: PMC5803414.
Dubin Ruth, Clarke Hance, and Kahan, Mel. The Risks of Opioid Tapering or Rapid
       Discontinuation. Canadian Family Physician. 2017. Available at:
       https://www.cfp.ca/news/2017/12/05/12-05
Edlund, M. J., Austen, M. A., Sullivan, M. D., Martin, B. C., Williams, J. S., Fortney, J. C., &
       Hudson, T. J. (2014). Patterns of opioid use for chronic noncancer pain in the Veterans
       Health Administration from 2009 to 2011. PAIN®, 155(11), 2337-2343.
Edmonds, A. T., Bensley, K. M., Hawkins, E. J., & Williams, E. C. (2020). Geographic differences in
       receipt of addictions treatment in a national sample of patients with alcohol use disorders
       from the U.S. Veterans Health Administration. Substance abuse, 1­10.
Eichmeyer, Sarah and Jonathan Zhang (2020). Prescription Opioid Use and Physical and Mental
       Health: Evidence from Primary Care. Working Paper.
Eichmeyer, Sarah and Jonathan Zhang (2021). Opioid Prescribing Variation in Emergency
       Departments: Consequences for Patient Health. Working Paper.
Food and Drug Administration. (2019, April). FDA identifies harm reported from sudden discontinuation of
       opioid pain medicines and requires label changes to guide prescribers on gradual, individualized tapering.

                                                       24
        FDA Drug Safety Communication. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-
        availability/fda-identifies-harm-reported-sudden-discontinuation-opioid-pain-medicines-and-
        requires-label-changes
Finlay, A. K., Harris, A. H., Timko, C., Yu, M., Smelson, D., Stimmel, M., & Binswanger, I. A.
        (2021). Disparities in access to medications for opioid use disorder in the Veterans Health
        Administration. Journal of addiction medicine, 15(2), 143-149.
Finley, E. P., Bollinger, M., Noël, P. H., Amuan, M. E., Copeland, L. A., Pugh, J. A., Dassori, A.,
        Palmer, R., Bryan, C., & Pugh, M. J. (2015). A national cohort study of the association
        between the polytrauma clinical triad and suicide-related behavior among US Veterans who
        served in Iraq and Afghanistan. American journal of public health, 105(2), 380­387.
        https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2014.301957 Fishbain DA. The association of chronic pain
        and suicide. Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry. 1999 Jul;4(3):221-227. DOI:
        10.153/scnp00400221.
Florence, C. S., Zhou, C., Luo, F., & Xu, L. (2016). The Economic Burden of Prescription Opioid
        Overdose, Abuse, and Dependence in the United States, 2013. Medical care, 54(10), 901­906.
        https://doi.org/10.1097/MLR.0000000000000625
Ford JA, Perna D. Prescription drug misuse and suicidal ideation: Findings from the National
        Survey on Drug Use and Health. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015;157:192196.
        doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.10.010
García MC, Heilig CM, Lee SH, et al. Opioid prescribing rates in nonmetropolitan and metropolitan
        counties among primary care providers using an electronic health record system -- United
        States, 2014--2017. CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.
Gellad WF, Good CB, Shulkin DJ. Addressing the Opioid Epidemic in the United States: Lessons
        From the Department of Veterans Affairs. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(5):611­612.
        doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.0147
Good, Bernie C. MD, MPH Federal Healthcare System Experience: VA Implementation,
        Maintenance, and Evaluation. Veterans Affairs Pharmacy Benefits Management May, 2017.
Government Accountability Office. Progress Made Towards Improving Opioid Safety, but Further
        Efforts to Assess Progress and Reduce Risk are Needed. 2018. Available at:
        GAO-18-380, VA HEALTH CARE: Progress Made Towards Improving Opioid Safety, but
        Further Efforts to Assess Progress and Reducce Risk Are Needed
Government Accountability Office. (December, 2019) Veterans Health Care: Service Use for
        Substance Use Disorders, and Efforts to Address Access Issues in Rural Areas. Available at:
        https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-20-35.pdf
Hadlandsmyth, K., Mosher, H., Vander Weg, M. W., & Lund, B. C. (2018). Decline in Prescription
        Opioids Attributable to Decreases in Long-Term Use: A Retrospective Study in the Veterans
        Health Administration 2010-2016. Journal of general internal medicine, 33(6), 818­824.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-017-4283-8
Haffajee, R. L., Mello, M. M., Zhang, F., Zaslavsky, A. M., Larochelle, M. R., & Wharam, J. F.
        (2018). Four States With Robust Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs Reduced Opioid
        Dosages. Health affairs (Project Hope), 37(6), 964­974.
        https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2017.1321
Hedegaard H, Curtin SC, Warner M. Suicide mortality in the United States, 1999­2017. NCHS Data
        Brief, no 330. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2018.
Ilgen MA, Kleinberg F, Ignacio RV, et al. Noncancer Pain Conditions and Risk of Suicide. JAMA
        Psychiatry. 2013;70(7):692­697. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.908



                                                25
Johannes, Catherine B., T. Kim Le, Xiaolei Zhou, Joseph A. Johnston, and Robert H. Dworkin.
        2010. "The Prevalence of Chronic Pain in United States Adults: Results of an Internet-Based
        Survey," Journal of Pain 11(11): 230-1239.
Johnson, C.E., Bush, R.L., Harman, J., Bolin, J., Evans Hudnall, G. and Nguyen, A.M. (2015),
        Variation in Utilization of Health Care Services for Rural VA Enrollees With Mental Health
        Related Diagnoses. The Journal of Rural Health, 31: 244-253. doi:10.1111/jrh.12105
Kane, Tim. (2016). The Decline of American Engagement: Patterns in U.S. Troop Deployment.
        Hoover Institution Economics Working Papers. Working Paper 16101.
        https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/research/docs/16101_-_kane_-
        _decline_of_american_engagement.pdf
Kang, H. K., Bullman, T. A., Smolenski, D. J., Skopp, N. A., Gahm, G. A., & Reger, M. A. (2015).
        Suicide risk among 1.3 million veterans who were on active duty during the Iraq and
        Afghanistan wars. Annals of epidemiology, 25(2), 96­100.
Kaplan, Mark S., McFarland, Bentson H., Huguet, Nathalie, and Valenstein, Marcia. 2012: Suicide
        Risk and Precipitating Circumstances Among Young, Middle-Aged, and Older Male
        Veterans American Journal of Public Health 102, S131_S137,
        https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300445
Keyes, K. M., Cerdá, M., Brady, J. E., Havens, J. R., & Galea, S. (2014). Understanding the rural-
        urban differences in nonmedical prescription opioid use and abuse in the United States.
        American journal of public health, 104(2), e52­e59. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301709
Kilby AA. Opioids for the Masses: Welfare Tradeoffs in the Regulation of Narcotic Pain
        Medications. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 2015.
Kim HM, Smith EG, Ganoczy D, et al. Predictors of suicide in patient charts among patients with
        depression in the Veterans Health Administration health system: importance of prescription
        drug and alcohol abuse. J Clin Psychiatry. 2012;73(10):e1269e1275.
        doi:10.4088/JCP.12m07658
Klugman, J., Condran, G., & Wray, M. (2013). The role of medicolegal systems in producing
        geographic variation in suicide rates. Social Science Quarterly, 94(2), 462-489.
Kuramoto, S. J., Chilcoat, H. D., Ko, J., & Martins, S. S. (2012). Suicidal ideation and suicide attempt
        across stages of nonmedical prescription opioid use and presence of prescription opioid
        disorders among U.S. adults. Journal of studies on alcohol and drugs, 73(2), 178­184.
        https://doi.org/10.15288/jsad.2012.73.178
Leung, L. B., Rubenstein, L. V., Yoon, J., Post, E. P., Jaske, E., Wells, K. B., & Trivedi, R. B. (2019).
        Veterans health administration investments in primary care and mental health integration
        improved care access. Health Affairs, 38(8), 1281-1288.
Leung, L. B., Rose, D., Stockdale, S., McGowan, M., Yano, E. M., Graaff, A. L., ... & Rubenstein, L.
        V. (2019). Regional Adoption of Primary Care--Mental Health Integration in Veterans
        Health Administration Patient-Centered Medical Homes. The Journal for Healthcare Quality
        (JHQ), 41(5), 297-305.
Lin, A.L., Peltzman, T., McCarthy, J.F., et al. (2019). Changing trends in opioid overdose deaths and
        prescription opioid receipt among veterans. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 57(1), 106-
        110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2019.01.016
Lin LA, Bohnert ASB, Kerns RD, Clay MA, Ganoczy D, Ilgen MA. Impact of the Opioid Safety
        Initiative on opioid-related prescribing in veterans. Pain. 2017 May;158(5):833-839. doi:
        10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000837. PMID: 28240996.
Lovejoy, T. I., Morasco, B. J., Demidenko, M. I., Meath, T., Frank, J. W., & Dobscha, S. K. (2017).
        Reasons for discontinuation of long-term opioid therapy in patients with and without

                                                   26
        substance use disorders. Pain, 158(3), 526­534.
        https://doi.org/10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000796.
Lund BC, Ohl ME, Hadlandsmyth K, Mosher HJ. Regional and Rural-Urban Variation in Opioid
        Prescribing in the Veterans Health Administration. Mil Med. 2019;184(11-12):894-900.
        doi:10.1093/milmed/usz104
Maguen S, Luxton DD, Skopp NA, et al. Killing in combat, mental health symptoms, and suicidal
        ideation in Iraq war veterans. J Anxiety Disord. 2011;25(4):563567.
        doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2011.01.003
McCarthy, John F., Blow, Frederic C., Ignacio, Rosalinda C., Ilgen, Mark A., Austin, Karen L. and
        Valenstein, Marcia, 2012:Suicide Among Patients in the Veterans Affairs Health System:
        Rural-Urban Differences in Rates, Risks, and Methods American Journal of Public
        Health 102, S111_S117, https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300463
Meinhofer A. Prescription drug monitoring programs: the role of asymmetric information on drug
        availability and abuse. Am J Health Econ. 2017
Minegishi, T., & Frakt, A. (2018). Reducing Long-term Opioid Use in the Veterans Health
        Administration. Journal of general internal medicine, 33(6), 781­782.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-018-4352-7
Minegishi, T., Garrido, M.M., Stein, M. et al. Opioid Discontinuation Among Patients Receiving
        High-Dose Long-Term Opioid Therapy in the Veterans Health Administration. J GEN
        INTERN MED 35, 903­909 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-020-06252-9
Mohamed S, Neale M, Rosenheck RA. VA intensive mental health case management in urban and
        rural areas: veteran characteristics and service delivery. Psychiatr Serv. 2009;60(7):914-921.
        doi:10.1176/ps.2009.60.7.914
Mosher, H. J., Krebs, E. E., Carrel, M., Kaboli, P. J., Vander Weg, M. W., & Lund, B. C. (2015).
        Trends in prevalent and incident opioid receipt: an observational study in Veterans Health
        Administration 2004­2012. Journal of general internal medicine, 30(5), 597-604.
Moyo, P., SimoniWastila, L., Griffin, B. A., Onukwugha, E., Harrington, D., Alexander, G. C.,
        and Palumbo, F. (2017) Impact of prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMPs) on
        opioid utilization among Medicare beneficiaries in 10 US States. Addiction, 112: 1784­ 1796.
        doi: 10.1111/add.13860.
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics (NCVAS). VA Utilization Profile FY 2017.
        2017. https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/Quickfacts/VA_Utilization_Profile_2017.pdf
Office of Research and Development. 2020. U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. VA Research on
        Rural Health. Rural Health (va.gov)
Office of Rural Health. 2014. U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. Rural Veteran Health Care
        Challenges. https://www.ruralhealth.va.gov/aboutus/ruralvets.asp
Oliva Elizabeth M, Bowe Thomas, Manhapra Ajay, Kertesz Stefan, Hah Jennifer
        M, Henderson Patricia et al. Associations between stopping prescriptions for opioids, length
        of opioid treatment, and overdose or suicide deaths in US veterans: observational
        evaluation BMJ 2020; 368 :m283
Oquendo, M. A., & Volkow, N. D. (2018). Suicide: A Silent Contributor to Opioid-Overdose
     Deaths. New England Journal of Medicine, 378(17), 1567­1569.
     https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1801417
Park, Tae Woo, Richard Saitz, Dara Ganoczy, Mark A. Ilgen, and Amy S.B. Bohnert. 2015.
     "Benzodiazepine Prescribing Patterns and Deaths from Drug Overdose Among U.S. Veterans
     Receiving Opioid Analgesics: Case-Cohort Study," bmj 350: h2698.


                                                  27
Petzel, Robert., Written statement of Dr. Robert Petzel Under Secretary for Health Veterans Health
        Administration Department Of Veterans Affairs Before The Senate Veterans' Affairs
        Committee U.S. Senate April 30, 2014
Possemato K, Wray LO, Johnson E, Webster B, Beehler GP. Facilitators and Barriers to Seeking
     Mental Health Care Among Primary Care Veterans With Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. J
     Trauma Stress. 2018;31(5):742-752. doi:10.1002/jts.22327
Rudd, R. A., Seth, P., David, F., & Scholl, L. (2016). Increases in drug and opioid-involved overdose
     deaths--United States, 2010­2015. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 65(50 & 51), 1445-1452.
Sandbrink, F, 2019. "Session II Efforts to reduce high-dose opioid analgesic prescribing: What have
        we learned?", Pages 1-33.
Santos Silva, J.M.C., Tenreyro, Silvana. (2006). The Log of Gravity. The Review of Economics and
        Statistics; 88 (4): 641­658. doi: https://doi.org/10.1162/rest.88.4.641
Santos Silva, J. M. C., & Tenreyro, S. (2011). Further simulation evidence on the performance of the
     Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood estimator. Economics Letters, 112(2), 220­222.
     https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2011.05.008
Smalley KB, Yancey CT, Warren JC, Naufel K, Ryan R, Pugh JL. Rural mental health and
        psychological treatment: a review for practitioners. J Clin Psychol. 2010;66(5):479489.
Sher, L., & Yehuda, R. (2011). Preventing suicide among returning combat veterans: A moral
        imperative. Military Medicine, 176(6), 601­602. https://doi.org/10.7205/MILMED-D-11-
        00026
Shinseki, Eric K. 2014. U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. Office of Public and Intergovernmental
        Affairs. VA Initiative Shows Promise in Reducing Use of Opioid for Chronic Pain. News
        Release https://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id=2529
Suffoletto B, Lynch M, Pacella CB, Yealy DM, Callaway CW. The Effect of a Statewide Mandatory
        Prescription Drug Monitoring Program on Opioid Prescribing by Emergency Medicine
        Providers Across 15 Hospitals in a Single Health System. J Pain. 2018 Apr;19(4):430-438.
        doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2017.11.010. Epub 2017 Dec 11. PMID: 29241835; PMCID:
        PMC5869080.
Sun Eric C, Dixit Anjali, Humphreys Keith, Darnall Beth D, Baker Laurence C, Mackey Sean et
        al. Association between concurrent use of prescription opioids and benzodiazepines and
        overdose: retrospective analysis BMJ 2017; 356 :j760
Swensen, Isaac D, Substance-abuse treatment and mortality, Journal of Public Economics, Volume
        122, 2015, Pages 13-30, ISSN 0047-2727, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.12.008.
Talari MP, Yarra P Increased risk of death by suicide or overdose in patients stopping opioid
        medications Evidence-Based Nursing Published Online First: 31 August 2020. doi:
        10.1136/ebnurs-2020-103293
Teich, J., Ali, M.M., Lynch, S. and Mutter, R. (2017), Utilization of Mental Health Services by
        Veterans Living in Rural Areas. The Journal of Rural Health, 33: 297-304.
        doi:10.1111/jrh.12221
Toblin, Robin L., Phillip J. Quartana, Lyndon A. Riviere, Kristina Clarke Walper, and Charles W.
        Hoge. 2014. "Chronic Pain and Opioid Use in U.S. Soldiers After Combat Deployment,"
        Journal of the American Medical Association: Internal Medicine 174(8): 1400- 1401.
Tondo, L., Albert, M. J., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2006). Suicide Rates in Relation to Health Care Access
        in the United States: An Ecological Study. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67(4), 517­
        523. https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.v67n0402




                                                  28
Turvey, C.L., Lund, B.C., Jones, D. and Arndt, S. (2020), Community Treatment for Opioid Use
       Disorders in Urban and Rural Veterans. The Journal of Rural Health, 36: 167-
       176. https://ntserver1.wsulibs.wsu.edu:2137/10.1111/jrh.12406
United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Measuring rurality:
       Rural-urban continuum codes, 2013. Available at: https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-
       products/rural-urban-continuum-codes.aspx
Vanderlip, E. R., Sullivan, M. D., Edlund, M. J., Martin, B. C., Fortney, J., Austen, M., Williams, J. S.,
       & Hudson, T. (2014). National study of discontinuation of long-term opioid therapy among
       veterans. Pain, 155(12), 2673­2679. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2014.09.034
VA     Veterans Affairs/Department of Defense Clinical Practice Guideline for Management of
       Opioid Therapy for Chronic Pain. Washington, DC: Department of Veterans Affairs,
       Department of Defense; 2010
       https://www.va.gov/painmanagement/docs/cpg_opioidtherapy_fulltext.pdf
VA     U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. (2015) VA Opioid Prescription Policy, Practice, and
       Procedures. 114th Congress, 4th Hearing. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-
       114shrg94295/html/CHRG-114shrg94295.htm
VA     US Department of Veteran Affairs. (2018). VA Becomes First Hospital System to Release Opioid
       Prescribing Rates https://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/includes/viewPDF.cfm?id=3997
VA     Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention (2019). National Veteran Suicide Prevention
       Annual Report. Available at: https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/docs/data-
       sheets/2019/2019_National_Veteran_Suicide_Prevention_Annual_Report_508.pdf
VA     U. S. Department of Veteran Affairs (2020). VA reduces prescription opioid use by 64 %
       during past eight years. In News Release. viewPDF.cfm (va.gov)
Von Korff, M., Kolodny, A., Deyo, R. A., & Chou, R. (2011). Long-term opioid therapy
       reconsidered. Annals of internal medicine, 155(5), 325­328. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-
       4819-155-5-201109060-00011
Wallace AE, Weeks WB, Wang S, Lee AF, Kazis LE. Rural and urban disparities in health
       related quality of life among veterans with psychiatric disorders. Psychiatr
       Serv. 2006;57(6):851856.
Wenger, Jennie W., Caolionn O'Connell, and Linda Cottrell, Examination of Recent Deployment
       Experience Across the Services and Components. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation,
       2018. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1928.html.
Westanmo, Anders, PharmD, MBA, Marshall, Peter MD, Jones, Elzie, PharmD, Burns, Kevin,
       PharmD, Krebs, Erin E., MD, MPH, Opioid Dose Reduction in a VA Health Care
       System--Implementation of a Primary Care Population-Level Initiative, Pain Medicine,
       Volume 16, Issue 5, May 2015, Pages 1019­1026, https://doi.org/10.1111/pme.12699
Wilcox, H. C., K. R. Conner, and E. D. Caine. 2004. Association of alcohol and drug use disorders
       and completed suicide: an empirical review of cohort studies. Drug and Alcohol
       Dependence 76:S11­19.
Wide-ranging online data for epidemiologic research (WONDER), Atlanta, GA: CDC, National
       Center for Health Statistics; 2020. Available at http://wonder.cdc.gov




                                                   29
Figure 1: Quarterly evolution of unique VA patient opioid prescriptions (source: Good, 2017)




                                            30
Figure 2: Timeline of VA opioid policies and OSI implementation (source: Sandbrink, 2019)
 Figure 3 Average county-year suicide trend for veteran/military personnel
and civilians, differentiated by urban-rural status, and weighted by total county
                                    population.
Figure 4: Coefficients from a linear regression of suicides per 100,000 among
    veterans/military personnel and civilians by urban-rural status. The
    specification includes right-hand side controls discussed in the text.




                                     33
Figure 5: Coefficients from a linear regression of suicides per 100,000 among
veterans/military personnel and civilians by urban-rural status. The
specification does not include any right-hand side controls besides county and
year fixed effects.




                                      34
 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics ­ By urban/rural status, pre-OSI Period
 Variable Description                      Veteran                Civilian
 (county-year)                        Rural      Urban       Rural       Urban
                                       1.20        8.38       4.92        35.99
 Suicide count
                                      (1.55)      (7.55)     (4.15)      (33.44)
                                      3,642      31,644     29,423       323,817
 Population estimates
                                     (2,468)    (21,723)   (18,004) (246,894)
                                      32.74       28.02      17.05        12.85
 Suicide rate per 100,000
                                     (42.96)     (18.84)    (13.06)       (7.39)
                                     $30,955    $41,787     $20,752      $29,003
 Median income
                                     (6,386)    (11,311)    (4,151)      (6,750)
                                       8.09        7.28       9.25         8.20
 Unemployment rate
                                      (4.83)      (2.63)     (3.23)       (2.22)
 Percent of population                 5.89        7.69      56.39        57.06
 that is female                       (2.71)      (3.27)     (3.24)       (2.26)
 Percent of population                 6.58        8.12      29.61        33.12
 that is 18-34 years old              (3.42)      (3.47)     (5.83)       (5.83)
 Percent of population                42.22       39.72      17.39        13.60
 that is 65 year and older            (7.58)      (9.30)     (3.51)       (2.94)
 Percent of population                18.05       29.55      17.12        32.49
 that has a bachelors                 (8.17)     (10.63)     (7.20)      (11.07)

                                             Rural                  Urban
                                              2.43                   26.70
 Addiction treatment
                                             (2.65)                 (28.18)
 centers
                                              7.39                   6.85
 Addiction treatment
                                             (7.65)                 (4.34)
 centers per 100,000
Note: Summary statistics are weighted by county population. Standard deviations are
in parentheses below the mean.




                                        35
 Table 2: Descriptive Statistics ­ Pre- & Post-OSI Implementation
 Variable Description                       Veteran              Civilian
 (county-year)                      Pre-OSI Post-OSI Pre-OSI Post-OSI
                                        7.33        7.71    30.75        37.72
 Suicide count
                                       (7.44)      (7.84)  (32.67)      (36.41)
                                      26,919      25,060   274,142      293,415
 Population estimates
                                     (22432)     (20,839) (250,746) (267,761)
                                       28.81       33.62    13.55        15.11
 Suicide rate per 100,000
                                      (24.69)     (28.80)   (8.76)       (8.40)
                                     $39,959     $40,226   $27,611      $28,168
 Median income
                                     (11,387)    (11,775)  (7,094)      (7,133)
                                        7.42        7.76     8.37         8.46
 Unemployment rate
                                       (3.13)      (3.47)   (2.45)       (2.61)
 Percent of population                  7.39        8.03    56.94        56.15
 that is female                        (3.26)      (3.49)   (2.46)       (2.29)
 Percent of population                  7.86        8.18    32.53        32.12
 that is 18-34 years old               (3.51)      (3.71)   (5.98)       (5.71)
 Percent of population                 40.15       45.00    14.24        15.50
 that is 65 year and older             (9.08)      (9.78)   (3.36)       (3.55)
 Percent of population                 27.61       28.46    29.90        31.15
 that has a bachelors                 (11.12)     (11.34)  (11.99)      (12.15)

                                             Pre-OSI              Post-OSI
 Addiction treatment
                                               22.60                25.15
 centers
                                              (27.27)              (28.21)
 Addiction treatment                            6.94                 7.48
 centers per 100,000                           (5.06)               (5.18)
Note: Summary statistics are weighted by county population. Standard deviations are
in parentheses below the mean.




                                        36
Table 3: OSI Regression Results (OLS)
                                       OLS                OLS
                                (without controls)   (with controls)
Dependent Variable                Suicides/100k      Suicides/100k

Variables
Civilian Suicide Rate by
Year (base: 2010)
                                        0.637**          0.874*
2011
                                         (0.270)         (0.458)
                                         -0.684*         -0.435
2012
                                         (0.382)         (0.724)
                                          -0.054          0.383
2013
                                         (0.349)         (0.813)
                                        0.716**           0.670
2014
                                         (0.350)         (0.950)
                                        2.331***         1.787*
2015
                                         (0.375)         (1.062)
                                        2.624***          1.643
2016
                                         (0.397)         (1.277)
                                        3.035***          1.498
2017
                                         (0.389)         (1.553)
                                        3.580***          1.573
2018
                                         (0.372)         (1.841)

Veteran*Year
(base: 2010)
                                          0.732           1.664
2011
                                         (1.044)         (1.124)
                                          1.469          2.209*
2012
                                         (1.068)         (1.296)
                                          1.027           1.846
2013
                                         (1.073)         (1.323)
                                          1.811           2.302
2014
                                         (1.277)         (1.490)
                                        3.748***        3.680**
2015
                                         (1.255)         (1.511)
                                        4.742***        4.281***
2016
                                         (1.228)         (1.426)
                                        6.403***        5.822***
2017
                                         (1.342)         (1.623)
                                        5.247***        4.620***
2018
                                         (1.270)         (1.692)

Year*Rural
(base: 2010)
                                         0.991            -0.298
2011
                                        (0.716)          (0.975)
                                         0.895            -1.914
2012
                                        (0.802)          (1.313)
2013                                    1.344*           -2.757*

                                  37
                                                    (0.810)                   (1.606)
                                                     0.781                   -3.740**
  2014
                                                    (0.800)                   (1.826)
                                                   2.011**                    -1.713
  2015
                                                    (0.790)                   (1.949)
                                                     1.295                    -1.760
  2016
                                                    (0.828)                   (2.255)
                                                   1.876**                    -0.312
  2017
                                                    (0.780)                   (2.659)
                                                   2.420***                    1.150
  2018
                                                    (0.863)                   (3.112)

  DDD:
  Veteran*Year*Rural
  (base: 2010)
                                                   2.536                       2.253
  2011
                                                  (2.695)                    (2.801)
                                                   2.921                       3.466
  2012
                                                  (2.850)                    (3.107)
                                                10.256***                   11.263***
  2013
                                                  (2.952)                    (3.314)
                                                 9.017***                   9.496***
  2014
                                                  (2.984)                    (3.437)
                                                 8.424***                   9.354***
  2015
                                                  (3.042)                    (3.437)
                                                 8.235***                   9.590***
  2016
                                                  (3.070)                    (3.455)
                                                  5.309*                      6.869*
  2017
                                                  (3.086)                    (3.616)
                                                  5.289*                      6.386*
  2018
                                                  (3.173)                    (3.717)
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The dependent variable in the linear model is the suicide
rate per 100,000 individuals at the county-year level. Both regressions are weighted by the
total population in each county and include county and year fixed effects with standard errors
clustered by county. Control variables in column 2 include: PDMP indicators, number of
inpatient and outpatient addiction treatment centers, interactions between PDMP policies and
treatment centers, and estimates of the percentage of the population aged 18-34, female, and
black, the unemployment rate, median income, and percentage that have some college
experience, all for both veteran and non-veteran populations separately. Finally, all control
variables are interacted with veteran and rural county status.




                                              38
Table 4: OSI Regression Results (Poisson)
                                   Poisson QMLE        Poisson QMLE
                                  (without controls)   (with controls)
Dependent Variable                  Suicide Count       Suicide Count

Variables
Civilian Suicide Rate by
Year (base: 2010)
                                         0.018              0.014
2011
                                        (0.024)            (0.053)
                                        -0.066              -0.024
2012
                                        (0.048)            (0.077)
                                        -0.011              0.099
2013
                                        (0.030)            (0.078)
                                        0.061*             0.199**
2014
                                        (0.033)            (0.099)
                                       0.175***            0.344**
2015
                                        (0.065)            (0.136)
                                       0.192***            0.379**
2016
                                        (0.070)            (0.154)
                                       0.226***            0.411**
2017
                                        (0.070)            (0.172)
                                       0.268***            0.422**
2018
                                        (0.063)            (0.191)

Veteran*Year
(base: 2010)
                                        0.004               0.050
2011
                                       (0.048)             (0.053)
                                       0.087*             0.145***
2012
                                       (0.049)             (0.055)
                                        0.037              0.096*
2013
                                       (0.055)             (0.057)
                                        0.002               0.078
2014
                                       (0.075)             (0.076)
                                       -0.008               0.062
2015
                                       (0.084)             (0.088)
                                        0.010               0.075
2016
                                       (0.089)             (0.095)
                                        0.016               0.076
2017
                                       (0.096)             (0.108)
                                       -0.032               0.024
2018
                                       (0.081)             (0.095)

Year*Rural
(base: 2010)
                                       -0.012              -0.024
2011
                                       (0.048)             (0.069)
                                        0.041              -0.063
2012
                                       (0.069)             (0.094)
                                                      0.010                    -0.179*
  2013
                                                     (0.060)                   (0.102)
                                                     -0.053                   -0.304**
  2014
                                                     (0.058)                   (0.118)
                                                     -0.000                    -0.288*
  2015
                                                     (0.078)                   (0.149)
                                                     -0.062                   -0.367**
  2016
                                                     (0.085)                   (0.165)
                                                     -0.020                    -0.316*
  2017
                                                     (0.080)                   (0.180)
                                                     -0.037                     -0.294
  2018
                                                     (0.080)                   (0.201)

  DDD:
  Veteran*Year*Rural
  (base: 2010)
                                                      0.193*                    0.187
  2011
                                                     (0.112)                   (0.115)
                                                       0.151                    0.200
  2012
                                                     (0.114)                   (0.122)
                                                    0.326***                  0.405***
  2013
                                                     (0.126)                   (0.136)
                                                    0.370***                  0.446***
  2014
                                                     (0.132)                   (0.141)
                                                     0.326**                  0.408***
  2015
                                                     (0.127)                   (0.133)
                                                     0.306**                  0.394***
  2016
                                                     (0.131)                   (0.137)
                                                       0.207                   0.298**
  2017
                                                     (0.135)                   (0.147)
                                                      0.256*                   0.344**
  2018
                                                     (0.133)                   (0.143)
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The dependent variable in the Poisson QMLE
specification is the count of suicides at the county-year level. Both regressions are weighted by
the total population in each county and include county and year fixed effects with standard
errors clustered by county. Control variables in column 2 include: PDMP indicators, number
of inpatient and outpatient addiction treatment centers, interactions between PDMP policies
and treatment centers, and estimates for the percentage of the population aged 18-34, female,
and black, the unemployment rate, median income, and percentage that have some college
experience, all for both veteran and non-veteran populations separately. Finally, all control
variables are interacted with veteran and rural county status.




                                               40
       Table 5: OSI Regression Results (OLS with Controls)
                           OLS              OLS              OLS            OLS
Dependent              Homicides/          Legal        Unintentional   Undetermined
Variable                   100K         Intervention       Firearm         Intent
                                        Deaths/100k      Deaths/100K    Deaths/100K
Variables
Civilian Suicide
Rate by Year
(base: 2010)
                           0.062            0.016            0.022        -1.147**
2011
                          (0.234)          (0.050)          (0.028)        (0.486)
                        -0.937***          -0.082            0.040        -1.693**
2012
                          (0.357)          (0.073)          (0.039)        (0.686)
                        -0.915***          -0.119            0.069        -2.133**
2013
                          (0.352)          (0.091)          (0.046)        (0.958)
                        -1.146***          -0.065            0.052        -2.355**
2014
                          (0.416)          (0.094)          (0.052)        (1.161)
                           0.549           -0.006            0.021         -1.945*
2015
                          (0.423)          (0.100)          (0.058)        (1.166)
                         1.183**            0.056            0.012          -1.077
2016
                          (0.471)          (0.117)          (0.075)        (1.116)
                         1.532***           0.149           -0.048          -1.409
2017
                          (0.549)          (0.139)          (0.102)        (1.393)
                          1.232*           0.303*           -0.099          -1.567
2018
                          (0.661)          (0.173)          (0.132)        (1.601)

Veteran*Year
(base: 2010)
                        -0.260           -0.090             0.132           0.217
2011
                        (0.447)          (0.147)           (0.084)         (0.339)
                         0.351           -0.060            0.161*           -0.741
2012
                        (0.468)          (0.123)           (0.082)         (0.516)
                         0.497            0.148             0.002           -0.216
2013
                        (0.527)          (0.142)           (0.073)         (0.375)
                         0.145            0.040             0.086         -0.877**
2014
                        (0.531)          (0.153)           (0.103)         (0.369)
                         0.019           -0.040             0.017          -0.607*
2015
                        (0.685)          (0.161)           (0.089)         (0.367)
                        -0.572            0.066             0.123           -0.192
2016
                        (0.602)          (0.174)           (0.098)         (0.435)
                        -0.957            0.134            -0.042           -0.175
2017
                        (0.610)          (0.176)           (0.096)         (0.379)
                        -0.900           -0.155             0.095           0.514
2018
                        (0.712)          (0.169)           (0.109)         (0.546)

Year*Rural
(base: 2010)
2011                     0.683            -0.097           0.021          1.456***

                                          41
                              (0.451)               (0.099)               (0.083)              (0.551)
                               0.586                 0.099                 -0.122              1.674**
2012
                              (0.609)               (0.139)               (0.103)              (0.730)
                               0.378                 0.211                -0.231*              2.107**
2013
                              (0.678)               (0.178)               (0.123)              (1.003)
                               0.318                 0.121               -0.285**               1.941
2014
                              (0.787)               (0.188)               (0.134)              (1.201)
                              -0.154                 0.264                 -0.210               1.434
2015
                              (0.788)               (0.204)               (0.136)              (1.212)
                              -0.070                 0.204                 -0.122               0.801
2016
                              (0.845)               (0.231)               (0.146)              (1.181)
                              -1.486                 0.011                 -0.159               1.139
2017
                              (0.958)               (0.293)               (0.175)              (1.462)
                              -0.421                 0.000                 -0.129               0.753
2018
                              (1.139)               (0.360)               (0.206)              (1.670)

DDD:
Veteran*Year*
Rural
(base: 2010)
                               -0.011                0.053                 0.154                -0.429
2011
                              (1.036)               (0.288)              (0.257)               (0.670)
                               0.360                 0.528                0.000                  1.315
2012
                              (1.142)               (0.418)              (0.239)               (0.802)
                               0.652                 -0.033              0.841**                 0.398
2013
                              (1.221)               (0.353)              (0.331)               (0.690)
                               0.472                 0.490                0.009                1.796**
2014
                              (1.228)               (0.416)              (0.276)               (0.750)
                               -0.410                0.236                -0.050               1.825**
2015
                              (1.328)               (0.383)              (0.257)               (0.799)
                                0.104                0.092                 0.031                 1.133
2016
                              (1.269)               (0.413)              (0.327)               (0.850)
                               2.002                 0.475                -0.072                1.453*
2017
                              (1.279)               (0.445)              (0.234)               (0.838)
                                0.214                0.089                 0.147                 0.744
2018
                              (1.387)               (0.389)              (0.289)               (0.877)

Pre-Treatment                  4.458                 0.287                0.174                 2.385
Weighted                      (7.453)               (1.983)              (1.677)               (5.531)
Means
       Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The dependent variables in these OLS specifications are
       deaths from homicides, legal interventions (e.g. involving law enforcement), unintentional
       firearms, and deaths with undetermined intent at the county-year level. All regressions are
       weighted by the total population in each county and include county and year fixed effects with
       standard errors clustered by county. Control variables include: PDMP indicators, number of
       inpatient and outpatient addiction treatment centers, interactions between PDMP policies and
       treatment centers, and estimates for the percentage of the population aged 18-34, female, and
       black, the unemployment rate, median income, and percentage that have some college
       experience, all for both veteran and non-veteran populations separately. Finally, all control
       variables are interacted with veteran and rural county status.



                                                    42
Table 6: OSI Regression Results (OLS with controls)
                                          OLS              OLS
                                  All Violent Deaths    All Violent
 Dependent Variable
                                      Excluding        Deaths/100K
                                    Suicides/100K
 Variables
 Civilian Suicide Rate by
 Year (base: 2010)
                                        -1.047*             -0.172
 2011
                                        (0.574)            (0.771)
                                       -2.672***         -3.107***
 2012
                                        (0.793)            (1.155)
                                       -3.098***          -2.715**
 2013
                                        (1.020)            (1.362)
                                       -3.514***           -2.844*
 2014
                                        (1.258)            (1.601)
                                         -1.381             0.406
 2015
                                        (1.196)            (1.637)
                                         0.175              1.818
 2016
                                        (1.174)            (1.769)
                                         0.224              1.722
 2017
                                        (1.475)            (2.162)
                                         -0.131             1.442
 2018
                                        (1.732)            (2.533)

 Veteran*Year
 (base: 2010)
                                          0.000           1.664
 2011
                                         (0.589)         (1.284)
                                         -0.289           1.920
 2012
                                         (0.769)         (1.493)
                                          0.431           2.276
 2013
                                         (0.711)         (1.507)
                                         -0.606           1.696
 2014
                                         (0.712)         (1.709)
                                         -0.612           3.068
 2015
                                         (0.893)         (1.898)
                                         -0.575          3.706**
 2016
                                         (0.783)         (1.726)
                                         -1.041          4.781**
 2017
                                         (0.671)         (1.876)
                                         -0.447          4.173**
 2018
                                         (0.758)         (1.960)

 Year*Rural
 (base: 2010)

                                    43
                                                  2.063***                    1.766
  2011
                                                   (0.756)                   (1.280)
                                                  2.236**                     0.323
  2012
                                                   (0.975)                   (1.693)
                                                  2.466**                    -0.292
  2013
                                                   (1.242)                   (2.100)
                                                    2.095                    -1.644
  2014
                                                   (1.475)                   (2.355)
                                                    1.334                    -0.379
  2015
                                                   (1.436)                   (2.401)
                                                    0.812                    -0.947
  2016
                                                   (1.455)                   (2.673)
                                                   -0.494                    -0.807
  2017
                                                   (1.792)                   (3.200)
                                                    0.203                     1.353
  2018
                                                   (2.091)                   (3.725)

  DDD:
  Veteran*Year*Rural
  (base: 2010)
                                                   -0.234                     2.019
  2011
                                                  (1.293)                   (3.190)
                                                    2.203                     5.669
  2012
                                                  (1.477)                   (3.517)
                                                    1.858                  13.122***
  2013
                                                  (1.483)                   (3.762)
                                                   2.768*                  12.264***
  2014
                                                  (1.518)                   (3.837)
                                                    1.600                  10.954***
  2015
                                                  (1.719)                   (3.966)
                                                    1.360                  10.950***
  2016
                                                  (1.617)                   (3.960)
                                                  3.859**                  10.728***
  2017
                                                  (1.600)                   (4.003)
                                                    1.194                    7.580*
  2018
                                                  (1.651)                   (4.155)

  Pre-Treatment Weighted                           7.303                     28.500
  Means                                           (10.223)                  (23.424)
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The dependent variables in these linear models are all
violent deaths rate per 100,000 individuals excluding suicides and all violent deaths rate per
100,000 individuals including suicides at the county-year level. Both regressions are weighted
by the total population in each county and include county and year fixed effects with standard
errors clustered by county. Control variables include: PDMP indicators, number of inpatient
and outpatient addiction treatment centers, interactions between PDMP policies and treatment
centers, and estimates for the percentage of the population aged 18-34, female, and black, the
unemployment rate, median income, and percentage that have some college experience, all for
both veteran and non-veteran populations separately. Finally, all control variables are
interacted with veteran and rural county status.




                                             44
     Table 7: Veteran Migration Regression Results
                                                              OLS
              Dependent Variable                         Percent Veteran

              Variables
              Year
              (base: 2010)
                                                              -0.003***
              2011
                                                               (<0.001)
                                                              -0.005***
              2012
                                                               (<0.001)
                                                              -0.009***
              2013
                                                               (<0.001)
                                                              -0.012***
              2014
                                                               (<0.001)
                                                              -0.015***
              2015
                                                               (<0.001)
                                                              -0.018***
              2016
                                                               (<0.001)
                                                              -0.022***
              2017
                                                               (<0.001)
                                                              -0.024***
              2018
                                                               (<0.001)

              Rural*Year
              (base: 2010)
                                                               <0.001
              2011
                                                              (<0.001)
                                                               <0.001
              2012
                                                              (<0.001)
                                                              -<0.001
              2013
                                                               (0.001)
                                                              -<0.001
              2014
                                                               (0.001)
                                                              -<0.001
              2015
                                                               (0.001)
                                                               -0.001
              2016
                                                               (0.001)
                                                               -0.001
              2017
                                                               (0.001)
                                                               -0.001
              2018
                                                               (0.001)
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The dependent variable is the percent of a county's
population that is made up of veterans and military personnel; this regression is weighted by
total county population and includes county and year fixed effects.
Figure A1 States in our sample are highlighted in blue.




                          46
Figure A2 Average county-year suicide trend for veteran/military personnel
and civilians, differentiated by urban-rural status, and weighted by total county
population.




                                       47
Table A1: OSI Regression Results (longer time horizon)
                                        OLS
                                  (without controls)
Dependent Variable               Suicide Rate/100K

Variables
Civilian Suicide Rate by
Year (base: 2004)
                                      0.931**
2005
                                       (0.431)
                                      1.616***
2006
                                       (0.412)
                                      2.743***
2007
                                       (0.479)
                                      2.671***
2008
                                       (0.481)
                                      2.845***
2009
                                       (0.458)
                                      2.906***
2010
                                       (0.488)
                                      3.543***
2011
                                       (0.538)
                                      2.221***
2012
                                       (0.596)
                                      2.851***
2013
                                       (0.579)
                                      3.620***
2014
                                       (0.541)
                                      5.234***
2015
                                       (0.592)
                                      5.527***
2016
                                       (0.588)
                                      5.936***
2017
                                       (0.582)
                                      6.481***
2018
                                       (0.570)

Veteran*Year
(base: 2004)
                                        1.331
2005
                                       (1.006)
                                        0.449
2006
                                       (1.017)
                                        1.455
2007
                                       (1.121)
                                       2.507**
2008
                                       (1.032)
                                       2.866**
2009
                                       (1.140)

                           48
                          3.022***
2010
                           (1.122)
                          3.754***
2011
                           (1.025)
                          4.491***
2012
                           (1.097)
                          4.049***
2013
                           (1.039)
                          4.833***
2014
                           (1.259)
                          6.770***
2015
                           (1.260)
                          7.764***
2016
                           (1.146)
                          9.426***
2017
                           (1.350)
                          8.269***
2018
                           (1.228)

Year*Rural
(base: 2004)
                          1.754**
2005
                           (0.768)
                            0.878
2006
                           (0.740)
                            0.529
2007
                           (0.816)
                           1.445*
2008
                           (0.789)
                          1.562**
2009
                           (0.784)
                          2.120***
2010
                           (0.817)
                          3.109***
2011
                           (0.894)
                          3.011***
2012
                           (0.968)
                          3.460***
2013
                           (0.962)
                          2.899***
2014
                           (0.922)
                          4.124***
2015
                           (0.933)
                          3.409***
2016
                           (0.961)
                          4.002***
2017
                           (0.912)
                          4.530***
2018
                           (0.968)

DDD:
Veteran*Year*Rural

                     49
              (base: 2004)
                                                                2.052
              2005
                                                              (2.593)
                                                                2.941
              2006
                                                              (2.496)
                                                                3.261
              2007
                                                              (2.513)
                                                                3.392
              2008
                                                              (2.556)
                                                                2.452
              2009
                                                              (2.535)
                                                               -3.481
              2010
                                                              (2.650)
                                                               -0.946
              2011
                                                              (2.466)
                                                               -0.560
              2012
                                                              (2.498)
                                                              6.775**
              2013
                                                              (2.748)
                                                              5.536**
              2014
                                                              (2.808)
                                                               4.943*
              2015
                                                              (2.892)
                                                                4.753
              2016
                                                              (2.894)
                                                                1.786
              2017
                                                              (3.005)
                                                                1.691
              2018
                                                              (3.098)
Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The dependent variable in the linear model is the suicide
rate per 100,000 individuals at the county-year level. This regression is weighted by the total
population in each county and include county and year fixed effects with standard errors
clustered by county.




                                              50
Table A2: OSI Regression Results (OLS) for Rural Counties
                                          OLS                  OLS
                                   (without controls)     (with controls)
 Dependent Variable                  Suicides/100k        Suicides/100k

  Variables
  Rural Civilian Suicide Rate
  by Year (base: 2010)
                                                  1.628**                     0.595
  2011
                                                   (0.663)                   (0.861)
                                                    0.211                   -2.333**
  2012
                                                   (0.705)                   (1.099)
                                                   1.290*                    -2.374*
  2013
                                                   (0.731)                   (1.391)
                                                  1.497**                   -3.105**
  2014
                                                   (0.719)                   (1.564)
                                                  4.342***                    0.018
  2015
                                                   (0.695)                   (1.639)
                                                  3.919***                    -0.207
  2016
                                                   (0.727)                   (1.862)
                                                  4.911***                    1.040
  2017
                                                   (0.677)                   (2.165)
                                                  5.999***                    2.520
  2018
                                                   (0.779)                   (2.514)

  Rural Veteran Suicide
  Rate: Year*Veteran
  (base: 2010)
                                                   3.268                      3.896
  2011
                                                 (2.485)                    (2.565)
                                                  4.390*                    5.678**
  2012
                                                 (2.642)                    (2.823)
                                                11.283***                  13.152***
  2013
                                                 (2.750)                    (3.046)
                                                10.827***                  11.915***
  2014
                                                 (2.697)                     (3.119)
                                                12.172***                  13.186***
  2015
                                                 (2.772)                     (3.115)
                                                12.976***                  14.071***
  2016
                                                 (2.814)                     (3.161)
                                                11.712***                  12.958***
  2017
                                                 (2.779)                    (3.244)
                                                10.536***                  11.333***
  2018
                                                 (2.909)                    (3.321)

Note: *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The dependent variable in the linear model is the suicide
rate per 100,000 individuals at the rural county-year level. Both regressions are weighted by
the total population in each county and include county and year fixed effects with standard
errors clustered by county. Control variables in column 2 include: PDMP indicators, number
of inpatient and outpatient addiction treatment centers, interactions between PDMP policies
and treatment centers, and estimates for the percentage of the population aged 18-34, female,
and black, the unemployment rate, median income, and percentage that have some college

                                             51
experience, all for both veteran and non-veteran populations separately. Finally, all control
variables are interacted with veteran and rural county status.




                                               52
