                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            NO FREE LAUNCH: AT-RISK ENTRY BY GENERIC DRUG FIRMS

                                         Keith M. Drake
                                            Robert He
                                        Thomas McGuire
                                       Alice K. Ndikumana

                                       Working Paper 29131
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29131


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2021




McGuire acknowledges research support from a Dean's Initiative Award from Harvard Medical
School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w29131.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Keith M. Drake, Robert He, Thomas McGuire, and Alice K. Ndikumana. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
No Free Launch: At-Risk Entry by Generic Drug Firms
Keith M. Drake, Robert He, Thomas McGuire, and Alice K. Ndikumana
NBER Working Paper No. 29131
August 2021
JEL No. D22,I11,I18,O32

                                           ABSTRACT

After receiving FDA approval, a generic drug manufacturer can launch "at risk" before
conclusion of any patent infringement litigation, but it risks paying damages if it loses. The
generic can eliminate the risk by waiting to launch until the appeals process is complete but
waiting has downsides too. We develop a model that implies that, after the generic has won a
district court decision, at-risk entry is generally profitable and will occur quickly unless the cost
of waiting for the appeal is very low. We examine generic drug applications that have received
FDA approval with "first-filer" status (which precludes later filing generics from entering before
the first filer). In our data, the generic and brand usually settled prior to the conclusion of
litigation. For the remainder, drugs that received FDA approval prior to a favorable district court
decision were always launched at risk. Generics without FDA approval before a favorable
district court decision launched upon approval unless the approval was close in time to the appeal
decision or it had forfeited the first filer exclusivity (indicating a low cost of waiting). We also
consider implications of at-risk entry for social welfare, arguing that at-risk entry is analogous to
a "buy out" of the patent with favorable welfare implications in both the short run (consumer
prices) and long run (efficient incentives for R&D).

Keith M. Drake                                    Thomas McGuire
Greylock McKinnon Associates                      Department of Health Care Policy
35 S. Main Street                                 Harvard Medical School
Suite 306                                         180 Longwood Avenue
Hanover, NH 03755                                 Boston, MA 02115
kdrake@gma-us.com                                 and NBER
                                                  mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Robert He
Greylock McKinnon Associates                      Alice K. Ndikumana
35 S. Main Street                                 Department of Health Care Policy
Suite 306                                         Harvard Medical School
Hanover, NH 03755                                 180 Longwood Avenue
rhe@gma-us.com                                    Boston, MA 02115
                                                  andikumana@g.harvard.edu
I. Introduction

The central issue in regulation of pharmaceutical drug markets is managing the tradeoff between

encouraging innovator firms to invest in development of new products and making drugs

available to buyers at competitive prices. 1 In the pharmaceutical industry, a combination of

patent protection and market exclusivities governed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

balances these objectives. Patent protection policy involves statutory exclusivities, requirements

to obtain a patent, rules for challenging and defending a patent, and other elements, some of

which are unique to the drug industry. 2 Market exclusivities are periods during which the FDA

will not approve applications from follow-on competitors for an innovator drug (e.g., generic

manufacturers). The Hatch Waxman Act of 1984 changed the incentives for both innovator and

generic pharmaceutical firms. For innovator firms, the new regulations increased incentives to

invest in innovation by introducing new exclusivity periods and extending existing exclusivities.

For generic firms, the Hatch Waxman Act created a mechanism for challenging the patents

obtained by innovator firms. 3 This Hatch Waxman-created mechanism (described below) allows

a generic firm to technically "infringe" on a brand firm's patent(s) before selling its product,

allowing a pathway for a patent infringement lawsuit without the generic challenger running the

risk of paying damages to the patent holder. A district court's decision about validity and

infringement may be appealed so that final resolution of the litigation typically follows an

appeals court decision.




1
    For discussion of the tradeoff between investment in research and competitive pricing in pharmaceutical markets,
    see, for example, Berndt (2002) and Goldman and Lakdawalla (2011).
2
    For a discussion of how the patent system in the pharmaceutical industries differs from other industries, see
    Lemley (2008).
3
    The Hatch-Waxman Act's official name is the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act (Pub. L.
    No. 98-418).

                                                           2
      The technical-infringement mechanism created by Hatch Waxman has led to more patent

challenges (Frank 2007; Hemphill and Sampat 2011), which frequently end with a negotiated

entry date for the generic in a settlement agreement (Greene and Steadman 2010). If brand and

generic litigants have not settled, the generic firm can elect to infringe in the conventional way

by selling product prior to resolution of the patent litigation. After receiving FDA approval for

its product (based on criteria unrelated to patent validity), the generic firm can, in the parlance of

the drug industry, enter and sell "at risk." This mode of entry is considered "at risk" because

generic sales reduce profits of the patent holder, presenting the generic seller with a risk of

paying compensation to the brand if the patent is found valid and infringed.

      While the joint decision of a brand and a challenging generic about settlement has received a

great deal of attention in the academic literature, 4 a generic firm's unilateral decision to enter at

risk has received much less, despite the potentially massive consequences for social welfare.

The price at which the brand sells a drug typically vastly exceeds the price at which the generic

sells a bioequivalent product (Berndt, McGuire, and Newhouse 2011). For example, at-risk

entry that accelerates competitive pricing of a single "blockbuster" drug with annual sales of $2

billion by one-year effects a transfer of $1.4 billion or more from a brand firm to consumers,

with both the short- and long-term welfare consequences.

      Prior to a district court decision, a generic's decision about at-risk entry is made in the

presence of considerable uncertainty. Once the district court decision has resolved most (but not

all) of the uncertainty, the generic's calculus changes. This paper picks up the story at this point

with a simple model of the benefits and costs to a generic in connection with the decision to enter



4
    The concern is that an agreement about the terms and timing of competition between potential rivals may
    maximize their joint profits at the expense of consumers. See, for example, Shapiro (2003); Elhauge and Kruger
    (2012); Edlin et al. (2013); Edlin et al. (2015); and Drake, Starr, and McGuire (2015).

                                                          3
at risk after a district court decision. We use the model to generate predictions about the timing

of at-risk entry and go on to compare the model's predictions with data on the frequency of at-

risk launch opportunities and launches from 2005-2020 which we assembled for this purpose.

Our data include information about whether the at-risk launch was found to infringe, and if so,

what information we could glean about how much the generic paid in damages to the brand.

   The model of benefits and costs implies that, assuming the chance of the generic winning on

appeal is high, at-risk entry is generally profitable and will occur "as soon as possible" unless the

cost of waiting for the appeals court decision is very low, in which case the generic will not

launch at risk. Our empirical results support this prediction. In our data, the generic most often

settled early in the litigation process. However, generics that did not settle, and that received

FDA approval prior to a favorable district court decision, were launched at risk 100% of the

time. If the generic did not have FDA approval at the time of a favorable decision, it launched

upon approval unless the final approval was obtained close in time to the appeals court decision

(indicating the cost of waiting was low) or they had forfeited the exclusivity period (also

reducing the cost of waiting).

   Section II provides background on the relevant regulations of the pharmaceutical industry. In

Section III, we present a model of the benefits and costs of the generic's at-risk entry decision.

Section IV describes the assembly of our novel data set on at-risk entry opportunities, empirical

methods, and results. Section V broadens the perspective to consider the benefits and costs of at-

risk entry from the standpoint of economic efficiency. We argue that more and faster at-risk

entry would improve social welfare in both the short and the long term. In brief, as long as

generic firms are liable for brand lost profits for patents found valid and infringed, incentives for

innovator firms to pursue novel research and subsequently file for patents with a high likelihood



                                                  4
of withstanding a patent challenge are maintained. At the same time consumer prices are moved

towards marginal cost. We observe that at-risk entry is roughly equivalent to the generic firm

"buying out" the patent, paying the patent holder expected value of monopoly profits, and

putting the patent in the public domain (Kremer 1998). Long-term incentives for research are

actually improved because more frequent at-risk entry would direct financial incentives away

from research leading to weak patents needlessly blocking generic entry and towards truly

innovative research.


II. Background

A. CIRCUMSTANCES OF AT-RISK ENTRY IN THE DRUG INDUSTRY

The Hatch-Waxman Act balanced the competing goals of promoting competition by generic

drugs, resulting in lower drug prices, while maintaining pharmaceutical companies' incentives to

develop new and better drugs. Hatch-Waxman increased the economic rewards for innovation

by giving innovator, or brand name, drug manufacturers longer periods of market exclusivity for

newly approved products (Hemphill and Lemley 2011). To expediate generic entry, Hatch-

Waxman also introduced the Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA) process, which

enabled generic manufacturers to apply for approval based on proof of bioequivalence to an

approved brand drug, relying on clinical trial results from the associated brand drug. The Act

also created incentives for generic manufacturers to challenge weak, invalid, or improperly listed

patents to prevent such patents from blocking competition by lower-priced generics.

   A generic drug manufacturer submitting an ANDA to the FDA with a "Paragraph IV"

certification is asserting that patents purportedly covering the brand drug are invalid,

unenforceable, or uninfringed by its product. The generic has 30 days to notify the brand

manufacturer of its ANDA filing. The brand then has 45-days from receipt of the notice to sue

                                                  5
the generic for patent infringement, which initiates a 30-month stay during which the FDA will

not approve the generic's drug unless the generic wins the litigation. During the 30-month stay,

the generic can receive "tentative approval," which essentially means that, aside from the stay,

the generic product is approvable. After the 30-month stay expires, the FDA can approve the

generic's product regardless of whether patent litigation is ongoing, which gives the generic the

option to launch at risk. However, the brand can petition the court for an injunction that prevents

the generic from launching during the litigation (21 U.S. Code § 314.107; Lietzan and Julia Post

2016).

      Any launch before the conclusion of the patent infringement litigation is "at risk" because it

exposes the generic to the risk of paying damages to the brand. The generic could end up paying

more in damages than it earned in profits during the at-risk launch because the brand's profits are

lost at a high price while the generic's profits are made at a lower price. Furthermore, a court

may require the generic to pay triple damages if the generic is found to have exhibited willful or

wanton infringement. 5 The generic can mitigate its risk of paying damages by waiting to launch

until after a favorable district court decision, or it can eliminate the risk entirely by waiting until

the appeals process is complete or by settling with the brand at any time.

      However, waiting to launch can be costly, due to discounting of future revenues and potential

unfavorable market developments. For example, the brand market may be getting smaller over

time. 6 This is especially likely if the brand attempts to retain sales at a high price by claiming

new patents for modifications of the original product, referred to as "line extensions," and works

to move patients from the original formulation to the line extension prior to loss of patent


5
    Triple damages, also referred to as "treble damages," are imposed at the discretion of the court. For further
    discussion of triple damages see Powers and Carlson (2001).
6
    Brand drug sales are sometimes described as having a natural "life cycle" described by an inverted U-shaped sales
    curve. See Fischer, Leeflang, and Verhoef (2010).

                                                           6
protection on the original product. Success with this strategy, referred to by critics as "product

hopping," greatly reduces sales of the generic version of the original formulation (Cheng 2008;

Carrier and Shadowen 2016). Waiting to launch also provides other generics more time to

receive FDA approval, which could result in a more competitive generic market after entry.

      A generic submitting the first substantially complete ANDA with Paragraph IV certification

is referred to as a "first filer." First filers are granted a 180-day exclusivity period during which

the FDA will not approve other ANDAs (Section 505(j)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act; Lietzan 2004).

The exclusivity period begins on the first day that the first filer markets the product, meaning

that subsequent filers cannot launch until 181 days after the first filer. The exclusivity period

enables the first filer to charge prices above those with multiple generic competitors. This

"prize" encourages applications that challenge weak patents unnecessarily restricting generic

entry. Multiple generics can share first-to-file status and the associated right to the exclusivity

period if they file on the same day, and any first filer can launch at risk after receiving FDA

approval. Additionally, the brand can launch its own "authorized generic" at any time and so can

compete with first filers after an at-risk launch, including during the 180-day exclusivity period. 7

Later filing generics cannot launch at risk unless the exclusivity period has expired or been

forfeited.

      A first filer must receive tentative FDA approval within 30-months of filing its ANDA to

retain its right to the 180-day exclusivity period (Section 505(j)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act). If the

first filer launches at risk, the exclusivity period begins upon launch; however, the 180-day

period continues to run if the brand wins an injunction blocking the generic's sales. If the first

filer chooses not to launch at risk, it can use its right to the exclusivity period (thus blocking later


7
    Authorized generics are typically launched within a few days of the first ANDA generic launch. See Farrell et al.
    (2011).

                                                           7
filers from entering) by either winning the litigation or settling for a licensed entry date, and it

forfeits the exclusivity period if it loses the patent infringement litigation.

    Brand and generic firms may negotiate a settlement at any point during the litigation process.

The settlement will include an agreed upon entry date for the generic firm and may also include

other terms.


B. RESEARCH ON AT-RISK ENTRY

At-risk entry is the norm in many industries (Lemley 2008). Most entrants invent and begin

selling products without notifying patent owners of potential infringement. Makers of most new

products are not accused of patent infringement, but when litigation does occur, it begins after

the products have been sold and patents have purportedly been infringed. In the pharmaceutical

industry, the FDA prohibits entry of generic drugs during exclusivity periods awarded to newly

approved brand drugs and strictly regulates entry after they expire. The Paragraph IV

certification enables generic manufacturers to begin the required approval process for entry

before applicable patents expire. However, unlike other industries, generic entrants in the drug

industry must notify the patent owners before they start selling ­ at the time of application ­

triggering possible litigation. Generic firms are effectively kept out of the market for 30 months

after the initiation of litigation because the FDA is prohibited from issuing final approval during

this time.

    Some authors have argued that, in the drug industry, generic companies file patent challenges

indiscriminately hoping to obtain favorable settlement terms from the patent owner. These

authors argue that the practice of "patent prospecting" undermines brand firms' incentives to

conduct R&D by diluting protection of intellectual property. Grabowski and colleagues found

that Paragraph IV challenges have shortened the effective exclusivity period for brand drugs,

                                                   8
measured as the time from brand drug launch to first generic launch. Over time, a greater share

of brand drugs face a Paragraph IV challenge and the challenges are occurring earlier, meaning

the time between a brand drug launching and facing its first challenge has declined (Higgins and

Graham 2009; Grabowski and Kyle 2007; Grabowski et al. 2011).

      Other authors have investigated the other side of the story. Brand firms have increasingly

acquired low-quality and late-expiring patents to extend their patent protection beyond the term

of the active ingredient patent, a strategy referred to as "evergreening." Based on their empirical

analysis, Hemphill and Sampat found that patent challenges usefully target weak and late-

expiring patents and offset the proliferation of lower-quality patents. Patent challenges are more

common for higher sales drugs largely because higher sales drugs are more likely to be covered

by multiple low-quality patents. The increase in patent challenges has not impacted the market

term of active ingredient patents (Hemphill and Sampat 2012).

      There are some reports on the frequency of at-risk launches in the drug industry but none, so

far as we know, containing recent data. After winning a district court decision on summary

judgment, Geneva Pharmaceuticals was the first firm to launch at-risk in 2002 with its generic

version of Augmentin (Manspeizer 2014). By 2007, some larger generic companies launched

products even before a district court decision (O'Malley, Jr. et al. 2011). A 2010 financial

analyst report identified 28 at-risk launches between 2003 and 2009. 8 A January 2014 legal

publication reported that at-risk launches have occurred "at least 26 times" since the Augmentin

launch (Manspeizer 2014). While these findings indicate that at-risk launches are occurring, the

drugs subject to at-risk launch are still a small fraction of the thousands of drugs subject to patent

protection.


8
    Greene & Steadman (2010) defined at-risk launches narrowly "as launch prior to a trial court decision" and thus
    excluded at-risk launches after a district court decision.

                                                           9
    When the generic launches at risk and then loses the patent infringement case, the brand is

entitled to damages based on its lost profits (Manspeizer 2014). However, determining the

magnitude of those lost profits can be complicated from both an economic and legal standpoint.

For example, the brand often launches its own "authorized generic" in response to the infringing

generic, and the question arises of whether the generic should be held responsible for lost brand

sales and price erosion caused by the brand's own authorized generic. The small number of legal

trials determining damages, usually taking place after the generic has lost a separate patent

infringement trial, have all ended in settlement. 9


III. Weighing The Benefits And Costs Of An At-Risk Launch After A Favorable District
     Court Decision

To launch at risk, a generic firm needs final FDA approval, which it can receive at any point

during the patent infringement litigation after any relevant exclusivity periods, such as the 30-

month stay, expire. The generic often (but not always) receives FDA approval soon after a

district court decision, which can end an injunction or 30-month stay. 10 Here we characterize the

generic's decision to enter at risk after both winning a district court decision and receiving final

FDA approval. At the end of this section, we comment on how the decision differs for a generic

that has received FDA approval and is considering a launch before a district court decision, a

decision by the generic which involves more uncertainty and a greater risk of paying damages.

    The generic manufacturer with final FDA approval in patent litigation with a brand must

decide whether and when to launch at risk as information emerges in discovery and in court




9
   As described below, the lone case that did not end in settlement involved the drug Plavix. But in that case, the
   brand and generic had previously agreed on how damages would be calculated in a settlement.
10
   During the 30-month stay, the FDA cannot grant final approval unless the court makes a decision in favor of the
   generic drug. If a generic drug has otherwise met the requirements for FDA approval, a district court decision in
   favor of the generic firm enables the FDA to grant final approval.

                                                         10
decisions, and against the background of ongoing settlement negotiations. 11 One option is to

wait for an appeals court decision. We refer to the expected payoff from waiting to enter until

after appeals as p0 , where p represents the probability of a favorable final litigation outcome

for the generic (i.e., win on appeal contingent on a win at district) and 0 the present value of the

profits to be made with entry at that time. 12 There is no risk of paying damages after a favorable

appeals court decision.

     A generic's expected profits from entry at risk after a favorable district court decision depend

on the profits the generic can make during an at-risk entry, and the expected value of any

damages it must pay to the brand. Let g be the profits the generic gains by launching at risk

prior to an appeals court decision and after final FDA approval, and b be the profits lost by the

brand during the generic's at-risk entry. If the patent is ultimately found valid and infringed, the

generic can expect to pay some share, s, of the brand profits in damages, where s could be less

than or greater than one. The expected damages are thus (1 - p)sb where (1 - p) is the

likelihood that the generic does not win patent litigation. Note that the generic keeps any profits

it makes during the at-risk entry even if it must pay damages to the brand.

     The generic will launch at risk if expected profits from launching at risk exceed expected

profits from waiting to launch until after the appeals court decision.



                                  g - (1 - p)sb > p0                           (1)



11
   The generic may settle with the brand at any time during the litigation. Theoretical literature on brand-generic
   patent litigation has focused on the factors influencing whether a settlement is possible. For example, see Elhauge
   and Krueger (2012) and Ghili and Schmitt (2017). The likelihood and terms of the settlement depend on the
   expected payoffs to both parties in the absence of a settlement, which are heavily influenced by the likelihood of
   at-risk entry (Elhauge and Krueger 2012). Our focus is more limited. We examine the generic's decision-making
   process about at-risk entry in the absence of a settlement.
12
   After an unfavorable appeals court decision, the generic cannot launch until after patent expiry and launches
   without exclusivity. We assume these profits equal zero.

                                                         11
We expect g > 0 due to discounting of revenue in future periods relative to the current period,

potential declines in profitability due to decreased demand for the drug, and presence of

additional generic competitors with a later entry.

    The first observation to make from (1) is that if the left-hand side of the expression is

positive, indicating at-risk entry is profitable, the expected value of profit is likely to be

maximized by at-risk entry "as soon as possible." Both g and b are roughly proportional to

the volume of sales a generic makes at risk. Each sale generates a certain profit for the generic

and causes a certain loss to the brand for which the generic risks being liable. On expectation,

the generic pays (1 - p)s dollars for each dollar of potential gain from at risk entry. If the risk is

worth it to the generic for 100 sales it will be worth it for 1,000 or for 100,000. The more at-risk

entry sales made, the higher the expected profit.

    The second observation is that at some point, unless a generic can make enough sales, a

positive left-hand side can fall below the expected profits from waiting until after appeal, p0 .

This would likely occur, for example, if FDA approval comes just prior to the expected timing of

an appeals court decision. In this case, even though a generic's expected profits from at risk

entry are positive, they still fall below what the firm could expect by waiting for an appeals court

decision.

    Putting these two observations together, the decision rule in (1) leads to the prediction that

generic firms will either enter "as soon as possible" after a favorable district court decision, or if

regulatory or other reasons interfere with an early at-risk entry, they would wait until after the

appeals court decision.




                                                   12
       We can use (1) to solve for the threshold probability required to make at-risk entry more

profitable than waiting for an appeals court decision.



                                                     sb - g
                                             p =                        (2)
                                                     sb - 0



So long as the generic believes its likelihood of a win at the appeals level is at least p*, at-risk

entry is profitable on expectation. A calculation shows how (2) works: let g = 1, 0 = 0.8, and

b = 2.0, and s =.90. With these parameters, conditional on a win at the district court, the

generic must expect a likelihood of winning of 0.8 or greater to enter at risk.

       In practice, appellate courts rarely overturn district court decisions in drug patent litigation

and a generic that has won a district court decision has a low risk of paying damages (i.e., p is

near 1.0). 13 The generic must decide whether the small risk of paying damages outweighs the

cost of waiting to launch until after the appeal. The cost of waiting depends on the time

remaining in the litigation, the market's growth (up or down), and the development of other

generic competition, factors which vary from case to case. Normalizing on the generic's profits

from launching at risk (g = 1), the cost of waiting can be expressed in percentage terms as one

minus the generic's profits from waiting to launch until after an appeal (1 - 0). Figure 1

illustrates the tradeoff between the generic likelihood of a win at appeal (p) and the cost of

waiting in percentage terms. The line in Figure 1 divides the space based on the same value of

expected damages as above, sb = 1.8. With these parameters, and as shown in Figure 1, if the

generic's chance of winning the litigation is 95% it will launch at risk unless it can retain 96% or



13
     In our data, described below, the observed probability of the generic winning a final appeals court decision when
     it had already won a district court decision (p) was 96.4%.

                                                           13
more of its expected profits by waiting and launching after the appeals court decision. A generic

would have to retain 80% of the profits by waiting in order to overcome the incentives to launch

at risk when the likelihood of the generic winning on appeal is 80%.


Figure 1. The generic's threshold for launching at risk based on the cost of waiting and its
probability of winning the patent litigation on appeal




   To now in this Section, we assumed the generic won a district court decision and was

deciding whether to launch at risk based on its risk of losing on appeal and other factors

described in (1). A generic with FDA approval prior to a district court decision can enter at risk

at that point as well. At this early stage, the generic's perceived probability of winning is

compound: the generic awaits a district as well as possibly an appeals court decision.

Furthermore, the generic's subjective probability of winning is likely to change as the case

develops during the discovery and pre-trial hearing process and becomes clarified but not fully


                                                 14
resolved after a district court decision. Settlement negotiations are going on in the background.

We do not write an expression analogous to (2) for this more complicated dynamic optimization

decision depending heavily on the generic's evolving subjective probability of a litigation win.

We do include data about at-risk launches prior to a district decision in our empirical analyses.


IV. Data And Empirical Results

A. DATA ON AT-RISK LAUNCH OPPORTUNITIES

We started with a list of 538 drug products with at least one ANDA that was approved after

January 1, 2005 and were listed in the "180-Day Exclusivity Tracker" on Hyman, Phelps, and

McNamara PC's FDA Law Blog website. 14 We compared our list to the FDA's list of Paragraph

IV Patent Certifications, updated November 17, 2020, and added 161 additional

ANDAs. Finally, we found 27 additional approved ANDAs by conducting internet searches for

all the drugs in the data sources that were listed as not having an approved ANDA. Thus, our list

included 726 drug products with at least one ANDA approved in 2005 or later.

     We consulted the FDA's ANDA approval letters and conducted internet searches to see

which generics were first filers, to see if they were sued by the brand manufacturer, and to find

the case identifiers for the litigation (the case number) that would enable us to look up additional

case information on legal databases. 15 We also examined Lex Machina data to check if litigation

had been initiated. For drugs with associated patent infringement litigation, we used Lex

Machina data and the Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER) service to identify

district and appeals court rulings. We classified a decision as a generic win if every relevant

patent were found to be invalid, unenforceable, or uninfringed. If the court found that at least


14
   Last updated January 29, 2020. FDA and FDA Law Blog https://www.fdalawblog.net/wp-content/uploads/180-
   Day.xlsx.
15
   FDA approval letters are available at Drugs@FDA.com, although some are not available.

                                                    15
one valid patent blocked the generic's immediate entry, we classified it as a brand win because it

prevented the generic from entering at risk. We also checked to see if an injunction had

prevented the generic from entering.

   We used the generic manufacturer's press release or another publicly available source to

determine when a product launch occurred. We compared the dates of the legal decisions to the

generic's entry date to determine whether the drug had been launched at risk during the

litigation. For cases where the generic launched at risk and then lost the patent infringement

litigation, we conducted internet searches to gather information on damages paid from the brand

to the generic.

   In total, after a series of exclusion decisions, we identified 75 drugs where at least one first-

to-file generic had the opportunity to launch at risk. ANDAs cover unique drug-form

combinations and sometimes cover multiple strengths. From our list of 726 drug products with

at least one approved ANDA of a first filer, we excluded 167 "duplicate" drugs that involved the

same pair of brand-generic litigants, the ANDAs received FDA approval at the same time, and

the drug products were launched at the same time. In essence, we treated these duplicates as one

observation. Because we were interested in the generic's decision to launch at risk, we excluded

122 drugs for which the brand had opted not to sue the generic. We excluded 168 where the

generic received FDA approval, did not launch at risk, and then settled before a district court

decision. We excluded 115 drugs where the litigation had settled or was dropped before the

generic received FDA approval and 39 drugs where the generic lost a district court decision

before FDA approval. We excluded 7 drugs where the approved generics did not have

exclusivity or first-filer status or it could not be determined; 13 where the generic received FDA

approval after the final appeal (and thus could not launch at risk); 2 where the generic received



                                                 16
FDA approval after a district court win but there was no further appeal; 3 where litigation was

ongoing and no legal decisions had been made; 9 where the drug is classified as over-the-counter

(OTC); and 5 where an injunction prevented the generic from launching at risk. We also

excluded 1 drug where the brand company reformulated its drug to prevent generic competition,

discontinued the original formulation, and the generic never launched a generic version of the

original formulation (even after winning the appeal).

       We also gathered data on potential predictors of at-risk launches. Brand manufacturers must

submit all patents that protect their approved drug to the FDA including the patent number,

patent expiration date and an indication of whether the patent is a drug substance, drug product,

or method of use patent. 16 As an indicator of patent strength, patent numbers in PACER were

used to determine whether a substance or product patent was involved in the litigation. We

classified substance and product patents based on how they are classified in the Orange Book.

We also gathered data on the brand market sales prior to generic entry using internet searches.

The FDA approval letters, the FDA's website, and the 180-Day Exclusivity Tracker were used to

determine whether the first filer had retained its 180-day exclusivity period. We obtained

information on generic formulation from the FDA Orange Book and Drugs@FDA databases.

Drugs are classified as oral solids, injectables, and topicals (including patches and inhalers).




16
     As defined by the FDA, "drug product is a finished dosage form, e.g., tablet, capsule, or solution, that contains a
     drug substance, generally, but not necessarily, in association with one or more other ingredients. Drug
     substance is an active ingredient that is intended to furnish pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the
     diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease or to affect the structure or any function of the
     human body, but does not include intermediates used in the synthesis of such ingredient." See 21 U.S. Code §
     314; Brand manufacturers must submit patent number, patent expiration date and indicate if the patent is a drug
     substance, drug product, or method of use patent. see 21 U.S. Code § 355. Active ingredient patents have been
     shown to be more likely than method of use patents to be upheld in court. We use the drug substance and drug
     product designations as proxies for patent strength. See Hemphill & Sampat (2011).

                                                             17
B. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

Figure 2 illustrates our data on at-risk launch opportunities and decisions. Of the 42 generic

drugs that had received FDA approval before a district court decision and were not prevented

from entering by an injunction, 26 were launched at risk before a district court decision and 16

were not. Of the 16 generic drugs that were not launched at risk before a district court decision,

two were launched at risk after the generic's district court win; the litigation for one drug was

settled after the generic's district court win; and no generics were launched at risk after the 13

district court decision losses, necessarily so because entry would be blocked by an injunction. 17

Of the 33 generic drugs that received FDA approval after a favorable district court decision, 25

were launched at risk before the appeals court decision and 8 were not. Of the generic drugs that

were not launched at risk, 7 launched after a favorable appeals court win and for 1 drug in our

data the litigation was ongoing.




17
     There were two drugs, Norvasc and Aloxi, for which the generic lost at district court, but won at appeals and
     launched thereafter.

                                                           18
Figure 2. Generic At-Risk Entry Opportunities and Launches




   We present descriptive results comparing drugs on factors that may have influenced the at-

risk entry decision. We test the statistical significance of variation between the groups, using

Fisher's exact test due to small sample size. In Table 1 we present results for drugs that received

FDA approval before the district court decision and in Table 2 for drugs that received FDA

approval after the district court decision, but before the appeals court decision.

   Generics that launched at risk before the district court decision were more likely to win or

settle the patent litigation compared to generics that received FDA approval but did not launch at

risk before the district court decision (see Table 1). This may imply that generic manufacturers

can anticipate the outcome of the litigation to some degree. Drugs that were not launched at risk

were more likely to have a drug substance or drug product patent than those that were launched

                                                 19
at risk, suggesting that patent strength factors into the decision to launch at risk. The number of

patents, however, was not statistically different between drugs that were and were not launched

at risk. Drugs launched at risk before a district court decision were more likely to have under

$50 million in sales, to receive FDA approval more than three months before the date of the

district court decision, and to have retained their exclusivity status compared to drugs that were

not launched at risk. The generic's decision calculus is different for a generic firm that has

forfeited its exclusivity period. While an at-risk launch still puts the generic at risk of paying

large damages, its profit prospects are substantially lowered. Dosage form was distributed

similarly across the two groups.




                                                 20
Table 1. Generic drugs that received FDA approval and could launch before a district court
decision

                                            Launched Before District
                                                 Court Decision
                                               Yes            No        p-value
 Total, n (col %)                           26 (100%)     16 (100%)

 Litigation Outcome, n (col %)
  Generic Win                                 7 (27%)       4 (25%)      0.087
  Brand Win                                   5 (19%)       8 (50%)
  Settled                                    14 (54%)       4 (25%)

 Patent Type, n (col %)
  Has Drug Substance Patent                   4 (15%)       8 (50%)      0.032
  Has Drug Product Patent                    11 (42%)      14 (88%)      0.004
  Has Drug Substance or Product Patent       11 (19%)      14 (76%)      0.004

 # of Patents Asserted, n (col %)
  1                                          16 (62%)       6 (37%)      0.204
  >1                                         10 (38%)      10 (63%)

 Drug Sales, n (col %)
  <$50 million                                8 (31%)      0 (0.0%)      0.041
  $50 - $350 million                          8 (31%)      7 (44%)
  >$350 million                              10 (38%)      9 (56%)

 Form, n (col %)
  Oral                                       22 (85%)      13 (81%)      1.000
  Topical or Injection                        4 (15%)       3 (19%)

 Months between FDA approval and
 district court decision, n (col %)
  <3                                         2 (18%)        9 (56%)      0.109
  >= 3                                       9 (82%)        7 (44%)

 Exclusivity Status, n (col %)
  Retained                                   24 (96%)      11 (69%)      0.026
  Forfeited                                   1 (4%)        5 (31%)




                                              21
    Table 2 assesses whether certain measured factors were related to the generic's decision to

launch at risk for generics that received FDA approval after a district court decision. The generic

won 100% of the appeals in Table 2 ­ and 96.4% if appeals after district court wins from Table 3

are included. Differences were not statistically significant because of the small sample size in

each group, but the results point to some potentially important differences. Drugs that were

launched at risk involved only one patent (44%) more frequently than drugs that were not

launched at risk (13%), again indicating that the generic's likelihood of losing the appeal may

impact its decision. The timing of the FDA approval and the status of the generic's 180-day

exclusivity period both appear to factor into the generic's decision. The generic was more likely

to launch at-risk if it was approved 3 months or more before the appeals court decision or if it

had retained its 180-exclusivity period. Specifically, in a comparison that tested significance at

the 10% level (p=0.09), among drugs with a retained exclusivity period, drugs approved more

than three months before the appeals court decision were more likely to be launched at risk (10

out of 11) compared to drugs approved less than three months before the appeals court decision

(1 out of 3).




                                                22
Table 2. Generic drugs that received FDA approval after a favorable district court decision

                                             Launched Before Final
                                             Appeals Court Decision
                                                Yes          No            p-value
 Total, n (col %)                           25 (100.0%) 8 (100.0%)

 Litigation Outcome, n (col %)
  Generic Win                                 17 (74%)      7 (100.0%)      0.290
  Brand Win                                     0 (0%)       0 (0.0%)
  Settled                                      6 (26%)       0 (0.0%)

 Patent Type, n (col %)
  Has Drug Substance Patent                    6 (76%)       3 (63%)        0.651
  Has Drug Product Patent                     12 (48%)       6 (75%)        0.242
  Has Drug Substance or Product Patent        13 (52%)       6 (75%)        0.416

 # of Patents Disputed, n (col %)
  1                                           11 (44%)       1 (13%)        0.206
  >1                                          14 (56%)       7 (88%)

 Drug Sales, n (col %)
  <$50 million                                 4 (16%)       1 (12%)        0.418
  $50 - $350 million                          15 (60 %)      3 (38%)
  >$350 million                                6 (24%)       4 (50%)

 Form
  Oral                                        18 (72%)       7 (88%)        0.643
  Topical or Injection                         7 (28%)       1 (12%)

 Months between FDA approval and
 appeal, n (col %)
  <3                                           1 (6%)        2 (25%)        0.215
  >= 3                                        17 (94%)       6 (75%)

 Exclusivity Status, n (col %)
  Retained                                    16 (70%)       3 (37%)        0.206
  Forfeited                                    7 (30%)       5 (63%)




   Figure 3 illustrates the time between the generic's FDA approval and launch relative to the

court decisions for drugs with a retained exclusivity period. The top portion of the figure shows


                                               23
the timing for drugs that were approved before the district court decision. The generic either

launched at risk, usually before the district court decision (the black lines ending with black

circles), or did not launch at risk and then lost the district court decision (the blue Xs), so no

longer had the option to launch at risk. As described in more detail below, after some of the at-

risk launches, the generic eventually lost the patent litigation and paid damages to the brand.

   The bottom portion of Figure 3 (beginning with the drug Razadyne) shows the timing for

drugs that were approved after the district court decision. The majority were launched at risk (16

of 19), usually immediately after approval, with three exceptions: Intermezzo, Toprol-XL 50mg

(launched by Sandoz), and Toprol-XL 100mg and 200 mg (launched by KV), represented as

black lines ending in blue circles. The first filer for Intermezzo, Novel, was in the process of

being acquired when it received FDA approval (Lupin 2015), which may have affected the

timing of its launch. Toprol-XL's experience confirms that the timing of FDA approval is an

important factor. Sandoz received FDA approval for the 50mg version of Toprol-XL just two

months before the appeals court decision and chose not to launch at risk. However, Sandoz

received FDA approval of the 25mg version twelve months before the appeals court decision,

and Sandoz did launch the 25mg version at risk. Similarly, KV did not launch the 100mg and

200mg versions of Toprol-XL at-risk when it received FDA approval two months before the

appeals court decision.




                                                  24
Figure 3. Months Between Generic FDA Approval and Launch Relative to Legal Decisions

                  Xopenex
                   Protonix
                     Famvir
                    Ultracet
                      Plavix
                   Norvasc
                       Tarka
                     Oracea
                Acetadote
                Floxin Otic
           Restoril (7.5mg)
                   Skelaxin
                  Topamax
                    Actonel
                    Aciphex
              Differin (gel)
                    Lysteda
                     Staxyn
                      Amrix
                      Lyrica
                     Trizivir
                Razadyne
                     Fusilev
                   Zymaxid
            Razadyne ER
                 Soolantra
                    Zegerid
                    Eloxatin
               Intermezzo
                     Atelvia
                Ultram ER
    Wellbutrin XL (300mg)
          DDVAP (tablets)
               Megace ES
                     Riomet
                      Effient
                   Accolate
                      Axiron
                      Ethyol
    Toprol XL (100/200mg)
         Toprol XL (50mg)

                                -40         -20                      0                 20                   40
                                              Months Relative to District Court Decision

                                      FDA Approval to Launch                           At-Risk Entry
                                      Entry Not At Risk                                Appeals Court Decision
                                      FDA Approval - No Entry - District Court Loss




                                                                25
C. DAMAGES PAID BY GENERICS AFTER A LOSS IN THE PATENT INFRINGEMENT
   LITIGATION

Finally, we investigated damages paid by generics that launched at risk and then lost a court

decision. As a reminder, regulations make generic firms entering at risk liable for brand lost

profits. In practical terms, how much a generic manufacturer pays is subject to settlement

negotiation between the parties. Five of the six cases we identified in which an at-risk entry was

found to infringe on a valid patent resulted in a settlement over the damages either during a

separate damages trial or during the appeals process. Some information on damages was

publicly reported for three of the six cases: 18

           1. Apotex launched a generic version of Plavix at risk on August 8, 2006 (Apotex 2006).

               After antitrust authorities rejected a proposed settlement between Apotex and Sanofi

               (the brand manufacturer), Apotex lost district and appeals court decisions regarding

               the patent's alleged invalidity (Sanofi-Aventis v. Apotex 2011). The settlement

               specified that, if the authorities rejected the settlement and Apotex were to lose the

               litigation, damages would be set to 50% of Apotex's net sales, and the district court

               accepted Sanofi's summary judgment motion calculating this amount. On October

               18, 2011, the appeals court rejected the district court's decision to grant prejudgment

               interest, but otherwise affirmed its decision (Reuters 2011). On February 8, 2012,

               Apotex paid Sanofi $444.4 million in damages, post-judgment interest, and costs

               (FiercePharma 2012).



18
     The amount was not publicly reported after settlements of litigation related to the drugs Amrix, Famvir, and
     Xopenex. Terms of the Amrix settlement were not disclosed. The Famvir settlement obligated Teva to "make a
     one-time payment to Novartis in addition to an ongoing royalty on U.S. sales of generic" Famvir. See Teva
     Pharmaceutical Industries Limited, Form 6-K, Feb. 15, 2010. The Xopenex settlement released Mylan from a $18
     million jury damage award, provided a license for Mylan to continue generic sales, and included other
     confidential details (Mylan 2012).

                                                        26
           2. Teva and Sun launched generic versions of Protonix at risk on December 24, 2007

               and January 30, 2008, respectively (Reuters 2007). A jury rejected the generics'

               claims of alleged noninfringement and invalidity of Protonix's active ingredient

               patent on April 23, 2010 and the district court judge confirmed the jury verdict in a

               July 15, 2020 opinion. During a damages trial in June 2013, an expert witness for

               Pfizer (the brand manufacturer) testified that damages should total $3.0 billion, which

               included lost profits of $2.8 billion and pre-judgment interest of $0.2 billion (Altana

               and Wyeth v. Teva 2013). On June 12, 2013, the parties agreed to pay a total of

               $2.15 billion to settle the litigation (Gabi Online 2013). Teva agreed to pay $800

               million in 2013 and another $800 million by October 2014. Sun agreed to pay $550

               million in 2013.

           3. Glenmark launched a generic version of Sanofi-Aventis' Tarka at risk in June 2010

               (Patent Law Weblog 2011). In 2011, a jury ruled against Glenmark's allegations that

               the patents were invalid and awarded $16.0 million in damages. On April 21, 2014,

               the appeals court affirmed the rulings regarding patent validity and remanded "to the

               district court for the reserved accounting of any post-verdict damages" ­ Glenmark

               did not appeal the damage amount (Sanofi-Aventis v. Glenmark 2014). Glenmark

               had continued selling the remaining stock of its product for two to three months after

               filing its appeal, which may have resulted in an additional $9.0 million in damages

               (and $25 million in total). 19 The parties settled the case on October 7, 2015,

               presumably agreeing on the amount of supplemental damages to be paid (Sanofi-

               Aventis v. Glenmark 2015).


19
     This was described by "a person familiar with the development, who didn't want to be identified" (Unnikrishnan
     2014).

                                                          27
       As these case studies indicate, paid damages are offset, in part, by the profits earned by the

generic from the at-risk launch. We estimate the generic's profits using publicly available

sources and compare it to the paid damages to arrive at an estimate of a net figure from the

generic's point of view. We calculate the net present value of profits and damages as of the date

the generic decided to launch at risk. Table 3 indicates that, for the cases for which we could

find data to make the calculations, generic profits offset 59% to 100% or more of the paid

damages. 20


Table 3. Damages and Profits of Generics for Cases that the Generic Lost a Court Decision
                  Years Between           Generic             Paid      Profits /
                     Launch and Profits ($M)             Damages      Damages
                   Paid Damages                              ($M)
 Plavix                        3.5          3,770            339.4      > 100%
 Protonix ­ Teva          5.5-6.8           664.7          1,043.8        63.7%
 Protonix ­ Sun                5.4          316.7            312.1      101.5%
 Tarka                         5.3             8.4            14.2        59.2%



V. At-Risk Entry And Social Welfare

The empirical orientation of our paper was framed in terms of the benefits and costs of at-risk

entry from the point of view of the generic firm making the decision. For generic firms that have

won a district court decision, our model predicted that generics should launch at risk unless the

cost of waiting for the appeals court decision is low, and our empirical results support this

prediction. In our dataset of at-risk launch opportunities, at-risk entry was extremely common.

Drugs with FDA approval before a favorable district court decision were always launched at risk

at or before the favorable decision. Drugs that received FDA approval after a favorable district

court decision were launched at risk unless approval was received close in time to the appeals



20
     Calculations for Table 3 are provided in supplemental materials.

                                                           28
court decision or the generic had forfeited the exclusivity period, both of which reduce the cost

of waiting. Generally, our model depicting generic firms as maximizing the expected value of

future profits within the current regulatory structure fit the data well. 21

       Although generic firms often launch at risk when given the opportunity, opportunities are

limited by regulation. In terms of the overall number of drugs protected by patents, the rate of

at-risk entry is low. Our research uncovered 75 at-risk entry opportunities, bearing on about

13% of all drugs with approved ANDAs. The last time a generic launched at risk before a

district court decision was in 2013. All of the 12 recent at-risk entries we observed (after 2013)

were approved and launched after the district court decision, and each decision was affirmed on

appeal.

       A broader perspective on at-risk entry considers the benefits and costs to consumers in both

the short and the long term. The frequency and timing of at-risk generic entry is highly

consequential for the functioning of markets for drugs. An at-risk entry can transfer hundreds of

millions of dollars from the brand firm to consumers. Earlier generic entry produces

considerable short-term welfare gains driven by cost-savings for insurers, consumers, and

government programs (Bransetter, Chatterjee, and Higgins 2016; Berndt et al. 2007). While a

consumer price reduction improves short-term efficiency by moving price much closer to

marginal cost, at-risk entry may disturb efficient long-term incentives to invest in R&D.

       At-risk entry presents less of a tradeoff of short versus long-term efficiency than it may first

appear. Indeed, so long as the generic firm is liable for the brand firm's lost profits, it is efficient

in both the short and the long term for at-risk entry to occur immediately and for all brand


21
     Our model applied to the at-risk decision after a district court decision. Generics with a retained exclusivity
     period that received FDA approval before the district court decision appeared, if anything, to err on the side of
     launching at risk. They lost the patent litigation in all of the cases where they chose not to launch at risk and some
     of the ones where they did.

                                                             29
products. 22 Regarding the short term, immediate at-risk entry makes drugs available to

consumers at low prices, achieving short-term efficiency. Regarding the long term, with

infringing generics liable for lost profits, brands with valid and infringed patents receive the full

profits associated with exclusivity. Brands winning the patent litigation are compensated for

their lost profits from the time the at-risk entry occurred and are free once the infringing generic

is no longer selling to make high profits associated with exclusivity until patent expiry. In other

words, immediate at-risk entry with generics subject to paying damages does not diminish the

profits for valid and infringed patents.

       Immediate at-risk entry eliminates brand profits for invalid or uninfringed patents; this, too,

is efficient. The patent system is not intended to encourage research resulting in obvious or

unoriginal patents which might, nonetheless, be used by the patent holder to deter competition.

       Perhaps surprisingly, from a welfare standpoint, immediate at-risk generic entry with time

needed to litigate any patents is superior even to immediate legal resolution of patent validity.

With generics liable for lost profits, aside from costs of the legal process itself, immediate at-risk

entry generates improved innovation incentives for brand firms while giving consumers access to

drugs at low prices. Indeed, while the legal process plays out, consumers get the low prices for

some time even for drugs protected by valid patents, and for these cases, consumer welfare is

improved over immediate legal resolution.

       A useful analogy is the "buy out" of patents by a regulator or international organization

proposed by Kremer (Kremer 1998). A government could buy out a patent by paying the patent




22
     If the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) were a perfect arbiter of patent applications, a patent
     would be awarded if and only if it were valid and enforceable, obviating the need for patent litigation based on
     patent validity. The USPTO is not a perfect arbiter (nor should it be from the standpoint of efficiency recognizing
     the costs of resolving patent-related issues) as evidenced by, among other things, generic firms' success rate in
     patent challenges.

                                                            30
holder the estimated present value of expected profits, and then put the patent in the public

domain, eliminating patent barriers to competition. With at-risk entry, the generic firm fulfills

the same role. For a valid patent, the generic firm essentially "buys out" the patent for the

expected profits and sells for a much lower price, at least during the time prior to a court

decision. At-risk entry achieves some patent buy out for affected drugs with financing from

private companies rather than the public sector.

   Recognition of two forms of uncertainty do not change the basics of the argument. At the

time research is undertaken, innovator firms do not know with certainty whether a given line of

investigation will or will not lead to patents likely to be found valid and infringed. Although

subject to uncertainty, innovator firms are not blind to prospects either, and are guided by profit

incentives regarding investments to undertake. Social welfare is advanced if investment in R&D

is directed to attaining successful patents. Immediate at-risk entry with patent validity

determined by a court achieves this by transmitting incentives exactly proportional to the

likelihood of patent validity.

   In another form of uncertainty, courts make mistakes (in both directions) about patent

validity. A court may judge a patent to be "new and useful" when it is not, or the other way

around. Mistakes imply that expected rewards for new and useful innovation is reduced some

and expected rewards for low-value innovation is increased. Overall, incentives for research

might be higher or lower (depending on which form of mistake was more common). In any case,

immediate at-risk entry maintains the favorable effects of maximizing short-term efficiency

while directing profit rewards towards research that will result in patents found to be valid by

courts.




                                                   31
   At-risk entry and resolution of patent validity and infringement involve transaction costs for

the legal system. The median cost of cases litigated under the Hatch-Waxman Act was $3.5

million in 2019 (Nayak 2019). While these costs are not trivial, they are small in relation to the

welfare gains from at-risk entry for important drugs.

   While the first-best, immediate at-risk entry with generics liable for brand lost profits, is

useful as a welfare benchmark, it is infeasible in practice. A generic firm decides about at-risk

entry on the basis of its expected profits, not social welfare. Since a generic firm does not

appropriate the full social benefit from at-risk entry, for this fundamental reason, and even before

any regulatory barriers to at-risk entry are considered, at-risk entry will occur less frequently

than is socially optimal.




                                                 32
REFERENCES

Altana Pharma AG and Wyeth, Plaintiffs, v. Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc., et al., Defendants,
        No. 2:04-cv-02355 (D.N.J.), Opinion, filed May 14, 2013.
Apotex. 2006. "Apotex Launches First Generic Plavix®." Press release, August 8, 2006.
        http://www.ptca.org/pr_apotex/20060808.html
Berndt, Ernst R., Richard Mortimer, Ashoke Bhattacharjya, Andrew Parece, and Edward Tuttle.
        2007. "Authorized Generic Drugs, Price Competition, And Consumers' Welfare" Health
        Affairs 26 (3): 790-799.
Berndt, Ernst R., Thomas G. McGuire, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2011. "A primer on the
        economics of prescription pharmaceutical pricing in health insurance markets." Forum
        for Health Economics & Policy 14 (2).
Berndt, Ernst. 2002. "Pharmaceuticals in U.S. Health Care: Determinants of Quantity and Price."
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 16 (4): 45-66.
Branstetter, Lee, Chirantan Chatterjee, and Mathew J. Higgins. 2016. "Regulation and welfare:
        evidence from Paragraph IV generic entry in the pharmaceutical industry." The RAND
        Journal of Economics 47 (4): 857-890.
Carrier, Michael A., and Steve D. Shadowen. 2016. "Product hopping: A new framework." Notre
        Dame Law Review 92 (1): 167-230.
Cheng, Jessie. 2008. "An antitrust analysis of product hopping in the pharmaceutical industry."
        Columbia Law Review 108 (6): 1471-1515.
Drake, Keith M., Martha A. Starr, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2015. "Do `Reverse Payment'
        Settlements Constitute an Anticompetitive Pay-for-Delay?" International Journal of the
        Economics of Business 22 (2): 173-200.
Edlin, Aaron, Scott Hemphill, Hebert Hovenkamp, and Carl Shapiro. 2013. "Activating Actavis."
        Antitrust 28: 16-23.
Edlin, Aaron, Scott Hemphill, Hebert Hovenkamp, and Carl Shapiro. 2015. "The Actavis
        Inference: Theory and Practice." Rutgers University Law Review 67: 585-635.
Elhauge, Einer, and Alex Krueger. 2012. "Solving the Patent Settlement Puzzle." Texas Law
        Review 91 (283).
Farrell, Joseph, David J. Balan, Keith Brand, and Brett W. Wendling. 2011. "Economics at the
        FTC: Hospital mergers, authorized generic drugs, and consumer credit markets." Review
        of Industrial Organization 39 (4): 271-296.
FDA Law Blog. 2020. "Competitive Generic Therapy 180-Day Exclusivity Tracker."
        https://www.fdalawblog.net/wp-content/uploads/80-Day.xlsx.
FiercePharma. 2012. "Sanofi and Bristol-Myers Squibb Collect Damages in Plavix Litigation
        with Apotex." Press release, Feb. 8, 2012. https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/sanofi-
        and-bristol-myers-squibb-collect-damages-plavix-patent-litigation-apotex-0
Fischer, Mark, Peter S.H. Leeflang, and Peter C. Verhoef. 2010. "Drivers of peak sales for
        pharmaceutical brands" Quantitative Marketing and Economics 8: 429-460.
Frank, Richard G. 2007. "The Ongoing Regulation of Generic Drugs." The New England
        Journal of Medicine 357.
Gabi Online. 2013. "Teva and Sun Pharma settle battle over generic Protonix." Jun. 14, 2013.
        https://www.gabionline.net/generics/news/Teva-and-Sun-Pharma-settle-battle-over-
        generic-Protonix



                                              33
Ghili, Soheil, and Matt Schmitt. 2017. "A framework for estimating damages in reverse payment
        cases." Antitrust Law Journal 81 (3): 873-901.
Goldman, Dana, and Darius Lakdawalla. 2011. "Intellectual Property, Information Technology,
        Biomedical Research, and Marketing of Patented Products." in M. Pauly, T. McGuire,
        and P. Barros, Handbook of Health Economics 2: 825-872. Elsevier B.V.
Grabowski, Henry G. & Margaret Kyle. 2007. "Generic competition and market exclusivity
        periods in pharmaceuticals." Managerial and Decision Economics 28 (4-5): 491-502.
Grabowski, Henry G., Margaret Kyle, Richard Mortimer, Genia Long, and Noam Kirson. 2011.
        "Evolving brand-name and generic drug competition may warrant a revision of the
        Hatch-Waxman Act" Health Affairs 30 (11): 2157-2166.
Greene, Adam, and Dewey D. Steadman. 2010. "Pharmaceuticals: Analyzing Litigation Success
        Rates." RBC Capital Markets Equity Research.
Hemphill, Scott C, and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2011. "When Do Generics Challenge Drug Patents?"
        Journal of Legal Studies 8 (4): 613-649.
Hemphill, Scott C., and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2012. "Evergreening, patent challenges, and
        effective market life in pharmaceuticals." Journal of Health Economics 31 (2): 327-339.
Hemphill, Scott, and Mark A. Lemley. 2011. "Earning Exclusivity: Generic Drug Incentives and
        the Hatch Waxman Act." Antitrust Law Journal 77: 947-989.
Higgins, Mathew J., and Stuart J.H. Graham. 2009. "Balancing innovation and access: Patent
        challenges tip the scales." Science 326 (5951): 370-371.
Kremer, Michael R. 1998. "Patent buyouts: A mechanism for encouraging innovation."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (4): 1137-1167.
Lemley, Mark A. 2008. "Ignoring Patents." Michigan State Law Review 2008 (19): 19-34.
Lietzan, Erika K. "A Brief History of 180-Day Exclusivity Under the Hatch-Waxman
        Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act" Food and Drug Law Journal
        59 (2): 287-323.
Lietzan, Erika, and Julia Post. 2016. "The Law of 180­Day Exclusivity." Food and Drug Law
        Journal 71: 327-400.
Lupin. 2015."Lupin enters into a definitive agreement to acquire GAVIS Pharmaceuticals LLC
        and Novel Laboratories Inc." Press release, July 23, 2015. https://www.prnewswire.com/
        news-releases/lupin-acquires-gavis-to-expand-us-generic-business-518269021.html.
Manspeizer, David. 2014. "The Law on Damages in Generic Drug Launches Remains Vague."
        The New York Law Journal (January 6, 2014): 9.
Mylan. 2012. "Mylan Announces Settlement Agreement in Litigation Relating to its Generic
        Xopenex®." Press release, May 29, 2012. https://investor.mylan.com/news-releases/
        news-release-details/mylan-announces-settlement-agreement-litigation-relating-its
Nayak, Malathi. 2019. "Costs Soar for Trade Secrets, Pharma Patent Suits, Survey Finds."
        Bloomberg Law. September 10, 2019. https://news.bloomberglaw.com/ip-law/costs-soar-
        for-trade-secrets-pharma-patent-suits-survey-finds.
O'Malley, Joseph M., Jr., Bruce M. Wexler, Eric W. Dittmann, and Isaac S. Ashkenazi. 2011.
        "Failure to Launch." Intellectual Property Magazine (April 2011): 30-32.
Patent Law Weblog. 2011. "James DeGiulio, Jury Awards Abbott $16M in Tarka Patent Suit
        Against Glenmark." Feb. 1, 2011. https://www.patentdocs.org/2011/02/01/
Powers, Matthew D., and Steven C. Carlson. 2001. "The Evolution and Impact of the Doctrine of
        Willfull Patent Infringement." Syracuse Law Review 51: 53.



                                              34
Reuters. 2007. "Teva launches generic Protonix, ups '07 EPS forecast." Dec. 24, 2007.
       https://www.reuters.com/article/us-teva-protonix/teva-launches-generic-protonix-ups-07-
       eps-forecast-idUSL2461155520071224
Reuters. 2011. "UPDATE 1-U.S. appeal court upholds $442 mln Plavix award." Oct. 18, 2011.
       https://www.reuters.com/article/sanofi-apotex-patent/update-1-u-s-appeals-court-upholds
       -442-mln-plavix-award-idUKN1E79H1NL20111018
Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland v. Glenmark Pharmaceuticals, 2012-1489, Fed. Cir., appeal from
       D.N.J. in Case No. 07-CV-5855, decided Apr. 21, 2014.
Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland v. Glenmark Pharmaceuticals, No. 2:07-CV-05855 (D.N.J.), Joint
       Consent Order and Stipulation of Dismissal, filed Oct. 7, 2015.
Sanofi-Aventis v. Apotex, 2011-1048, Fed. Cir., appeal from S.D.N.Y. in Case No. 02-CV-2255,
       decided Oct. 18, 2011.
Shapiro, Carl. 2003. "Antitrust Analysis of Patent Settlements Between Rivals." Antitrust 17: 70-
       77.
Sun Pharma. 2008. "Sun Pharma launches generic Protonix® Tablets." Press release, Jan. 30,
       2008. https://sunpharma.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Sun-Pharma-launches-
       generic-Protonix-%C2%AE-January-30-2008.pdf
Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Limited. 2010. Form 6-K, Feb. 15, 2010.
Unnikrishnan, C.H. 2014. "Glenmark to pay up to $25 million in damages to Abbott Labs."
       Mint. Apr. 23, 2014. https://www.livemint.com/Companies/hb8nvWyguyKVXSv7T
       AAdeN/Glenmark-to-pay-up-to-25-million-in-damages-to-Abbott-Labor.html




                                               35
