                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PROCYCLICAL FISCAL POLICY AND ASSET MARKET INCOMPLETENESS

                                       Andrés Fernández
                                        Daniel Guzman
                                         Ruy E. Lama
                                        Carlos A. Vegh

                                      Working Paper 29149
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29149


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2021




We are grateful to Joao Ayres, Sofia Bauducco, Frank Bohn, Roberto Chang, Behzad Diba, Juan
Hernández, Ethan Ilzetzki, Enrique Mendoza, Victoria Nuguer, Felipe Saffie, Martin Uribe, and
seminar participants at the Central Bank of Chile, IDB, IMF, George Washington University,
Georgetown University, Johns Hopkins University, Universidad San Francisco de Quito,
Radboud University, University of Virginia, the Tsinghua Workshop on International Finance,
the INFOX Workshop on Fiscal Policy, the 6th International Macroeconomic and Finance
Conference (Asia), and the World Bank Kuala Lumpur Seminar Series for helpful comments and
discussions. We are particularly thankful to Guillermo Vuletin for his early contributions to this
paper. Jose Andree Camarena Fonseca provided excellent research assistance. Any remaining
errors are our own. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
represent those of the Central Bank of Chile, the IMF, the IMF Board of Directors, IMF
management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Corresponding author: Carlos Vegh
(cvegh1@jhu.edu).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andrés Fernández, Daniel Guzman, Ruy E. Lama, and Carlos A. Vegh. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Procyclical Fiscal Policy and Asset Market Incompleteness
Andrés Fernández, Daniel Guzman, Ruy E. Lama, and Carlos A. Vegh
NBER Working Paper No. 29149
August 2021
JEL No. F41,F44,H21,H30

                                          ABSTRACT

To explain the fact that government spending and tax policy are procyclical in emerging and
developing countries, we develop a model for the joint behavior of optimal tax rates and
government spending over the business cycle. Our set-up relies on financial frictions, which have
been shown to be critical features of emerging markets, captured by various degrees of asset
market incompleteness as well as varying levels of debt-elastic interest rate spreads. We first
uncover a novel theoretical result within a simple static framework: incomplete markets can
account for procyclical government spending but not necessarily procyclical tax policy.
Explaining procyclical tax policy also requires that the ratio of private to public consumption
comoves positively with the business cycle, which leads to larger fluctuations in the tax base. We
then show that the procyclicality of tax policy holds in a more realistic DSGE model calibrated to
emerging markets. Finally, we illustrate how larger financial frictions, which amplify the business
cycle through more procyclical fiscal policies, have sizeable Lucas-type welfare costs.


Andrés Fernández                                 Ruy E. Lama
Research Department                              International Monetary Fund
Central Bank of Chile                            700 19th Street, NW
Agustinas 1180                                   Washington, DC 20431
Santiago                                         rlama@imf.org
Chile
afernandezm@bcentral.cl                          Carlos A. Vegh
                                                 School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
Daniel Guzman                                    Johns Hopkins University
Research Department                              1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Central Bank of Chile                            Washington, DC 20036
Agustinas 1180                                   and NBER
Santiago                                         cvegh1@jhu.edu
Chile
guzmangirondaniel@gmail.com
1       Introduction
There is, by now, overwhelming evidence that ...scal policy in emerging and developing coun-
tries is procyclical (i.e., expansionary in good times and contractionary in bad), compared
to developed countries where ...scal policy is either acyclical or countercyclical.2                        Figure
1, updated from Reinhart et al. (2004), illustrates this stylized fact by plotting the corre-
lation between the cyclical components of real government spending and real GDP for 121
countries: 99 developing (i.e., non-OECD) and 22 developed (i.e., OECD).3 Yellow (light)
bars denote developing countries while black bars stand for developed countries. The visual
message is striking: most of the yellow mass corresponds to positive values (indicating pro-
cyclical government spending) while most of the black mass corresponds to negative values
(indicating countercyclical government spending). In fact, the average correlation for de-
veloping countries is 0.29 compared to -0.12 for developed countries (signi...cant at the 1 and
5 percent levels, respectively).4 While the evidence on the tax side has been more di¢ cult
to come by due to the need of collecting data on tax rates (the policy instrument), Figure
2, updated from Vegh and Vuletin (2015), establishes the procyclicality of tax policy. In-
deed, the average correlation between changes in the VAT rate and real GDP for developing
countries is -0.22 (and signi...cantly di¤erent from zero at the 1 percent level) and -0.06 for
industrial countries (and not signi...cant at the 5 percent level).5               6


        The heavily countercyclical policy on the spending side in industrial countries is to
be expected.       Textbook Keynesian models, of course, tell us that, in recessionary times,
countercyclical ...scal policy is called for. More recent theoretical work has only con...rmed
this decades-old prescription. Christiano et al. (2011) and Nakata (2016), for example, show
that the optimal ...scal policy in a stochastic model with sticky prices is countercyclical.
    2
      For an early study, see Reinhart et al. (2004) and, more recently, Frankel et al. (2013) and the references
therein.
    3
      In this paper, OECD always refers to the original OECD countries.
    4
      Of course, the question of causality is critical: is real GDP causing ...scal policy or viceversa? Ilzetzki and
Vegh (2008) formally show that the causality from real GDP to government spending is indeed statistically
signi...cant.
    5
      Section 4 shows that we can reject the null hypothesis that these two averages are the same.
    6
      Notice that, in our terminology, a positive correlation between real GDP and the VAT rate indicates
counteryclical tax policy (i.e., higher tax rates in good times and lower in bad times) and a negative corre-
lation indicates procyclical tax policy (i.e., lower tax rates in good times or higher tax rates in bad times).



                                                         1
In fact, both papers conclude that countercyclical ...scal policy is even more e¤ective when
monetary policy has become powerless because of the zero lower bound.                     This is true
whether monetary policy is taken as given (Christiano et al., 2011) or is chosen optimally
as well (Nakata, 2016).
       The much more intriguing question, and the focus of this paper, is: why would policy-
makers in developing countries conduct ...scal policy in a procyclical way? This is obviously
puzzling since it amounts to making an already volatile business cycle even more pronounced.
A popular explanation for this procyclical puzzle relies on political-economy considerations.7
In Tornell and Lane (1999), a positive shock may lead to a more-than-proportional increase
in spending due to various units (e.g., ministries or provinces) staking competing claims on
available resources (akin to socially excessive ...shing from a common pond). In Alesina et
al. (2008), voters demand more public goods and/or fewer taxes in good times to prevent
the government from appropriating rents (the classic starving the Leviathan argument).
       The other key explanation that has been put on the table is imperfections in inter-
national capital markets.       In an early paper, Riascos and Vegh (2003) show that, in a
calibrated model, incomplete markets can explain the procyclicality of government spend-
ing. Cuadra et al. (2010) show how the combination of incomplete markets with default
risk leads to optimal procyclical ...scal policy (both on the spending and revenue sides). In
turn, Bauducco and Caprioli (2014) introduce limited commitment in a small open economy
model with exogenous government spending and show how this friction can lead to procycli-
cal ...scal policy on the taxation side. More recently, Bianchi et al. (2019) show that, in the
presence of high risk premia, nominal rigidities, and default risk, the optimal ...scal policy
in bad times may be procyclical as the cost of high sovereign spreads dominates Keynesian
gains of countercyclicality.
       Our starting point is that while existing arguments based on imperfections in capital
markets (like default risk and limited commitment) o¤er plausible and relevant insights into
the procyclical ...scal policy puzzle, they miss a much more fundamental question: is there
a role for standard incomplete markets (i.e., access to just a risk-free bond in an uncertain
   7
    See, for example, Tornell and Lane (1999), Talvi and Vegh (2005), Alesina et al. (2008), and Ilzetzki
(2011).



                                                   2
world) in explaining procyclical ...scal policy on both the spending and taxation sides? In
other words, how far can we go with a canonical small open economy model with incomplete
markets in explaining spending and tax procyclicality? In fact, Cuadra et al. (2010) argue
that incomplete markets per se cannot explain procyclical tax policy.8 In other words, the
literature has left the mistaken impression that incomplete markets may not be enough to
generate procyclicality in both government consumption and tax rates.
       In this paper, we go back to basics and examine what the workhorse model of a small
open economy, operating under incomplete asset markets, has to say about procyclical ...s-
cal policy. We quickly (even in a static setup) uncover a key and novel theoretical result:
while incomplete markets are enough to generate procyclical government spending, the same
is not true of tax rates.       In fact, under incomplete markets, tax rates may be acyclical,
countercyclical, or procyclical depending on how the ratio of private to public consumption
comoves with real GDP over the business cycle. Intuitively, if this comovement is positive,
then in good times the tax base (consumption) is increasing more than government spending,
which will induce the government to reduce tax rates (procyclical tax policy). Conversely,
if this comovement is negative, the tax base is increasing less than government spending in
good times, which will prompt the ...scal authority to increase tax rates (countercyclical tax
policy). We trace back this endogenous comovement to preference parameters over private
and public consumption, which allows us to perform various experiments that shed further
light on the mechanism involved. For expositional purposes, we will refer to this channel
as the "consumption preference channel." Importantly, we argue that, in practice, the ra-
tio of private to public consumption comoves positively with the business cycle so that the
empirically-relevant case is the one in which incomplete markets lead to procyclical tax rates.
In other words, no other ingredients ­sovereign risk, limited commitment, high risk premia
­other than standard incomplete markets are needed to explain the procyclicality of both
government spending and tax rates. It may well be, of course, that other ingredients are
needed for quantitative purposes or related stylized facts but, from an applied theory per-
spective, all we need to explain the puzzle of procyclical ...scal policy in developing countries
   8
     Speci...cally, they argue (p.455) that "[i]n Riascos and Vegh the government can commit to pay its debt,
so it faces the same interest rate across states. Since the government always borrows at the international
risk free rate, the model is not able to generate a negative correlation between output and tax rates."


                                                     3
are incomplete markets.
     Having used a static model to illustrate this novel result on the cyclicality of tax rates in
the simplest possible setup, we then build a standard DSGE model with incomplete markets
to examine whether the intuition built with the static model holds for an in...nite-horizon
model. Further, to understand the precise role of the degree of market incompleteness, we
also examine the benchmark cases of ...nancial autarky and complete markets. To get rid of
the unit root that characterizes the basic DSGE model, we incorporate an upward-sloping
supply of funds that renders the model stationary and thus amenable to computer solutions
(Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2003).       Interestingly, the intertemporal nature of the DSGE
model brings a second channel into the picture: since households can, for example, borrow
to smooth consumption in response to a negative shock, then consumption (and thus the tax
base) will fall by less than otherwise, which will reduce the ...scal authority'
                                                                               s need to increase
taxes (i.e., tax policy will be, all else equal, less procyclical/more countercyclical). For
expositional purposes, we will refer to this second channel as the "consumption smoothing
channel."
     How do these two channels interact in the DSGE model? The steeper the upward-
sloping supply of funds, the less consumption smoothing will take place, and, hence, the
more similar will be the results to the static case (i.e., the cyclicality of tax policy will
essentially depend on the consumption preference channel).          Conversely, the atter the
upward-sloping supply of funds, the more important the consumption smoothing channel
becomes and, hence, the less relevant the consumption preference channel.          For the more
empirically-relevant speci...cation (based on estimations of the debt elasticity), the consump-
tion preference channel clearly dominates and hence our insights from the static model go
through. We thus conclude that the cyclicality of tax policy will be essentially determined
by the positive comovement of the ratio of private to public consumption over the business
cycle.
     We should note that the dominance of the consumption preference channel over the
consumption smoothing channel is consistent with an extensive literature that has identi...ed a
steep upward-sloping supply of funds as a distinctive amplifying mechanism when accounting
for EMEs'business cycles and linked this feature to the presence of stronger ...nancial frictions


                                               4
in DSGE models (Neumeyer and Perri, 2005; Uribe and Yue, 2006; García-Cicco et al., 2010;
Chang and Fernández, 2013; Fernández and Gulan, 2015).
     We then examine the role of the degree of persistence of TFP shocks. The main
motivation is the work of Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) who suggest that cycles in emerging
markets are more volatile because shocks are more persistent. The question is then: how
does more persistence a¤ect optimal tax policy? Our analysis clearly indicates that more
persistence is associated with more procyclical tax policy. The intuition is simple enough:
the more persistent are TFP shocks, the more consumption will react. Hence, in response to
a negative TFP shock, for example, consumption will fall by more than if the shock were not
as persistent, which reduces the tax base for a prolonged period of time and forces the ...scal
authority to increase taxes more. This is thus another channel that would make developing
countries more procyclical.
     Up to this point, the DSGE analysis will have illustrated the qualitative e¤ects of var-
ious kinds of ...nancial frictions on ...scal cyclicality, without looking into how these dynamics
may explain the actual data. To this e¤ect, we conduct a matching moments exercise by
...tting the model for non-OECD countries. We conclude that the model does quite a good
job in matching our four targeted moments: the standard deviations of output and private
consumption, and the correlations between government spending and output and tax rates
and output.    In addition, the model matches very well the (positive) correlation between
GDP and the ratio of private to public consumption, even though this was not a targeted
moment.
     We then o¤er a formal quanti...cation of the welfare costs of ...scal procyclicality. As
stressed by Reinhart et al. (2004), ...scal procyclicality makes an already volatile business
cycle in emerging markets even more pronounced (the "when it rains, it pours" phenom-
enon). To our knowledge, however, no paper has yet provided an estimate of this cost. By
calibrating the model for non-OECD countries and varying the debt-elasticity (from low val-
ues typical of OECD countries to high values typical of non-OECD countries), we conclude
that Lucas-type welfare costs of business cycles become at least twice as large as ...scal policy
procyclicality increases accordingly. While higher debt-elasticity will also introduce other
costs that may not be directly attributable to more procyclical ...scal policy (like making it


                                                5
harder for households to smooth consumption), our analysis makes clear that more ...scal
procyclicality will indeed be costly to the economy. This o¤ers a compelling policy rationale
to a vast literature that has emerged on the potential bene...ts of ...scal rules in reducing ...scal
procyclicality.9
          Finally, we o¤er empirical evidence in favor of (a) the results of the model and (b)
the ...nancial frictions emphasized in the theoretical and calibration analysis.         In terms of
the results of the model, we show that non-OECD countries exhibit statistically signi...cant
procyclical ...scal policy both on the spending and taxation sides. In terms of the ...nancial
frictions, we proxy market incompleteness with capital controls measures and show that such
controls are signi...cantly more prevalent in non-OECD than OECD countries (our point of
reference). Further, we estimate the debt elasticities used in the model with two di¤erent
proxies for debt and conclude that the debt elasticities are signi...cantly higher in non-OECD
than OECD countries. Finally, we show that GDP volatility is signi...cantly higher in non-
OECD than OECD countries. In sum, the empirical evidence is consistent with the idea
that countries that exhibit procyclical ...scal policy are characterized by deeper ...nancial
frictions (i.e., more market incompleteness and higher debt elasticities) and display more
output volatility.
          The paper proceeds as follows.          Section 2 develops the static model, which isolates
the consumption preference channel. Section 3 turns to the DSGE model and focuses on
how the consumption smoothing channel interacts with the consumption preference channel.
Section 4 presents empirical evidence that supports our main ...ndings.              Section 5 o¤ers
concluding remarks.



2         A static model
To illustrate our main point, consider a simple, static, small open economy model of optimal
...scal policy.10 We will analyze two di¤erent asset market structures: (i) ...nancial autarky
and (ii) complete markets. The purpose of this model is to examine, in the simplest possible
    9
        For an early and leading example, see Frankel (2011).
  10
        The reader is referred to Appendix A for detailed derivations.



                                                         6
framework, how market incompleteness (in the form of ...nancial autarky) a¤ects the cyclical
behavior of ...scal instruments (i.e., government spending and tax rates) in response to output
uctuations.11 The key punchlines will be: (i) under complete markets, spending and tax

policy are acyclical; and (ii) under ...nancial autarky, while government spending is always
procyclical, the same is not true of tax rates. In fact, the cyclical behavior of tax rates will
depend on how the ratio of private to public consumption comoves with the business cycle.


2.1     Setup

Consider a small open economy perfectly integrated with the rest of world in good markets.
Output is exogenous and stochastic, and follows the binomial distribution:
                                    8
                                    < y = y + ; with probability p;
                                       H
                                 y=                                                                                                              (1)
                                    : y =y    ; with probability 1 p;
                                       L

where y and          are positive parameters, and H and L denote the high and low output states
of nature, respectively. For simplicity, p is assumed to be equal to 1=2. Since E (y ) = y
                 2
and V (y ) =         , an increase in        represents a mean-preserving spread.
       Following Baxter and King (1993), we assume that households'preferences are sepa-
rable in private and public consumption:
                            8            "            1                                          1
                                                                                                              #
                            >
                            >
                                              1
                                                       c
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                  g
                            >
                            >      E
                                             ci             1
                                                                + (1           )
                                                                                    gi                    1
                                                                                                                  ;       6= 1 and       6= 1;
                            >
                            >    i=H;L            1    1
                                                                                         1        1                   c              g
                            >
                            >            "
                                                        c                                          g
                                                                                                          #
                            >
                            <                                                   1           1
                                                                                             g
                                                                               gi                     1
           U (ci ; gi ) =          E         ln(ci ) + (1                  )                 1                ;       c   = 1 and    g   6= 1;   (2)
                            >
                            >    i=H;L                                              1
                                                                                              g
                            >
                            >            "                                                            #
                            >
                            >                 1       1
                            >
                            >                ci        c    1
                            >
                            :      E              1    1        + (1           ) ln(gi ) ;                            c   6= 1 and   g   = 1;
                                 i=H;L                  c




where 1=    c   and 1=      g   denote the coe¢ cients of relative risk aversion for private and public
consumption, respectively. The parameters                              c   and               g    will determine how the ratio of private
  11
    It is worth stressing that, as emphasized by Reinhart et al. (2004), it would be misleading to use the
ratio g/y to characterize ...scal policy cyclicality because of the endogeneity of y. For example, if g/y goes
down in good times because output increases by more than g, we would wrongly conclude that government
spending is countercyclical when in reality government spending is procyclical (since g is being increased in
good times).



                                                                       7
to public consumption correlates with output.12                        As will become clear below, the relative
size of    c   and   g   will be crucial for our results.
       The household'
                    s budget constraint in each state of nature is given by


                                        yi = (1 +        i )ci ;       i = L; H;                            (3)

where      i   is a consumption tax.13
       The government'
                     s budget constraints are thus


                                            gi =     i ci ;        i = L; H:                                (4)

Combining the household'
                       s constraints, given by (3), with the government'
                                                                       s, given by (4),
yields the economy'
                  s resource constraints:


                                          yi = ci + gi ;            i = L; H:                               (5)


       For the sake of tractability, we will consider two polar cases in terms of asset market
completeness: ...nancial autarky and complete markets. We begin with the extreme case of
...nancial autarky (i.e. full absence of ...nancial instruments). Before proceeding, notice that
we can solve this problem as a social planner because the consumption tax does not distort
intertemporally (i.e., the model is static) or intratemporally (i.e., there is no labor/leisure
choice).       Once we have solved for the social planner'
                                                         s optimal allocation, we can use the
government'
          s constraints, given by (4), to recover the optimal consumption tax rates.
       In the ...nancial autarky case, the planner'
                                                  s problem consists in choosing fcH ; cL ; gH ; gL g
to maximize households'utility, given by (2), subject to the economy'
                                                                    s resource constraint.
As shown in Appendix A, at an optimum, the marginal utilities of private and public con-
sumption will be the same in each state of nature:


                                   Uci (ci ; gi ) = Ugi (ci ; gi ) ,       i = H; L:                        (6)
  12
    As illustrated in Appendix A for the case of = 1=2, c = g implies c = g ; c > g implies c > g , and
 c <  g implies c < g . In other words, the relative size of c and g dictates the preferences for c and g .
  13
    As shown in Appendix A, in this simple world the results would be identical if we assumed an output
(endowment) tax. Also, for simplicity, we assume that private and public sector initial asses are zero.


                                                              8
       In the complete markets case, the economy may buy/sell state contingent claims that
promise to deliver one unit of output if states H and L occur for a price qH and qL , respec-
tively.14 Prices are assumed to be actuarially fair, which implies that

                                                   qH    p
                                                      =     :
                                                   qL   1 p

The economy'
           s resource constraint is thus


                            qH yH + qL yL = qH (cH + gH ) + qL (cL + gL ):                               (7)


       The social planner chooses fcH ; cL ; gH ; gL g to maximize households' utility, given by
(2), subject to constraint (7). In addition to condition (6), it is also the case that


                                     UcH (cH ; gH ) = UcL (cL ; gL );

                                     UgH (cH ; gH ) = UgL (cL ; gL ):


In other words, the marginal utilities of private and public consumption are equalized across
states of nature (which, by de...nition, implies full risk sharing under complete markets).
Since the utility function is separable, these two optimality conditions imply that cH = cL
and gH = gL . The latter implies that government spending is the same across states of nature
regardless of the relation between         c   and    g.    We now fully characterize the properties of
...scal policy across states of nature.


2.2        Cyclical properties of ...scal policy

Let    g   and   capture, respectively, the cyclicality of government spending and tax rates:

                                               X             gH
                                               g       ln         ;
                                                             gL
                                               X              H
                                                       ln         :
                                                              L

  14
    The state contingent bonds are intra-period; that is, they are purchased at the beginning of the period,
before the shock materializes, and the households receive the pay-o¤ at the end of the period, once the shock
materializes.


                                                       9
where X              CM in the case of complete markets and X                               F A in the case of ...nancial
autarky.           A positive (negative) value of                 g;    that is, gH > gL (gH < gL ), would indicate
that government spending is procyclical (countercyclical). If gH = gL , then                                   g       = 0; which
implies acyclical government spending. A positive (negative) value of                                   ; that is,          H     >    L

(   H   <   L ),   would indicate that tax rates are countercyclical (procyclical). If                         H       =     L,   then
    = 0, implying acyclical tax policy.
        We are now ready to fully characterize the cyclical properties of optimal ...scal policy
in the static model under complete and incomplete markets (i.e., ...nancial autarky).                                                 We
will do so by establishing the following two propositions.

                                                                                                                            CM
Proposition 1 Government spending is acyclical under complete markets (i.e.,                                                g     = 0)
                                                                  FA
and is procylical under ...nancial autarky (                      g     > 0) regardless of the values of           c   and        g.



Proof. See Appendix A.

                                                                                                         CM
Proposition 2 Tax rates are acyclical under complete markets (i.e.,                                            = 0): Under
...nancial autarky, the cyclicality of tax rates depends on the relative values of                                      c   and        g.
                                    FA                                                          FA
Tax rates are acyclical (                   = 0) if       c   =        g,   countercyclical (        > 0) if   c       <     g,    and
                     FA
procyclical (             < 0) if   c   >    g.



Proof. See Appendix A.
        The key and novel results of this section are thus captured by Propositions 1 and
2, which establish that market incompleteness (as captured in this instance by ...nancial
autarky) is a necessary and su¢ cient condition for government spending to be procyclical.
In contrast, market incompleteness is a necessary but not su¢ cient condition for tax policy
to be procyclical. In fact, acyclicality, procyclicality, and countercyclicality are all possible
depending on the relative values of                   c   >        g.       In sum, ...nancial autarky does not tell us
anything, in principle, about the cyclicality of optimal tax policy.
        The role of the relative values of                    c   and       g   becomes clear when we realize that these
parameters will determine how the ratio g=c moves over the business cycle.                                         In order to
understand precisely the role of these two parameters, we can use (4) and rewrite                                                      as
follows:

                                                                   10
                                                       H              gH =cH
                                                 ln            = ln                :                                  (8)
                                                       L              gL =cL
     Therefore, the tax rate cyclicality is tightly linked to the optimal ratio g=c across states
of nature which, in turn, is determined by                 c   and    g:



     When         c   =       g,   then g=c is constant across states of nature (i.e., gH =cH = gL =cL ),
     and hence            H   =     L.   Since private and public consumption are equally valued, the two
     types of consumption increase by the same proportion in the good state of nature. The
     higher tax base (i.e., the higher private consumption) enables the ...scal authority to
     leave the tax rate unchanged and still ...nance the higher government spending. Tax
     policy is thus acyclical.

     When         c   <       g,   then gH =cH > gL =cL , and hence            H   >        L.     Since households have
     stronger preferences for public than private consumption, then private consumption
     increases proportionally less than public consumption in the good state of nature.
     Hence, if the ...scal authority kept the same tax rate, tax revenues would fall short. The
     ...scal authority needs to increase the tax rate to ...nance the higher public consumption
     (   H   >   L ),     thus engaging in countercyclical tax policy.

     When         c   >       g,   then gH =cH < gL =cL , and hence        H   <       L.        Since households'prefer-
     ences are stronger for private than public consumption, then c increases proportionately
     more than g in the good state of nature. The relatively higher tax base allows the ...scal
     authority to reduce the tax rate and still ...nance the higher public consumption (i.e.,
         H   <   L;   procyclical tax rates), thus engaging in procyclical ...scal policy. We will refer
     to this channel as the "consumption preference channel." In other words, the house-
     holds'stronger preference for private than public consumption leads to procyclical tax
     policy.

     It will thus be of interest to relate the degree of cyclicality of tax rates in the data to
the dynamics of the ratio of private to public consumption over the business cycle. We will
do so in the next section in the context of a fully-calibrated dynamic model.
     Finally, the degree of asset market completeness will also matter for the extent to


                                                           11
which higher income volatility a¤ects the cyclicality of ...scal policy. The next proposition
formalizes this.

Proposition 3 Under ...nancial autarky, the procyclicality of government spending increases
                                     FA
with output volatility (i.e., (d     g =d    ) > 0). When tax rates are procyclical (i.e.,             c   >    g ),
                                                                              FA
then tax procyclicality increases with output volatility ((i.e., (d                =d ) < 0).        When tax
rates are countercyclical (i.e.,     c   <   g ),   then tax countercyclicality also increases with output
                       FA
volatility (i.e., (d        =d ) > 0). When tax rates are acyclical (i.e.,           c   =   g ),   then output
                                    FA
volatility has no e¤ect (i:e:; d         =d ) = 0). Under complete markets, output volatility does
not a¤ect the cyclicality of either government spending or tax rates.

Proof. See Appendix A.
      In sum, this simple model has achieved several goals.                  First, we have shown (for
the ...rst time, as far as we know) that incomplete markets do not necessarily imply that
both government spending and tax rates are procyclical It would therefore be incorrect,
as a matter of applied macro-theory, to assert that incomplete asset markets explain ...scal
procyclicality. Second, we have shown that, depending on the relative size of                   c   and    g;   tax
rates could result in acyclical, procyclical, or countercyclical tax policy. Hence, the theory,
by itself, cannot tell us how tax rates are expected to move over the business cycle.                            In
other words, we will eventually need empirical guidance to establish which case is the most
plausible in the real world.        In fact, we will see that, in practice, the ratio c=g comoves
positively with the business cycle , which implies that the model'
                                                                 s prediction would be that
tax policy is procyclical.
      Before we get there, however, we will ...rst explore the natural question of whether the
key theoretical insights that we have derived in the context of this simple and static model
remain valid in a much richer and more realistic modeling environment.



3     A DSGE model
This section further explores the cyclical implications of optimal (Ramsey) ...scal policy in
both tax rates and public spending and their relationship with the degree of asset market

                                                        12
completeness in open economies, but in a richer environment (i.e., the standard DSGE model
used for the analysis of business cycles in small open economies). Agents will now operate
within an in...nite horizon setting, production will be endogenous, and households will choose
labor supply optimally.
        An important new feature (referred to henceforth as the "consumption smoothing chan-
nel") is that households will now be able to smooth consumption by issuing risk-free debt in
international markets, which will have a direct e¤ect on the cyclicality of ...scal policy. While
we will continue to explore the e¤ects of di¤erent degrees of asset market completeness, the
presence of debt opens up the possibility of studying the presence of a di¤erent, but related,
type of ...nancial friction: the existence of an upward sloping supply of external savings. We
will also explore the extent to which the slope of this supply of funds ­ a proxy for other
kinds of ...nancial frictions ­a¤ects the cyclicality of ...scal policy in response to productivity
shocks. Lastly, we will focus on how higher output volatility, driven by more persistent TFP
shocks, a¤ects the cyclicality of ...scal policy. Despite the richness of the new environment,
results will show that the main takeaways from the model continue to be those from the
much simpler static one in the previous section.


3.1      Setup

3.1.1     Households

Households maximize the expected present discounted value of utility:

                                              X
                                              1
                                                     t
                                     U = E0              U (ct ; gt ; lt );                    (9)
                                              t=0


where ct , gt , lt ; and   denote, respectively, private consumption, public consumption, labor
supply, and the discount factor.
        In what will be our benchmark case henceforth, households will have access to inter-
national asset markets by issuing one period non-state contingent bonds. This assumption
will be later relaxed when we consider, as in the previous static framework, the polar cases
of complete markets and ...nancial autarky.


                                                    13
        The representative household'
                                    s budget constraint is given by:


                                       dt = Rt 1 dt         1   +        t ct     yt ;                         (10)


where dt is the stock of private debt at the end of period t; Rt is the (gross) interest rate
of debt contracted in period t          1 and repaid in period t; and                    t   is the (gross) tax rate
                                               15
on consumption (and equal to 1 +           t ).       The standard no-Ponzi games condition applies.
Lastly, output yt , is given by
                                                    yt = At lt ;                                               (11)

where At is a stochastic productivity factor.


3.1.2     Real interest rates

The gross international real interest rate faced by households, Rt , is assumed to be equal to
the stochastic gross world real interest rate (Rt ) and an endogenous risk premium, St ; that
depends on the stock of debt:


                                          Rt = Rt St ;                                                         (12)
                                                      et :
                                           St = 1 + p d


        We follow Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003) and assume that p ( ) is a country-speci...c
                           et is the aggregate level of foreign debt which, in equilibrium, is
interest rate premium, and d
equal to household'
                  s debt. The functional form that we use for p ( ) also follows their work:

                                                       c
                                         p (d) =            ed       d
                                                                                1 ;                            (13)

          c
where         and d are parameters.
                     c
        Note that        governs the elasticity of the spread to changes in private debt (i.e., the
slope of the supply of external funds). In our benchmark case, we will follow Schmitt-Grohé
                                                                 c
and Uribe (2003) and consider small values of                            so as to render the model stationary. As
  15
    Labor income taxation would deliver similar, though not identical, results because the distortions intro-
duced are not exactly the same as in the previous section.


                                                           14
explained in more detail below, we will nonetheless consider also deviations from this level as
an additional source of ...nancial frictions (García-Cicco et al., 2010; Chang and Fernández,
2013; and Fernández and Gulan, 2015).


3.1.3     Government

The government'
              s ow budget constraint is given by


                                dg    g    g
                                 t = Rt 1 dt   1   + gt   (   t        1)ct ;                                          (14)


where dg
       t is the stock of public debt.

        We will further assume that a similar debt-elastic interest rate premium applies to
                                                                                        g         g
                           g
government debt; that is, Rt = Rt Stg , where Stg = 1 + p (dg
                                                            t) =
                                                                                  g
                                                                                      edt     d
                                                                                                           1 and   g
                                                                                                                       and
 g
d are parameters.


3.1.4     Driving processes

There are two independent sources of uncertainty modeled as stochastic driving forces. The
...rst one is for TFP:


                    ln At =A =   A    ln At 1 =A + "A
                                                    t ;           "A
                                                                   t      N IID(0;          2
                                                                                            A );                       (15)


where A is TFP in the steady state. The second one is for the world real interest rate:


                 ln Rt =R   =    R   ln Rt 1 =R      + "R
                                                        t ;        "R
                                                                    t           N IID(0;       2
                                                                                               R      );               (16)


where R is the non-stochastic real interest rate.


3.1.5     Ramsey problem

The Ramsey planner maximizes the welfare of the representative agent (9), subject to the
private and public budget constraints, (10) and (14), and the implementability constraints




                                                   15
from the household'
                  s problem:


                                                   t   = At ;

                                                   t   =    R t Et   t+1 ;



where     t (ct ; gt ; lt ; t )   is the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure and
 t   = h(ct ; gt ; lt ; t ) is the shadow price of wealth (further details can be found in Appendix
B).


3.2      Financial frictions

As in the static case, we will study the e¤ects of varying the level of asset market com-
pleteness. This is captured schematically in Figure 3. In addition to the benchmark case
(point B in Figure 3), we will explore the two polar cases of ...nancial autarky (point A) and
complete markets (point C).
       Following Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003), in the case of complete asset markets,
agents have access to a complete array of state-contingent claims so that the sequential
budget constraint becomes
                                              Et rt+1 bt+1 = bt + yt         t ct ;                   (17)

where bt+1 are the assets purchased in t to be delivered in each state of period t + 1 and rt+1
denotes the period-t price of an asset that pays one unit of the good in a particular state of
period t + 1 divided by the probability of occurrence of that state given information available
in period t: A no-Ponzi-game constraint exists, given by lim Et qt+j bt+j                  0 as j ! 1; for
all dates and for all contingencies, where qt = r1 r2 :::rt , with q0                 1.
       On the other hand, the case of ...nancial autarky assumes that neither households nor
the government can buy or sell ...nancial securities from/to the rest of the world. In other
words, assets can only be exchanged within the country.16 Formally, then, the following
  16
    In this case, and as detailed in Appendix B, we assume that both households and the government are
subject to quadratic portfolio adjustment costs.




                                                           16
general equilibrium condition must be added for this case:


                                             dt + dg
                                                   t = 0 8t:                                        (18)


       Furthermore, in this case the real interest rate R is no longer given by (12), (13), and
(16), and instead adjusts endogenously to ensure that condition (18) is satis...ed at all times.
       The second type of ...nancial friction, illustrated schematically by the vertical axis in
                                                                                                c
Figure 3 and captured in reduced form by (13), is a debt-elastic risk premium, with                 and
 g
     denoting the two elasticities considered.        Larger values of this elasticity, which imply
a stronger response of the real interest rate paid by the country to international creditors,
appear to be empirically necessary to bring DSGE models closer to emerging markets data
(Garcia-Cicco et al., 2010; Chang and Fernandez, 2013).
       While, conceptually, the model with debt-elastic interest rates converges to the ...nancial
                   c         g
autarky case as        and       become arbitrarily large (i.e., the vertical axis in Figure 3 rotates
to the left, eventually converging to the horizontal arrow), the two types of ...nancial frictions
are not completely isomorphic. The existence of debt-elastic real interest rates requires at
least some level of asset market incompleteness, but higher levels of this elasticity do not
necessarily imply more incompleteness. Fernández and Gulan (2015), for instance, provide
microfoundations for the debt elasticity parameter in an environment where private debt
is defaultable due to asymmetric information between domestic entrepreneurs and external
lenders, holding the level of asset market incompleteness constant. This justi...es a separate
analysis of these two types of frictions.
       A third and ...nal dimension that we will study within this richer setup is the presence
of varying degrees of persistence in the TFP process, At , as illustrated by the diagonal axis
in Figure 3. Based on the observation that small emerging economies have more volatile
GDP, Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) hypothesized that such phenomenon could be related to
higher persistence in TFP which, in turn, captures a myriad of frictions (whether of ...nancial
nature or not), such as frequent changes in ...scal, monetary, and trade policies. Our goal will
be to study the extent to which a more persistent TFP process delivers ...scal procyclicality
when the two kinds of ...nancial frictions that we consider coexist.


                                                    17
3.3         Calibration

Following Baxter and King (1993), we continue to use separable preferences:

                                             c1   1=   c
                                                                1       g1   1=   g
                                                                                           1
                             U (c; g; l) =                          +                          + log(1   l);
                                              1        1=   c            1        1=   g


where       c   and   g   can now be also interpreted as the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
of private and public consumption, respectively.
      The calibration of the various parameters in the DSGE model is summarized in Table
1. We rely mostly on previous studies of small open economies. Without loss of generality,
the steady-state level of TFP (A) is normalized to one. Following Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe
(2003), the steady-state level of the international real interest rate (R ) is set to 4 percent
on an annual basis. The steady-state ratio of total debt (public and private) to (quarterly)
income is set to 1:34; using Lane and Milesi-Ferretti'
                                                     s (2007) data on net foreign assets for
the non-OECD countries in Figures 1 and 2.
      The persistence of the TFP process, governed by the AR(1) coe¢ cient                                                   A   is set to
0:95 in our benchmark case, taken from Neumeyer and Perri (2005). The volatility of the
shock to this process will vary throughout our various experiments, including one where we
calibrate it so as to match certain moments in the data, but in our benchmark case it will be
set to 0:0129, also taken from Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003). The values chosen for                                                   R

and     R   , which govern the persistence and volatility of the real interest rate process, come
from Uribe and Yue (2006) and are set to 0:83 and 0:007, respectively.
      As usual, the discount factor ( ) is calibrated as the inverse of the gross international
real interest rate. In our baseline case of incomplete markets, the parameters capturing the
                                                                                                               c         g
debt elasticity of the real interest rate in both private and public debt,                                         and       , will be set
to 0:125, using the estimated value to be discussed later in the empirical section. However, in
the various experiments that we will conduct, the values considered for these parameters will
change so as to capture varying degrees of ...nancial frictions, and also consider alternative
values that aim at better matching some of the moments in the data.
      Last, but not least, we need to calibrate the parameters governing the intertemporal
elasticities of substitution for private ( c ) and public ( g ) consumption. From the static


                                                                    18
model, we know that the relative values chosen for these parameters are crucial for deter-
mining the cyclicality of ...scal policy. We will therefore set                    c   to 1 and consider a range of
                                                                 17
values for          g   from lower to higher than              c.




3.4         Results

This section presents the quantitative results from the DSGE model.                               We study, sepa-
rately, the e¤ects of market incompleteness and varying debt elastic spreads on the optimal
path of ...scal policy as it reacts to exogenous TFP disturbances. We do this through the
analysis of second moments, simulations, and impulse response functions. In addition, we
explore the ...scal consequences of higher income volatility resulting from more persistent
TFP shocks. Lastly, we present an exercise that measures the performance of the DSGE
model in matching some of the key moments in the data. All results come from a ...rst-order
Taylor approximation of the model around its non-stochastic steady state.


3.4.1       Second moments

We begin by exploring the two main second moments in our analysis: the contemporaneous
correlations of government consumption (g ) and tax rates ( ) with income (y ). The key role
played by the elasticities                g   and   c   in determining these moments and, thus, on the degree
of ...scal procyclicality are illustrated in Figures 4 and 5 for, respectively, the cases when the
                            c         g
debt elasticity (               and       ) varies and for di¤erent degrees of market incompleteness.18
        When varying the debt elasticity in Figure 4, in addition to our benchmark calibration
        c       g
for         =       = 0:125, we consider four alternative values: two are lower than our calibrated
                        c       g               c        g                                                     c
benchmark (                 =       = 0:01;         =        = 0:001), while the remaining two are higher (        =
 g              c           g
       = 1;             =       = 2:8).        The lowest value considered (0:001) can be thought as the
minimum level needed to render the model stationary and hence amenable to computing
second moments, while the highest value comes from the estimated value for Argentina in
  17
      It is worth pointing out that the calibration of c and g not only has relevance for the cyclical dynamics
of ...scal policy, but also for the steady state of the model. A calibration where c > g ( c < g ) delivers
a ratio of private-to-public consumption, c=g , that is lower (higher) than one, and hence tax rates that are
relatively higher (lower).
  18
      Since, in these exercises, we assume that c = g , we often use the notation c = g = :



                                                                      19
Garcia-Cicco et al. (2010).
      The main message from Figure 4 is essentially the same derived in the static model
of Section 2 (recall Propositions 1 and 2): ...scal procyclicality in government spending does
not depend on the relative values of          g   and           c,   but the same is not true of tax rates, in
which case the relative values of these parameters are crucial in determining the sign of the
correlation. Indeed, as shown in the top panel of Figure 4, for the entire range considered
for   g   from 0:5 to 1:5 (recall that   c    is ...xed at 1), the correlation between g and y lies
above 0:95 for all values of       considered. In contrast, as shown in the bottom panel, the
sign of the correlation between        and y changes drastically from                          1 to 1 as       g       increases.
                                                  c             g
For example, in the extreme case where                =              =   = 2:8, and the economy is basically in
...nancial autarky because it is too costly to issue debt (a case that will be explored in greater
detail next), the results are identical to the static model: tax rates behave in a procyclical
manner (i.e., the correlation is negative) for              g   less than        c   (which is ...xed at 1) while they
behave countercyclically (i.e., the correlation is positive) when the opposite occurs.                                       Put
di¤erently, the consumption preference channel identi...ed in the static model dominates the
consumption smoothing channel.
      An additional, and novel, feature of the correlation between                            and y that follows from
                                                                                                     c             g
Figure 4 is that the change in the sign of such correlation depends also on                              and           . Indeed,
                                                  c             g
as we move away from the polar case of                =              =       = 2:8 and        falls, so does the cut-o¤
value of     g   for which taxes change from being procyclical to countercyclical.                             Intuitively,
agents in this dynamic model can issue debt in order to smooth out the e¤ects of shocks on
their consumption path, a mechanism that, by construction, was absent in the static case
previously considered. For a given       g,   as agents are confronted with a negative TFP shock,
                                                        c                g
the cheaper it is for them to issue debt as                 and              fall, and hence the smaller the e¤ect
of the TFP shock on consumption (i.e., the tax base). This reduces the need for taxes to
increase in a procyclical manner, which will occur only when                           g   is low.
      Figure 5 reports the correlations between public consumption and output (top panel)
and tax rates and output (bottom panel) for the three cases of asset market completeness
considered (...nancial autarky, incomplete markets, and complete markets).                                     In the top
panel, we see that the less complete markets are, the higher the correlation between output


                                                      20
and public consumption, regardless of the value of                        g.   Indeed, public consumption is
uncorrelated with output under complete markets (i.e., covariance is zero) and perfectly
correlated under ...nancial autarky.19                  As in the static framework, the correlation between
tax rates and output (bottom panel) depends on the value of                     g,   more so as markets are less
complete. In the extreme case of ...nancial autarky, such correlation turns around completely
                                                                                                              c
from -1 to 1 as                 g   crosses 1 (note how similar this case is to the one in Figure 4 for            =
     g
             = 2:8). In the case of incomplete markets, the cross-over occurs at slightly lower levels
             g
of               because of the presence of the consumption smoothing channel analyzed above.
                 We report other second moments of the model in Table 2.                In addition to the two
moments already analyzed (correlation of tax rates and government spending with output),
the table shows the standard deviation of these three variables and consumption and the
correlation of the public spending ratio with output. The table reports the moments for the
three cases of market completeness considered and the various possible calibrations of                        g.

                 The case of market completeness is trivial as all moments (except income variability)
are zero, regardless of the calibration of                   g   as consumption, public spending and, hence,
tax rates, are perfectly smoothed thanks to complete markets.20                        For the case of ...nancial
autarky, as expected from the discussion above, the moments vary considerably depending
on the calibration of                  g.   Low (high) values of this elasticity relative to    c   render private
consumption more (less) volatile, while public consumption becomes less (more) volatile.
This, in turn, implies that the ratio c=g commoves positively (negatively) with income only
if           g     1(    g   > 1). The case of incomplete asset markets is an intermediate case, though
closer to the case of ...nancial autarky given the relatively high spread elasticity considered
         c         g
(            =         = 0:125).
                 A ...nal look at the dynamics of ...scal variables is explored in the simulation presented in
Figure 6 which illustrates, for the incomplete markets case, the deviations from the steady
state for the key variables in the model from randomly drawing TFP shocks during 40
quarters. The particular pattern of the draws is such that roughly in the ...rst half of the
period a sequence of positive TFP shocks takes place while the opposite is true towards the
     19
     For the complete markets case, the plot shows the covariance since the correlation cannot be computed.
     20
     Note that, for the case of complete markets, the table presents covariances instead of correlations, as the
latter cannot be computed.


                                                                 21
end of the sample (Panel A). Naturally, private consumption comoves positively with output
(Panel B). The path of government spending (Panel C) increases in the period of positive
TFP shocks and falls towards the end of the sample, indicating a procyclical behavior. As
expected, the path of tax rates (Panel D) critically depends on whether                          g   is above or below
 c   = 1: (i) when      g   >   c,   the path of tax rates is countercyclical (i.e., tax rates comove
positively with GDP); (ii) when           g   <   c,   the path of tax rates is procyclical (i.e., tax rates
comove negatively with GDP); and (iii) when                   g   =   c   = 1, the path of tax rates is acyclical.
                                                                                   c       g
Such simulations were conducted for the extreme case where                             =       = 2:8.


3.4.2     Impulse responses

A complementary analysis of ...scal policy is conducted by means of impulse response func-
tions (IRFs) following a fall of TFP by one percentage point relative to the steady state.
Figures 7A, 7B, and 8 show the IRFs under di¤erent degrees of asset market completeness
(Figures 7A and 7B) and varying debt elasticities of spreads (Figure 8). The ...gures present
the dynamics of the key variables in the model: productivity, private consumption, public
consumption, output, private debt, tax rates, real interest rates, and private and public
debt.21   22


        The columns of Figures 7A and 7B illustrate the three cases considered in terms of asset
market completeness: the left-most column is the case of ...nancial autarky, the middle column
is the benchmark case (i.e., a non-state contingent bond) and the right-most column is the
case of complete markets. Focusing ...rst on the top row of the ...gures that deals with the
case of    g   = 0:5, the key result is that, again, moving from complete markets to incomplete
markets and ...nancial autarky increases the procyclicality of both public expenditures as
well as tax rates.      Under ...nancial autarky and incomplete markets, and in response to a
fall of TFP by 1 percent below steady state, tax rates increase and public consumption falls
(Figure 7A). On the other hand, under complete markets (right column), neither public nor
private consumption and, thus, tax rates react as debt increases automatically given that
  21
     Notice that in the ...nancial autarky case, there is a single (domestic) real interest rate, whereas in the
incomplete markets case, the real interest rates faced by the private and public sector are not the same.
  22
     Units are in percentage deviations from steady state levels, except for real interest rates and debt (linear
deviations).



                                                         22
debt is no longer a state variable. In the case of incomplete markets (middle column), debt
is now a state variable and hence does not react following the shock. However, next period
debt increases in order to smooth the e¤ect on consumption of the shock (Figure 7B). Note
                                                                                                                      c         g
that under the benchmark calibration, issuing debt is relatively expensive (high                                          and       )
and the shock is quite persistent (high                      A)   so that the amount of debt issued following the
shock does not help much in smoothing its e¤ect, delivering a result that is quantitatively
similar to that of ...nancial autarky (Figure 7A). Note also that, under ...nancial autarky,
the public borrowing needed to pay for public consumption, in addition to higher tax rates,
pushes the domestic real interest rate up (Figure 7B).23
        The second and third rows of Figures 7A and 7B illustrate the e¤ects of di¤erent values
of     g,   the only parameter that varies as we move across rows, with the second row showing
results for          g       = 1, and the third for          g   = 2. In the ...nancial autarky case, left column
(when        g   =       c   = 1), the fall of public and private consumption is identical and, in turn, the
same as output. This implies that tax rates do not need to change and become acyclical.
The same is essentially true in the incomplete markets case due to debt being relatively
expensive. When                   g   is twice as large as       c,   the Ramsey planner can actually use tax rates
in a countercyclical way because the fall in public consumption is larger than that in private
consumption. Quantitatively similar results are observed under incomplete markets. Lastly,
as expected, increases in                 g   do not have any relevance in the complete markets case as neither
public nor private consumption react.
        The e¤ects of increasing the spread elasticity are illustrated in the ...rst row of Figure 8,
                                                                                                       c         g
comparing the benchmark case (middle column) with the case where                                           and       increase to
                                                         c             g
2:8 (left column) and the case where                         and           fall to 0:001 (right column). As it becomes
more costly to issue debt, a negative TFP shock has larger negative e¤ects on private and
public consumption. For relatively low values of                             g,   as is the case of the ...rst row in Figure
8, tax rates become procyclical because the e¤ects on public consumption are smaller than
on private consumption. The opposite occurs, however, when                                   g   increases, as in the second
and third rows, to the point that taxes become countercyclical (i.e., they fall as the recession
  23
    The considerable increase of the (now endogenous) interest rate in the ...nancial autarky model following
a negative TFP shock is explained by the outward shift in the demand for debt by the government. This
e¤ect is stronger the lower is the elasticity of substitution of public consumption.


                                                                      23
takes place).     Public consumption always responds procyclically by falling relative to its
steady state.


3.4.3     Output volatility

As mentioned above, higher persistence in the TFP residual is viewed as a potential source of
the higher output volatility observed in emerging economies (Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007).
This higher persistence is thus a simple way of capturing various frictions (...nancial and
non-...nancial), such as frequent changes in ...scal, monetary, and trade policies. Motivated
by this hypothesis, we now study the extent to which changes in the persistence of this shock
a¤ect the impact of ...nancial frictions on ...scal procyclicality.
        Figure 9 illustrates the IRFs following, as before, a fall in TFP of 1 percentage point
below the steady state under the three alternative cases of market completeness. We focus
on the case in which the persistence of the TFP process, captured by the AR(1) coe¢ cient,
falls from 0.95 to 0:42 as in Mendoza (1991).             The results are shown in the plots on the
lower row of the ...gure and, for comparison, the benchmark cases are reported on top. The
fall in persistence implies that the half life of a TFP shock falls from close to seven quarters
to less than a quarter, the volatility of the Solow residual decreases from 1.7 to 1.3 percent,
and the standard deviation of income falls from 2:9 to 2:5 percent in our benchmark case.
        Overall, the lower persistence reduces the tendency for ...nancial imperfections to in-
crease the procyclicality of ...scal policy. The mechanism is simple and intuitive: as the shock
becomes less persistent, agents react less vigorously in terms of private consumption, calling
for a less pronounced ...scal response (i.e., a reduction in public consumption and an increase
in tax rates). The exception is, of course, the case of complete markets (right column) where
the shock does not have any e¤ect except a smaller increase in debt. This contrasts with
the case of ...nancial autarky (left column) where the increase in taxes is considerably less
persistent following the shock.24        For the case of market incompleteness, results on public
spending and tax rates change drastically relative to the benchmark case as the persistence of
the shock diminishes (centered subplot in middle column). The strong procyclical tax rates
  24
     In fact, in the ...nancial autarky case, tax rates fall on impact. This is related to the increase in the
real interest rate that provides income to the government, which is a net creditor in the steady state. (Not
shown, but available upon request.)


                                                     24
largely vanishes. However, when we interact the fall in persistence with a higher spread
elasticity (bottom plot, middle column), the procyclicality in tax rates is restored and tax
rates increase in the wake of the shock.
        The role of persistence in TFP is further illustrated in Figure 10, which focuses on the
two key correlations between public consumption and tax rates with output, and reports
their values as the AR(1) coe¢ cient in the TFP process increases from 0:4 to near 1 (from
below). Results are qualitatively robust for the correlation of government expenditures and
income (top panel) and the correlation is always positive regardless of the persistence in the
shock.
        Regarding the correlation between tax rates and income (bottom panel), for the in-
termediate case of incomplete markets, we see that, as persistence decreases, the degree of
procyclicality falls. In fact, for relatively low levels of the debt elasticity ( = 0:125), the lack
of persistence of the shock is enough for consumption not to drop as much, which leads to
countercyclical tax rates (i.e., the correlation turns positive). In the extreme case of ...nancial
autarky, it is also the case that procyclicality falls as output persistence falls.


3.4.4     Moment matching

The analysis presented thus far has illustrated the e¤ect of various kinds of ...nancial frictions
on ...scal cyclicality, without asking how these dynamics account for those observed in the
data. Matching the data, however, is important to discipline the calibration of the model.
In the static model, for example, we showed how the behavior of the ratio c=g was relevant
for pinning down the relative values of      g   and   c   which, in turn, determines the degree of
procyclicality of tax rates.
        This subsection addresses the issue of data matching by calibrating some of the key
parameters in the DSGE model to match the most salient moments in the data. The four
parameters to be calibrated are: (i) the volatility and persistence of TFP shocks (                 A   and   A,

respectively), (ii) the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for government consumption
                                                       c       g
( g ); and (iii) the debt elasticity of the spread (       =       = ). The targeted moments in the
data are the standard deviations of income and private consumption (              y   and   c,   respectively)
and the correlations of taxes and public spending with real GDP (            ;y   and   g;y ,    respectively).

                                                  25
       The calibration procedure consists of the following steps. First, a grid is de...ned over
all possible combinations of values that the four parameters to be calibrated can take.25
Second, the model is simulated for each point of the grid (based on random TFP and world
real interest rate shocks) and the four targeted moments are computed using the HP-...ltered
series. Third, a quadratic loss function ­ de...ned as the sum of the (percentage) squared
deviations of simulated (HP-...ltered) moments from their empirical counterparts ­ is min-
imized over a four-dimensional grid de...ned for each of the parameters. Finally, we select
the combination of values of f        A;   A;   g;   g for which the loss function takes its minimum
value.    We use the data for non-OECD countries (see Figures 1 and 2) and restrict the
sample to balanced panel observations (within country) of more than ten annual consecutive
observations.
       The results of this exercise are reported in Table 3.                 The ...rst column shows the
second moments in the data.           The second column reports the results from the simulated
moments. The model performs rather well, considering how parsimonious it is. It captures
the higher volatility of private consumption relative to that of output, as well as the positive
correlation of government spending with output (procyclical government spending) and the
negative correlation of tax rates with output (procyclical tax policy). Remarkably, the model
matches the comovement between the ratio c=g and output, a moment that the exercise was
not targeted to match. This implies that, as anticipated in Section 2, the empirically relevant
case is the one in which c=g comoves positively with the cycle, which yields procyclical tax
policy. As shown in Table 3, the good performance of the model is based on a relative
inelastic government consumption intertemporal elasticity (              g   = 0:25), relatively high debt
elasticity of the spread ( = 1), and persistent TFP shocks (                 A   = 0:95).
       The model, however, is too parsimonious to account for the high volatility of govern-
ment spending, which is about one tenth of that in the data. It also accounts for only a ...fth
of the observed volatility in taxes. Clearly, the true data generating process captures other
sources of volatility in the ...scal instruments, in addition to the Ramsey dynamics implied by
our model. Likewise, the model accounts for only a fraction of the correlation between c and
  25
     We use a 1,925-point grid that provides at least ...ve di¤erent values for each calibrated parameter. The
rest of the parameters are taken from Table 1.



                                                      26
y , signalling perhaps that additional shocks are needed that can increase the comovement
between these two variables.


3.4.5       Welfare costs

Finally, we assess to what extent ...scal procyclicality is associated with more volatility and
welfare costs in emerging economies.                       As discussed in Reinhart et al. (2004), procyclical
...scal policy could be a source of ampli...cation of business cycles in emerging economies (the
"when it rains, it pours phenomenon"). In other words, expansionary (contractionary) ...scal
policy in good (bad) times would be expected to magnify the underlying business cycle. We
now evaluate how procyclicality might inuence welfare costs for di¤erent levels of ...nancial
frictions ( ).      We follow Lucas (1987) and compute welfare costs as the share of (steady
state) consumption that households living in an economy without shocks would have to
forgo to equate lifetime utility in an economy with TFP shocks and varying degrees of ...scal
procyclicality induced by di¤erent levels of the debt-elasticity ( ). Formally, welfare costs
(! ) are pinned down by the following expression:26

                                    X
                                    1                                           X
                                                                                1
                                           t                                           t
                               E0              U (c(1      ! ); g; l) = E0                 U (ct ; gt ; lt );            (19)
                                    t=0                                          t=0

where a bar over a variable denotes its steady-state value.
        Figure 11 presents the results.                    The left-most and middle panels illustrate how as
     increases, the procyclicality of both government spending and tax rates becomes larger
(i.e., the correlation of cyclical government spending and cyclical output increases and that
of cyclical tax rates and cyclical output falls). This reects the "when it rains, it pours"
syndrome as ...scal policy ampli...es shocks in a small open economy with incomplete markets.
The right-most panel reports the resulting welfare costs (! ).                                       In the benchmark case of
incomplete markets but no ...nancial frictions (i.e., an arbitrarily small value of                                 ), welfare
 26
    To compute welfare costs, we simulate the model for 100,000 quarters randomly drawing TFP
shocks and using the following parameters:    g = 0:5,   c = 1,    A = 0:0129, and     A = 0:95.
We use HP-...ltered series to calculate the moments relevant to determining the second order ap-
proximation of ! , Std(CHP ), Std(GHP ), and Std(LHP ), according to the following equation: ! =
                1
              cc
                    c   Std(CHP )2 ( 1 l l )2 Std(LHP )2    gg
                                                                 1   g   Std(GHP )2
 1    exp                                      2                                       :




                                                                     27
costs are close to 0:015 percent of lifetime consumption. As we increase the value of              to
empirically plausible levels found in emerging economies (e.g.          = 0:125, as shown in the
empirical section below), welfare costs nearly double to 0:03 percent.



4        Empirical evidence
This section complements our previous theoretical analysis by providing empirical evidence
supporting the links between ...nancial frictions and ...scal procyclicality in spending and tax
rates.     Speci...cally, we now test whether several plausible empirical proxies for the two
types of ...nancial frictions (asset market incompleteness and debt elasticity) considered in
our theoretical framework di¤er between OECD and non-OECD countries.


4.1       Data and estimation

As a proxy for market incompleteness, we use the dataset on restrictions on capital inows
and outows from Fernández et al. (2016), which quanti...es de jure restrictions on cross
border ows across 32 types of transactions in 10 di¤erent assets (equity, bonds, FDI, and
so forth), over the period 1995-2015. We use the following four speci...c indices: (i) overall
assets inow restrictions index (kai); (ii) overall assets outow restrictions index (kao); (iii)
bond inow restrictions (boi); and (iv) bond outow restrictions (boi). The value of these
four measures is an average of several restrictions indices within the corresponding category
(e.g., assets outows). Each index varies between 0 (no restrictions) and 1 (restrictions on
all assets).
         Our proxy for the spread elasticity is derived from estimating the functional form used
in the model (see equation (13)):

                                                 Di;t   Di
                          Si;t =   i   +   exp                   1 + "i;t ;
                                                 Yi;t   Yi

where i and t are, respectively, country and time indices, Si;t is the country spread,         i   is
a constant,      is the estimated elasticity, Di;t is debt, Yi;t is output, and "i;t is a mean zero
i:i:d disturbance. The above equation is estimated using panel ...xed e¤ects for two di¤erent


                                                   28
samples of countries: OECD and non-OECD.
      Two measures of debt are used: (i) total public debt from the World Bank'
                                                                              s WDI;
and (minus) net foreign assets from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2015). Si;t is proxied with the
EMBIG for non-OECD countries; the 10-year T-bill spread with respect to German T-bills
for OECD countries in the EU; and a UIP condition between the domestic 10-year T-bills
and the U.S. 10-year T-bills for the remaining OECD countries in the sample.
      Lastly, we use the two measures of ...scal procyclicality plotted in Figures 1 and 2.
The ...rst,    (y; g ), is the correlation between the cyclical components of real GDP and real
government consumption expenditure (using the HP ...lter). The second,             (y; ), is the
correlation between the cyclical component of real GDP and the VAT rate (also using the
HP ...lter).


4.2     Results

The key takeaway from the results summarized in Table 4 is that, as discussed in the In-
troduction, non-OECD countries, characterized by procyclical ...scal policies (unlike OECD
countries where government spending and tax policy are countercyclical or acyclical) also
exhibit larger ...nancial frictions as captured by the two proxies that we quantify and display
more macroeconomic volatility.
      Speci...cally, the top panel in Table 4 reports the average cyclicality measures across the
two groups of countries. The average correlations of government spending and the business
cycle in non-OECD and OECD countries are 0.29 and -0.12, respectively. Further, we can
reject the null hypothesis that the correlations are the same in the two groups of countries.
A similar result holds for the VAT rate in the sense that non-OECD countries behave in a
more procyclical manner.
      The second panel in Table 4 reports the results on asset market incompleteness. As
shown, all four non-OECD indices that proxy countries' inability to participate in capital
markets are higher than those of OECD countries by an order of magnitude, and the null
hypothesis of equal degrees of completeness is statistically rejected.
      The third panel presents our estimated debt spread elasticities for the two groups of
countries using two debt proxies. In both cases, the elasticities are considerably higher for

                                               29
non-OECD countries and the null hypothesis of equality is easily rejected.        For the case
of total public debt, the estimate for the non-OECD countries is       = 0:125 and signi...cant
at the one percent level, whereas the point estimate for OECD countries is 0:002 and not
signi...cant at the ten percent level. Using (negative) NFA as proxies of debt delivers similar
qualitative results.
     Lastly, average GDP volatility in non-OECD countries, measured by the standard
deviation of the ...ltered real GDP process, 3:28, is more than twice as large as that of OECD
countries, 1:47. This is consistent with existing work that documents the relatively higher
business cycle volatility in developing countries. This basic empirical evidence complements
our previous theoretical analysis by providing evidence in favor of the links between ...nancial
frictions and ...scal procyclicality in spending and tax rates.



5     Concluding remarks
The evidence shows that ...scal policy in developing countries is procyclical both on the spend-
ing and taxation sides. Since procyclical ...scal policy only exacerbates an already volatile
business cycle, why would policymakers pursue such a policy? This is a puzzle in search
of an explanation.     Several explanations in the literature have focused on capital market
imperfections, in the form, for example, of sovereign risk or limited commitment.        While
there may certainly be merit in such explanations, we believe that, from an applied theory
point of view, an obvious but critical question is: can a canonical small open economy model
with incomplete markets explain ...scal procyclicality?     In other words, do we need to go
beyond such an o¤-the-shelf model to explain the basic stylized facts of ...scal procyclicality?
     To answer this question, we have examined the e¤ects of asset market incompleteness
on optimal ...scal policy à la Ramsey.    We ...rst established theoretically in a static model
that (i) incomplete markets can explain procyclical government spending policy and (ii)
whether tax policy is procyclical depends on the relative preference for private versus public
consumption. Speci...cally, if the ratio of private to public consumption comoves positively
with the cycle, then optimal tax policy is procyclical. If the comovement is zero, then tax
policy is acyclical. If the comovement is negative, then tax policy is countercyclical. We


                                               30
isolate this channel in a static model and refer to it as the "consumption preference channel."
Since, in practice, the ratio of private to public consumption comoves positively with the
cycle, the theoretical presumption is that incomplete markets can also explain procyclical
tax policy.
      When we turn to a DSGE model with market incompleteness, a second channel comes
into the picture: the "consumption smoothing channel." The ability to smooth consumption
implies that in response to, for example, a positive shock, consumption increases less than
otherwise, which implies that the tax rate is reduced by less (thus making tax procyclicality
less likely, all else equal). Once we add an upward-sloping supply of funds to the model and
calibrate it to a typical developing country, we ...nd that the consumption preference channel
prevails.     Hence, for realistic parameterizations of the model, optimal tax policy will be
procyclical when the ratio of private to public consumption comoves positively with the
cycle, which is the case for developing countries. We thus conclude that the simplest model
of incomplete markets is capable of explaining procyclical ...scal policy in emerging markets
(both on the spending and taxation sides). In other words, more complicated set-ups with
sovereign risk and limited commitment are not needed for this purpose.
      Further, we o¤er empirical support for the main frictions introduced into the model:
market incompleteness and an upward-sloping supply of funds. We proxy market incom-
pleteness by using di¤erent measures of controls on capital ows and show that such controls
are much more prevalent in developing countries than in industrial countries. In the same
vein, we estimate an upward-sloping supply of funds and show that it is signi...cantly steeper
in developing than in industrial countries.
      Finally, we show that ...scal procyclicality is costly in terms of welfare. Indeed, in our
model, Lucas-type welfare costs of ...scal procyclicality may be twice as much in the typical
non-OECD country compared to the typical OECD country.               This result o¤ers a clear
theoretical rationale for developing countries to "complete"markets as much as possible and
reduce frictions (such as an upward supply of funds) that render more costly a given degree
of market incompleteness.
      In this respect, having access to sovereign wealth funds or contingent credit lines with
international ...nancial institutions could allow developing countries to access funds in bad


                                               31
times, resulting in more "complete"markets and reducing the extent of ...scal procyclicality.
In addition, countries may bene...t from implementing ...scal rules that take into account
market incompleteness. For example, structural rules that force the ...scal authority to save
in good times (and repay debt) would "complete" markets by increasing self-insurance and
incentivizing creditors to lend in bad times. The role of ...scal rules in reducing procylical
...scal policy by completing markets is thus an important avenue of future research.



References
 [1] Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath (2007), "Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is
    the Trend," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 115, pp. 69-102.

 [2] Alesina, A., F. Campante, and G. Tabellini (2008), "Why Is Fiscal Policy Often Pro-
    cyclical?" Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 6, pp. 1006-1036.

 [3] Bauducco, S., and F. Caprioli (2014), "Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Small Open Economy
    with Limited Commitment," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 93, pp. 302-315.

 [4] Baxter, M., and R. King (1993), "Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium," American
    Economic Review, Vol. 83, pp. 315-334.

 [5] Bianchi, J., P. Ottonello, and I. Presno (2019), "Fiscal Stimulus under Sovereign Risk,"
    NBER Working Paper No. 26307.

 [6] Chang, R. and A. Fernández (2013), "On the Sources of Fluctuations in Emerging
    Economies," International Economic Review, Vol. 54, pp. 1267-1295.

 [7] Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011), "When is the Government Spend-
    ing Multiplier Large?" Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, pp. 78-121.

 [8] Cuadra, G., J.M. Sanchez, and H. Sapriza (2010), "Fiscal Policy and Default in Emerg-
    ing Markets," Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 13, pp. 452-469.




                                             32
 [9] Fernández, A. and A. Gulan (2015), "Interest Rates, Leverage, and Business Cycles in
    Emerging Economies: The Role of Financial Frictions", American Economic Journal:
    Macroeconomics, Vol. 7, pp. 153-188.

[10] Fernández, A., M. Klein, A. Rebucci, M. Schindler, and M. Uribe (2016) "Capital
    Control Measures: A New Dataset," IMF Economic Review, Vol. 64, pp. 548-574.

[11] Frankel, J.A. (2011). "A Solution to Fiscal Procyclicality: the Structural Budget Insti-
    tutions Pioneered by Chile," Journal Economía Chilena, Central Bank of Chile, Vol.
    14, pages 39-78.

[12] Frankel, J.A., C.A. Vegh, and G. Vuletin, G. (2013), "On Graduation from Fiscal
    Procyclicality," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 100, pp. 32-47.

[13] García-Cicco, J., R. Pancrazi and M. Uribe (2010), "Real Business Cycles in Emerging
    Countries?" American Economic Review, Vol.100, pp. 2510­2531.

[14] Ilzetzki, E. (2011), "Rent-Seeking Distortions and Fiscal Procyclicality," Journal of
    Development Economics, Vol. 96, pp. 30-46.

[15] Ilzetzki, E. and C.A. Vegh (2008), "Procyclical Fiscal Policy in Developing Countries:
    Truth or Fiction?"NBER Working Paper No. 14191.

[16] Kaminsky, G., C.M. Reinhart, and C.A. Vegh (2004), "When It Rains, It Pours: Pro-
    cyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies,"in NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

[17] Lane, P.R., and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti (2007), "The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
    Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970­2004,"Journal
    of International Economics, Vol. 73, pp. 223-250.

[18] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1987). Models of Business Cycles (Oxford: Blackwell).

[19] Mendoza, E. (1991), "Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy," American Eco-
    nomic Review, Vol. 81, pp. 797-818.




                                             33
[20] Nakata, T. (2016), "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Occasionally Binding
    Zero Bound Constraints," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 73, pp.
    220-240.

[21] Neumeyer, P.A. and F. Perri (2005), "Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The
    Role of Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 52, pp. 345-380.

[22] Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2003), "Closing Small Open Economy Models," Jour-
    nal of International Economics, Vol. 61, pp. 163-185.

[23] Riascos, A. and C.A. Vegh (2003), "Procyclical Government Spending in Develop-
    ing Countries:   The Role of Capital Market Imperfections (unpublished manuscript,
    UCLA).

[24] Talvi, E., and C.A. Vegh (2005), "Tax Base Variability and Procyclical Fiscal Policy,"
    Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 78, pp. 156-190.

[25] Tornell, A., and P.R. Lane (1999), "The Voracity E¤ect," American Economic Review,
    Vol. 89, pp. 22-46.

[26] Uribe, M. and V. Yue (2006), "Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives
    Whom?" Journal of International Economics, Vol. 69, pp. 6-36.

[27] Vegh, C.A., and G. Vuletin, (2015), "How Is Tax Policy Conducted Over the Business
    Cycle?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 7, pp. 327-370.




                                            34
Appendix A: Static model (for online publication)

5.1    Financial autarky case

Consider a static model with a stochastic endowment and consumption tax. Output (en-
dowment) can take two di¤erent values with probability p and 1                                                       p:
                                 8
                                 < y = y + ; with probability p;
                                    H
                              y=                                                                                                          (20)
                                 : y =y    ; with probability 1 p:
                                    L



For simplicity, p is assumed to be equal to 1=2: It can be easily checked that


                                                             E (y ) = y;
                                                                                 2
                                                             V (y ) =                :


      Preferences are given by


                          8           "            1                                      1
                                                                                                       #
                          >
                          >
                                           1
                                                    c
                                                                                 1
                                                                                           g
                          >
                          >    E
                                          ci             1
                                                             + (1       )
                                                                             gi                    1
                                                                                                           ;       6= 1 and       6= 1;
                          >
                          >                    1    1
                                                                                  1        1                   c              g
                          >
                          >
                              i=H;L                  c                                      g
                          >
                          >           "                                                            #
                          <                                              1           1
                                                                                      g
         U (ci ; gi ) =                                                 gi                     1                                          (21)
                          >    E          ln(ci ) + (1              )                 1                ;       c   = 1 and    g   6= 1;
                          >
                          >   i=H;L                                          1
                                                                                       g
                          >
                          >           "                                                        #
                          >
                          >                1       1
                          >
                          >    E
                                          ci        c    1
                                                             + (1       ) ln(gi ) ;                                6= 1 and       = 1:
                          >
                          :                    1    1                                                          c              g
                              i=H;L                  c




      We can solve this problem as a social planner because the consumption tax does not
distort intertemporally (i.e., the model is static) or intratemporally (i.e., there is no la-
bor/leisure choice). The economy'
                                s resource constraints take the form


                                          yi = ci + gi ;                     i = L; H:                                                    (22)


      The planner'
                 s choice variables are fcH ; gH ; cL ; gL g. The Lagrangian is given by
           2           1                               1
                                                                     3                 2             1                            1
                                                                                                                                           3
                 1                                1                                             1                            1
                                                        g                                                                          g
                cH      c
                                1                 gH             15                            cL     c
                                                                                                              1              gL            15
 L = p4                     1       + (1      )             1            + (1     p) 4                    1       + (1   )             1
                 1          c
                                                   1        g
                                                                                                 1        c
                                                                                                                              1        g

          +    H (yH        cH       gH ) +   L (yH         cH           gH ):


Once we have solved the planner'
                               s problem, the government constraint in each state of nature
can be used to ...nd out the corresponding tax rates:


                                                  gi =      i ci ;            i = L; H:                                                    (23)


       The ...rst-order conditions forfcH ; gH ; cL ; gL g are given by, respectively,

                                                                         1

                                                                    cH    c
                                                                              =    H;                                                      (24)
                                                                         1
                                                                          g
                                                  (1            ) gH          =    H;                                                      (25)
                                                                         1

                                                                    cL    c
                                                                              =    L;                                                      (26)
                                                                         1
                                                                         g
                                                  (1            ) gL          =    L:                                                      (27)


These ...rst-order conditions imply that the marginal utilities of private and public consump-
tion are equalized in each state of nature (i.e., UcH = UgH and UcL = UgL ) but not across
states of nature (because there is no full insurance).
       Speci...cally, combining ...rst-order conditions (24) and (25), we obtain:

                                                                    c                  c

                                                  cH = gHg                                 :                                               (28)
                                                                          1

       By the same token, from (26) and (27):

                                                                c                  c

                                                  cL = gL       g
                                                                                       :27                                                 (29)
                                                                         1
  27
     To show that the relative size of c and g captures preferences for c/g , divide equation (28) by equation
(29) and rewrite this equation as log(cH =cL ) = ( c = g ) log(gH =gL ): Then, c = g implies (cH =gH ) =
(cL =gL ); c > g implies (cH =gH ) > (cL =gL ), and c < g implies (cH =gH ) < (cL =gL ).




                                                                        36
     Combining (22), (28), and (29), it follows that

                                                                  c                      c

                                               yH = gHg                                      + gH ;
                                                                          1
                                                                  c                      c
                                                                  g
                                                  yL = gL                                    + gL :
                                                                          1

     De...ne

                                                  c                   c

                              (gi )           gi g                        + gi ;              i = L; H;
                                                        1
                                                                      c              c
                          0                                                   c          1
                              (gi ) = 1 +                                         gi g       > 0:         i = L; H:
                                                        1                     g


     Then,


                                                  yi =         (gi );               i = L; H;

                                                  gi =         (yi ) > 0;                    i = L; H;                (30)
                                          0
                                              (yi ) > 0;                      i = L; H;

                1
where               and
                                                  dgi   1
                                                      = 0 > 0;                       i = L; H:
                                                  dyi


     De...ne the cyclicality of government spending as

                                                             gH
                                          g           log             = log(gH )              log(gL ):
                                                             gL

Using (30), this expression can be rewritten as


                                              g   = log( (yH ))                log( (yL )) > 0;

          0
because       (yi ) > 0 and yH > yL , which shows that government spending is procyclical
regardless of the values of           c   and           g   (Proposition 1 in the text).
     Taking into account the binomial distribution, given by (1), we now show that                                    g   is


                                                                        37
increasing in   (Proposition 3 in the text):

                              d   g            1    0          1    0
                                          =           (yH ) +         (yL ) > 0:
                              d               (yH )           (yL )



     To obtain a reduced form for                 i,   combine (23) with (28) and (29) to obtain

                                                              c
                                              1                       1    c
                                                                           g
                                  i   =                           gi           ;             i = L; H:                             (31)

     Now de...ne the cyclicality of the tax rate as

                                                                                   H
                                                                  log
                                                                                   L


which, using (31), can be rewritten as
                         0            c
                                          1
                              1
                                      g
                             gH                                                        gH
                                                                                                                      ? 0:
                                                                  c                                           c
                 = log @      1       c
                                          A=          1                   log                    =   1            g                (32)
                                      g                           g                    gL                     g
                             gL

As stated in Proposition 2, it follows that
                                    8
                                    >
                                    > +               (countercyclical),                             <
                                    >                                                            c       g;
                                    <
                                  =   0               (acyclical),                               c   =   g;
                                    >
                                    >
                                    >
                                    :                 (procyclical),                             c   >   g:




     What happens in response to a mean-preserving spread in output?                                                     Di¤erentiating
(32) with respect to ,
                                                  d                            c       d g
                                                          =       1                        ;
                                                  d                            g       d
where (d g =d ) > 0. Hence,                              8
                                                         >
                                                         > +                       <
                                                         >                     c            g;
                                              d          <
                                                       =   0                   c   =        g;
                                              d          >
                                                         >
                                                         >
                                                         :
                                                                               c   >        g:




                                                                      38
As stated in Proposition 3 in the text, if        is countercyclical (i.e., positive), it will become
more countercyclical. If it is zero, it remains zero of course. If it is negative (procyclical),
it becomes more negative (i.e., more procyclical). In other words, a mean-preserving spread
always ampli...es the cyclicality of tax rates.


5.2     Complete markets

While the model is static, we assume that households have access to contingent claims that
can insure them against the outcomes in each state of nature (i.e., high and low output).
The state-contingent bonds are intra-period; that is, they are purchased at the beginning of
the period (i.e., before the shock materializes), and the households receive the pay-o¤ at the
end of the period (i.e., after the shock takes place).
      As in the case of ...nancial autarky, we can solve the planner'
                                                                    s problem (with the
planner having access to complete markets abroad) since, in the absence of any distortions,
the government will be able to implement the ...rst-best policy.
      The planner chooses fcH ; gH ; cL ; gL g to maximize


                                  pU (cH ; gH ) + (1    p)U (cL ; gL );


subject to


                           qH yH + qL yL = qH (cH + gH ) + qL (cL + gL );

where U (ci ; gi ) is given by (21).
      The Lagrangian is given by


                    L = pU (cH ; gH ) + (1        p)U (cL ; gL )

                            + [qH yH + qL yL       qH (cH + gH )      qL (cL + gL )] :




                                                  39
The ...rst-order conditions are given by


                                           pUcH (cH ; gH ) =       qH ;                              (33)

                                           pUgH (cH ; gH ) =       qH ;                              (34)

                                      (1   p)UcL (cL ; gL ) =      qL ;                              (35)

                                     (1    p)UgL (cL ; gL ) =      qL :                              (36)


     Notice that, as in the ...nancial autarky case, the marginal utilities of private and public
consumption are equalized in each state of the world; that is, UcH = UgH and UcL = UgL .
     Combining ...rst-order conditions across states of the world (i.e., (33) and (34) on the
one hand, and (35) and (36) on the other), we obtain

                                pUcH (cH ; gH )   (1        p)UcL (cL ; gL )
                                                =                            ;
                                     qH                        qL
                                pUgH (cH ; gH )   (1        p)UgL (cL ; gL )
                                                =                            :
                                     qH                        qL

Assuming actuarially fair insurance (i.e., qH =qL = p=(1 p)), we can rewrite these optimality
conditions as


                                     UcH (cH ; gH ) = UcL (cL ; gL );                                (37)

                                     UgH (cH ; gH ) = UgL (cL ; gL ):                                (38)


Marginal utilities of private and public consumption are equalized across states of nature
(implying full risk sharing). Since the utility function, given by (21), is separable, conditions
(37) and (38) imply, respectively, that cH = cL and gH = gL . The latter implies that
government spending is acyclical (Proposition 1). In other words, under complete markets,
government spending is acyclical regardless of the relation between               c   and   g.   Further,
given (23), cH = cL and gH = gL imply that          H   =   L.   Hence, tax policy is also acyclical for
any values of   c   and   g   (Proposition 2). In either case (spending or tax rates), ...scal policy
is acyclical regardless of the variance of the distribution (Proposition 3).



                                                   40
5.3     Income tax

Suppose that we have an income tax in the form of an endowment tax (to keep it symmetrical
with the consumption tax case). In other words, the consumer'
                                                            s budget constraints are given
by:
                                ci = (1    i )yi ;   i = L; H;

where   i   is the endowment tax.
      Other than this, the model is exactly the same as in the case analyzed above. As in the
consumption tax case, this endowment tax is non-distortionary. We can thus solve the plan-
ner'
   s problem as we did for the consumption tax case. All results for both ...nancial autarky
and complete markets go through since they do not depend on what is the government'
                                                                                  s
source of tax income as long as it is non-distortionary.
      Given the planner'
                       s optimal choices (which will be the same as in the consumption tax
case), the income tax will follow from the government budget constraint:


                                gi = (1    i )yi ;   i = L; H:

      We conclude that Propositions 1-3 would also hold for the case of an income (i.e.,
endowment) tax.



6     Appendix B: DSGE model (for online publication)
This appendix formally sets up and solves the three variations of the main DSGE model used
in the text. First, we consider a small open economy operating under ...nancial autarky (i.e.,
no borrowing from/lending to the rest of the world). Second, we deal with a standard small
open economy that has access to a world risk-free bond (i.e., incomplete asset markets).
Third, we consider a small open economy that is operating under complete markets.




                                                41
6.1      Financial autarky model

6.1.1     Households'problem

The household'
             s problem is given by:

                                                              X
                                                              1
                                                                      t
                                                   max E0                 U (ct ; gt ; lt );
                                                              t=0


        subject to


                                  dt = (1 + rt 1 ) dt            1        yt + (1 +         t ) ct   +   (dt )       t;              (39)

                                  yt = At lt ;

                     ln At =A          =       A   ln At 1 =A + "A
                                                                 t ;                   "A
                                                                                        t      N IID(0;      2
                                                                                                             A );



and a no-Ponzi condition.
        We assume households face convex portfolio transactions costs, (dt ). These adminis-
trative services (for either assets or liabilities) are provided by a government agency at zero
cost. Pro...ts ( ) are transferred to households in a lump-sum way so as to get rid of any
wealth e¤ects associated with these portfolio adjustment/transaction costs.
        Notice also that here the portfolio costs are internalized by both the household and the
Ramsey planner. In the SOE case (see below), only the Ramsey planner internalizes the
upward sloping supply of funds.


6.1.2     Lagrangian

The Lagrangian is given by
           (                                                                                                                             )
               X
               1
                     t                         t
 L = E0                  U (ct ; gt ; lt ) +       t   [dt   (1 + rt 1 ) dt        1   + At lt       (1 +   t ) ct        (dt ) +   t]       :
               t=0




                                                                     42
        The ...rst-order conditions are given by

                                      t                           t
                        [ct ] :           Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )            t    (1 +     t)   = 0;
                                      t                           t
                        [lt ] :           Ul (ct ; gt ; lt ) +          t At   = 0;
                                      t                                                t+1
                        [dt ] :             t   [1      (dt )]        (1 + rt )              Et    t+1   = 0:




Simplifying the ...rst-order conditions, we obtain:


                                      Uc (ct ; gt ; lt ) =              t    (1 +     t) ;

                                      Ul (ct ; gt ; lt ) =                   t At ;


                                  t   [1             (dt )] = (1 + rt ) Et                     t+1 :



6.1.3     Government'
                    s ow budget constraint

The government'
              s ow budget constraint is given by


                          dg                g
                           t = (1 + rt 1 ) dt              1          t ct   + gt            (dt ) +     t:     (40)


6.1.4     Aggregate constraints

Financial autarky implies:
                                                     dt + dg
                                                           t = 0; 8t:


Combining the household'
                       s and government'
                                       s ow budget constraints, given by (39) and
(40), respectively, with the restriction above (in t and t                                   1) yields:


                                                        ct + gt = yt :




                                                                 43
6.1.5   Implementability conditions

The implementability conditions follow from the ...rst-order conditions and are given by:

                                        Ul (ct ; gt ; lt )
                    At =                                   (1 +                    t)   =     t         (ct ; gt ; lt ;   t );
                                        Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )
         Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )                                                               1 + rt
                            =       t            (ct ; gt ; lt ;         t)    =                    Et (ct+1 ; gt+1 ; lt+1 ;             t+1 ):
            1+ t                                                                        1     (dt )

6.1.6   Ramsey problem

The Lagrangian for the Ramsey problem is given by
                           8                                       P1                                                            9
                           >
                           >                                                        t
                                                                                        U (ct ; gt ; lt )                        >
                                                                                                                                 >
                           >
                           >                                             t=0                                                     >
                                                                                                                                 >
                           >
                           >                                                                                                     >
                                                                                                                                 >
                           >
                           >                                        +         t                                                  >
                                                                                                                                 >
                           >                                                       1;t ( t         At )                          >
                           <                                         h                                              i            =
                                                              t                            1+rt
                 L = E0                                +           2;t         t                       Et     t+1                    :
                           >
                           >
                                                                                         1   (dt )                             >
                                                                                                                               >
                           >
                           >                                                                                                   >
                           >
                           >
                           > +           t
                                             3;t     [dt          (1 + rt 1 ) dt              1   + At lt        (1 + t ) ct ] >
                                                                                                                               >
                                                                                                                               >
                                                                                                                               >
                           >
                           >                                                                                                   >
                                                                                                                               >
                           :                                  +      t                                                         ;
                                                                          4;t (At lt              ct      gt )

The ...rst-order conditions are given by


         [ct ] : Uct +          1;t ct       +       2;t ct              3;t   (1 +         t)          4;t   = 0;

          [lt ] : Ult +         1;t lt   +           2;t lt   +      3;t At         +       4;t At     = 0;

         [gt ] : Ugt +          1;t gt       +       2;t gt              4;t      = 0;

         [ t] :      1;t   t    +   2;t          t         3;t ct    = 0;
                               1 + rt
         [dt ] :     2;t                    " (dt ) Et t+1 + 3;t                                                    (1 + rt ) Et   3;t+1   = 0;
                            [1      (dt )]2
                           1
         [rt ] :                        Et t+1      dt Et 3;t+1 = 0;
                       1     (dt ) 2;t
         1;t    :    t   At = 0;
                            1 + rt
         2;t    :    t                  Et t+1 = 0;
                         1       (dt )
         3;t    :   dt (1 + rt 1 ) dt 1 + At lt (1 + t ) ct = 0;

         4;t    : At lt        ct       gt = 0:




                                                                               44
6.1.7     Parameterization

The portfolio transactions costs take the following quadratic form (see, for example, Schmitt-
Grohe and M. Uribe, 2003):

                                                                                               2
                                               (dt ) =                       dt           d        ;
                                                                     2
                                               (dt ) =                       dt       d ;                       " (dt ) = :


        where       and d are parameters.

                                                           1 1=          c                        1 1=          g
                                               c                                  1    g                                  1
                           U (ct ; gt ; lt ) = t                                      + t                                     + ln (1           lt ) ;
                                                 1                   1=       c          1                     1=     g
                                                                1=   c                                 1=       g                           1
                                        Uct = ct                         ; Ugt = gt                                 ; Ult =                          :
                                                                                                                                        1       lt

        The derivatives of              t   and      t    are given by, respectively,

                        Ul (ct ; gt ; lt )                                    1+              t
           t   =                           (1 +           t)    =                                 1=
                                                                                                           ;
                        Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )                           (1           lt )ct               c


                            1+ t                                                  1+ t                                                                     1
          ct   =                      1 1= c
                                              ;            lt   =                           1=              c
                                                                                                                ;    gt   = 0;              t   =                  1=   c
                                                                                                                                                                            :
                       c (1     lt )ct                                   (1        lt )2 ct                                                          (1   lt )ct
                                           c        1=
                 Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )   c
           t   =                    = t      ;
                    1+ t              1+ t
                         1=      1                                                                                             1=
                     ct c                                                                                                  ct       c

          ct   =                    ;   lt = 0;                          gt   = 0;                     t       =                      2:
                     c (1 + t )                                                                                           (1 +      t)




6.1.8     Dynamic system

We have a system of 12 endogenous and 1 exogenous variables:


                   fct ;   t ; lt ; gt ; dt ; rt ; yt ;   1;t ;      2;t ;        3;t ;       4;t ;        tg       andfAt g; respectively,.




                                                                                   45
that are determined by 13 equations:


                                                             Uct +              1;t ct       +            2;t ct            3;t   (1 +       t)       4;t    = 0;
                                                                                                     1=   c 1
               1=   c                        1+        t                                 ct
      [1] ct            +       1;t                    1 1=                       2;t                                       3;t   (1 +       t)       4;t    = 0;
                                                                                         c (1 +                  t)
                                                                    c
                                      c (1        lt )ct



                                                      Ult +         1;t lt   +           2;t lt           +       3;t At    +       4;t At    = 0;
                                             1                              1+          t
                    [2]                               +     1;t                              1=
                                                                                                          +       3;t At    +       4;t At    = 0;
                                       1         lt               (1            lt )2 ct              c




                                             Ugt +           1;t gt         +         2;t gt                4;t           = 0;
                                                                                        1=       g
                                                                [3]              gt                         4;t           = 0;




                                                                                 1;t         t   +         2;t        t        3;t ct     = 0;
                                                                                                           1=    c
                                                            1                                ct
                          [4]              1;t                      1=                  2;t                        2           3;t ct     = 0;
                                                 (1        lt )ct           c
                                                                                            (1 +                 t)




                                   1 + rt
                2;t                            " (dt ) Et                             t+1            +     3;t             (1 + rt ) Et           3;t+1     = 0;
                                [1    (dt )]2
                                 "                                                          #
                                          1 + rt
         [5]              2;t                                           2         Et                 +     3;t             (1 + rt ) Et           3;t+1     = 0;
                                      1               dt        d



                                                             1
                                                                                2;t     Et           t+1              d t Et      3;t+1      = 0;
                                                      1           (dt )
                                                           1
                        [6]                                                     2;t     Et           t+1              d t Et      3;t+1      = 0;
                                           1               dt         d




                                                                                      46
                                                                                                t          At = 0;
                                                                      1+              t
                                                    [7]                                   1=   c
                                                                                                           At = 0;
                                                               (1         lt )ct


                                                                            1 + rt
                                                                 t                     Et                                  t+1         = 0;
                                                                          1      (dt )
                                                                          1 + rt
                                         [8]              t                            Et                                  t+1         = 0;
                                                                 1           dt d

                                [9]            dt         (1 + rt 1 ) dt                  1   + At lt                      (1 +        t ) ct   = 0;

                                                          [10]            At lt                ct          gt = 0;

                                                                 [11]                 yt = At lt ;
                                                                                                        1=         c
                                                                                           c
                                                               [12]                   t   = t                          ;
                                                                                           1+                      t

          [13]              ln At = (1                    A ) ln A    +           A   ln At            1    + "A
                                                                                                               t ;                 "A
                                                                                                                                    t           N IID 0;     2
                                                                                                                                                             A   ;

with associated 8 parameters

                                                                                               2
                                                          { c;       g;       ;     A;         A ; A;              ; d}.


6.1.9   Steady state

The steady state is a system of 13 equations with 21 unknowns, comprised of 13 steady-state
variables given by
                                                   fc; ; l; g; d; r; y; ;                      1;      2;          3;       4 ; Ag;


                                                          2
and 8 parameters { c ;                  g;     ;    A;    A ; A;      ; d}:

                                                                                               1=          1
              1=   c                         1+         t                             ct c
         ct            +    1;t                         1 1=                  2;t                                                3;t   (1 +     t)     4;t   = 0;
                                                                                      c (1 +                t)
                                                                 c
                                    c (1           lt )ct
                                                                                                       1=              1
                           1=                           1+                                      c              c
        [1]            c        c
                                    +    1                                                2                                            3   (1 + )       4    = 0;
                                                   c (1  l)c1        1=   c
                                                                                                   c   (1 + )




                                                                                    47
                      1                                      1+        t
                                 +           1;t                         1=
                                                                                            +         3;t At    +       4;t At    = 0;
                 1          lt                     (1                2
                                                                 lt ) ct             c


                                     1                          1+
          [2]                                    +       1                                            +        3A   +        4A   = 0;
                                 1           l               (1 l)2 c                    1=      c




                                                                      1=   g
                                                             gt                             4;t        = 0;
                                                                       1=
                                              [3]                g             g
                                                                                                4      = 0;


                                                                                                1=    c
                                             1                                  ct
                      1;t                              1=                  2;t                             2        3;t ct    = 0;
                            (1           lt )ct              c
                                                                               (1 +                   t)

                                                        1                               c 1= c
                [4]                  1                                               2                                  3c    = 0;
                                         (1            l)c       1=   c
                                                                                       (1 + )2


      "                                                                        #
                      1 + rt
2;t                                                2         Et       t+1          +            3;t            (1 + rt ) Et       3;t+1    = 0;
           1                dt           d
                                 "                                                                   #
                                                        1+r
          [5]               2                                                       2                      +   3             (1 + r)   3   = 0;
                                             1                   d         d



                                     1
                                                             2;t       Et          t+1                d t Et       3;t+1      = 0;
                  1                  dt            d
                                                                                1
                                 [6]                                                                       2        d   3     = 0;
                                                                 1               d              d



                                                             1+             t
                                                                                1=      c
                                                                                                     At = 0 ;
                                                       (1  lt )ct
                                                           1+
                                     [7]                                           1=
                                                                                                      A = 0;
                                                        (1 l)c                              c




                                            1 + rt
                                     t               Et t+1 = 0;
                                         1     dt d
                                                   1+r
                                     [8]   1                = 0;
                                               1    d d

                                                                               48
                            [9]    d     (1 + r) d + Al                 (1 + ) c = 0;

                                       [10]          Al        c       g = 0;

                                              [11]         y = Al;
                                                       c 1=        c
                                         [12]                          = ;
                                                       1+
                                              [13]         A = A:

        After calibrating some of these parameters (see text for details), we solve this system
numerically.


6.2      Small open economy with incomplete asset markets

6.2.1     Households'problem

The household'
             s problem is given by:

                                                 X
                                                 1
                                                           t
                                      max E0                   U (ct ; gt ; lt );
                                                 t=0

        subject to


                          dt = (1 + rt 1 ) dt         1        yt + (1 +            t ) ct ;

                          yt = At lt ;
                                      ~t );
                          rt = rt + p(d

                 ln At =A    =    A   ln At 1 =A + "A
                                                    t ;                   "A
                                                                           t          N IID(0;      2
                                                                                                    A );

               ln Rt =R      =    R    ln Rt 1 =R                + "R
                                                                    t ;        "R
                                                                                t              N IID(0;    2
                                                                                                           R   ):


and a no-Ponzi condition.


                                   ~t = dt . This is not internalized by the household, but is
        Note that, in equilibrium, d
internalized by the Ramsey planner (below).




                                                          49
6.2.2     Lagrangian

The Lagrangian is given by


                   (1                                                                                                                   )
                    X
                          t                             t
          L = E0              U (ct ; gt ; lt ) +               t   [dt       (1 + rt 1 ) dt           1    + At lt   (1 +   t ) ct ]       :
                    t=0


        The ...rst-order conditions are given by

                                              t                                      t
                                [ct ] :           Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )                     t   (1 +      t)   = 0;
                                              t                                     t
                                 [lt ] :          Ul (ct ; gt ; lt ) +                   t At   = 0;
                                              t                                    t+1
                                [dt ] :             t       (1 + rt )                    Et     t+1   = 0:




The ...rst-order conditions reduce to


                                      Uc (ct ; gt ; lt ) =                     t   (1 +       t) ;

                                      Ul (ct ; gt ; lt ) =                         t At ;


                                                            t        = (1 + rt ) Et                   t+1 :




6.2.3     Government'
                    s ow budget constraint

The government'
              s ow budget constraint is given by




                                     dg
                                      t =
                                                             g
                                                        1 + rt            1   dg
                                                                               t    1         t ct   + gt ;
                                      g
                                     rt = rt + p(dg
                                                  t ):




                                                                          50
6.2.4   Implementability conditions

The implementability conditions are given by



                                           Ul (ct ; gt ; lt )
                    At =                                      (1 +                 t)   =      t          (ct ; gt ; lt ;      t );
                                           Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )
         Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )
                            =          t         (ct ; gt ; lt ;          t)   = (1 + rt ) Et (ct+1 ; gt+1 ; lt+1 ;                                 t+1 ):
            1+ t

6.2.5   Ramsey problem

The Ramsey problem takes the form:


                  8                                              P1                                                                                  9
                  >
                  >                                                                t
                                                                                       U (ct ; gt ; lt )                                             >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  >                                                      t=0                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  >                                                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  >                                                  +    t                                                                          >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  <                                                            1;t ( t             At )                                              >
                                                                                                                                                     =
         L = E0                                  t                                                                                                       :
                                             +              [    t        (1 + rt + p(dt )) Et                         t+1 ]
                  >
                  >
                                                      2;t                                                                                            >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  >        t                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  > +                      dt        1 + rt              + p(dt 1 ) dt                1    + At lt          (1 +           t ) ct    >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  >
                                3;t                                  1                                                                               >
                                                                                                                                                     >
                  >
                  :                                                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                                                                     ;
                               +   t
                                           4;t   dg
                                                  t             1 + rt         1   + p(dg      g
                                                                                        t 1 ) dt               1   +     t ct         gt




                                                                           51
The ...rst-order conditions are given by


               [ct ] : Uct +                   1;t ct        +        2;t ct                 3;t    (1 +          t)      +        4;t t    = 0;

               [lt ] : Ult +                   1;t lt    +           2;t lt      +           3;t At     = 0;

           [gt ] : Ugt +                       1;t gt        +        2;t gt                  4;t   = 0;

           [ t] :              1;t     t       +       2;t       t              3;t ct   +          4;t ct   = 0;
                                           0
           [dt ] :                 2;t p       (dt ) Et              t+1   +         3;t                (p0 (dt )dt + 1 + rt + p(dt )) Et                                 3;t+1    = 0;

           [dg
             t] :              4;t              (p0 (dg   g               g
                                                      t )dt + 1 + rt + p(dt )) Et                                                 4;t+1     = 0;

               1;t       :     t     At = 0;

               2;t       :     t     (1 + rt + p(dt )) Et                                     t+1       = 0;

               3;t       : dt          1 + rt                1   + p(dt 1 ) dt                      1   + At lt                   (1 +       t ) ct    = 0;

               4;t       : dg
                            t          1 + rt                1   + p(dg      g
                                                                      t 1 ) dt                      1   +        t ct             gt = 0:


6.2.6     Parameterization

Preferences are given by:

                                                                           1 1=          c                       1 1=         g
                                                   c                                                1    g                              1
                               U (ct ; gt ; lt ) = t                                                    + t                                 + ln (1             lt ) ;
                                                     1                               1=         c          1                  1=    g
                                                                                1=   c                                1=      g                             1
                                                   Uct = ct                              ; Ugt = gt                               ; Ult =                            :
                                                                                                                                                       1        lt

        The derivatives of                         t   and            t   are given by, respectively,

                              Ul (ct ; gt ; lt )                                               1+            t
           t         =                           (1 +                     t)    =                                1=
                                                                                                                          ;
                              Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )                                     (1            lt )ct             c


                                  1+ t                                                             1+ t                                                                    1
          ct         =                      1 1= c
                                                    ;                      lt    =                                1=      c
                                                                                                                              ;    gt   = 0;                t   =                  1=   c
                                                                                                                                                                                            ;
                             c (1     lt )ct                                         (1             lt )2 ct                                                         (1   lt )ct
                                                 c                   1=
                       Uc (ct ; gt ; lt )   c
           t         =                    = t      ;
                          1+ t              1+ t
                               1=      1                                                                                                     1=
                           ct c                                                                                                      ct           c

          ct         =                    ;   lt = 0;                                 gt      = 0;                    t   =                            2:
                           c (1 + t )                                                                                               (1 +          t)




                                                                                                    52
        Following Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2003), the debt-elastic speci...cation for the house-
hold is given by:

                                                                         c
                                                  p(dt ) =                     exp dt               d            1 ;
                                                                         c
                                                 p0 (dt ) =                  exp dt              d ;




and for the government:


                                                p(dg
                                                   t) =
                                                                         g
                                                                              exp dg
                                                                                   t                dg           1 ;

                                               p0 (dg
                                                    t) =
                                                                         g
                                                                             exp dg
                                                                                  t              dg :


6.2.7     Dynamic system

The dynamic system consists of 13 endogenous and 2 exogenous variables, respectively:


                                                        g
                          fct ;     t ; lt ; gt ; dt ; dt ; rt ; yt ;    1;t ;      2;t ;   3;t ;        4;t ;   tg    andfAt ; rt g;



that are determined by 15 equations:


                                                          Uct +          1;t ct     +      2;t ct                3;t   (1 +   t)   +   4;t t   = 0;
                                                                                        1= c 1
                 1=   c                      1+       t                             ct
        [1] ct            +   1;t                     1 1=                   2;t                                 3;t   (1 +   t)   +   4;t t   = 0;
                                                                                    c (1 +          t)
                                                               c
                                      c (1       lt )ct



                                                      Ult +         1;t lt    +         2;t lt   +          3;t At      = 0;
                                               1                             1+     t
                                    [2]           +           1;t                     1=
                                                                                                 +          3;t At      = 0;
                                             1 lt                   (1            2
                                                                              lt ) ct        c




                                                                                   53
                                                          Ugt +            1;t gt      +            2;t gt                            4;t         = 0;
                                                                                                     1=           g
                                                                                  [3] gt                                              4;t         = 0;




                                                                                1;t         t   +            2;t              t             3;t ct   +       4;t ct       = 0;
                                                                                                             1=       c
                                                              1                              ct
                            [4]            1;t                        1=                2;t                             2                   3;t ct   +       4;t ct       = 0;
                                                 (1       lt )ct           c
                                                                                            (1 +                      t)


                                   0
                           2;t p       (dt ) Et           t+1     +     3;t             (p0 (dt )dt + 1 + rt + p(dt )) Et                                                  3;t+1   = 0;

[5]          2;t    exp dt                 d      Et       t+1 + 3;t                            exp dt                            d dt + 1 + rt +                           exp dt         d       1   Et   3;t+1   = 0;



                                                                                4;t                 (p0 (dg   g               g
                                                                                                          t )dt + 1 + rt + p(dt )) Et                                              4;t+1   = 0;

       [6]         4;t                 g   exp dg
                                                t               dg dg
                                                                    t + 1 + rt +                                      g       exp dg
                                                                                                                                   t                    dg            1    Et      4;t+1   = 0;



                                                                                                             t            At = 0 ;
                                                                                 1+             t
                                                                [7]                                 1=       c
                                                                                                                          At = 0 ;
                                                                           (1         lt )ct

                                       [8]        t           1 + rt +                  exp dt                            d                 1        Et      t+1      = 0;

                   [9] dt              1 + rt         1   +           exp dt            1           d                  1              dt      1   + At lt         (1 +        t ) ct   = 0;

                         [10] dg
                               t                 1 + rt         1   +      g    exp dg
                                                                                     t                   1            dg                    1      dg
                                                                                                                                                    t    1   +     t ct      gt = 0;

                                                                                 [11] yt = At lt ;
                                                                                                                      1=          c
                                                                                                                 ct
                                                                                [12]            t   =                                 ;
                                                                                                                 1+               t

                                                          [13] rt = rt +                             exp dt                               d          1 ;

                         [14] ln At = (1                            A ) ln A      +         A       ln At                 1   + "A
                                                                                                                                 t ;               "A
                                                                                                                                                    t         N IID 0;              2
                                                                                                                                                                                    A


      [15] ln(1 + rt ) = (1                               R   ) ln(1 + r ) +                        R            ln(1 + rt 1 ) + "r
                                                                                                                                  t ;                                 "r
                                                                                                                                                                       t        N IID 0;       2
                                                                                                                                                                                               r




                                                                                                    54
with associated 13 parameters

                                                                                            g                     2                   2
                                        { c;         g;       ; ; d;               g; d         ;       A;        A;          r;      r   ; A; r }.




6.2.8   Steady state

The steady state is a system of 15 equations with 28 unknowns, comprised of 15 steady-state
variables
                                          fc; ; l; g; d; dg ; r; y; ;                                    1;       2;          3;      4 ; A; r   g;

                                                                           g                        2                     2
and 13 parameters { c ;                   g;     ; ; d;            g; d        ;       A;           A;        r   ;       r    ; A; r }:

                                                                                                              1=              1
                       1=                            1+                                                  c            c
             [1] c          c
                                +       1                                                           2                                      3   (1 + ) +          4   = 0;
                                                c (1  l)c1             1=      c
                                                                                                         c    (1 + )

                                                             1                            1+
                                        [2]                            +           1                                              +       3A   = 0;
                                                         1         l                   (1 l)2 c                   1=       c


                                                                                       1=
                                                                   [3] g                    g
                                                                                                              4   = 0;
                                                           1                                   c 1= c
                                [4]         1                                               2                                         3c   +     4c   = 0;
                                                (1        l)c      1=      c
                                                                                              (1 + )2
[5]     2     exp d             d           +        3                     exp d                         d d+1+r +                                    exp d          d         1    3   = 0;

            [6]   4                 g   exp dg                dg dg + 1 + r +                                          g       exp dg             dg         1           4   = 0;
                                                                          1+
                                                             [7]                                    1=
                                                                                                                      A = 0;
                                                                       (1 l)c                            c



                                    [8]                   1+r +                         exp d                         d               1          = 0;

                  [9] d                 1+r +                      exp d                        d             1           d + Al               (1 + ) c = 0;

                      [10] dg                   1+r +                  g       exp dg                         dg                  1       dg + c        g = 0;

                                                                               [11] y = Al;



                                                                                            55
                                    [12] r = r +                     exp d                         d        1 ;

                                                             c 1=            c
                                                  [13]                            = ;
                                                             1+
                                    [14] ln A = (1                       A ) ln A              +       A    ln A;

                      [15] ln(1 + r ) = (1                   R   ) ln(1 + r ) +                             R    ln(1 + r ):

     This system may be reduced to the following 8 equations:

                                                                                 1=            1
                 1=                    1+                            c                 c
         [1] c        c
                          +   1                                  2                                          3   (1 + ) +   4       = 0;
                                  c (1  l)c1     1=    c
                                                                         c   (1 + )
                                                                     1                           1+
                                                 [2]                             +         1                + 3 A = 0;
                                                                 1           l               (1 l)2 c 1= c
                                                                                                  [3] g 1= g     4 = 0;
                                                                                                1= c
                                                            1                                 c
                                     [4]     1                                             2             3 c + 4 c = 0;
                                                 (1        l)c   1=      c
                                                                                             (1 + )2
                                                            c 1=         c
                                      [5]         2                              +         3                    d+1+r          3   = 0;
                                                            1+
                                                                                              1+
                                                                                           [6]         A = 0;
                                                                                          (1 l)c 1= c
                                                           [7] d                 (1 + r ) d + Al (1 + ) c = 0;

                                                                     [8] dg                        (1 + r ) dg + c             g = 0;


with the following 9 unknowns


                                            fc; ; l; g; d;           1;           2;       3;          4g



and the following equation added to close the system


                                               (d + dg )=Al = DtoY;


where DtoY is calibrated to 1.34 (see Table 1).
     Note that this system can be further simpli...ed by setting dg = 0. To see this, note
that equation (4) above, repeated here for convenience:




                                                                 56
               4       g   exp dg   dg dg + 1 + r +             g   exp dg      dg    1      4   = 0;

can be reduced to


                                    exp dg      dg (dg + 1) = 1:

Let us assume that the parameter dg takes the value zero. Then:


                                         exp (dg ) (dg + 1) = 1;


which implies that dg = 0. In other words, one can assume that dg = 0 and then it follows
endogenously that dg = 0.
        After introducing this further simpli...cation and calibrating some of the parameters in
this model (see text for details), we solve this system numerically.


6.3      Small open economy with complete asset markets

6.3.1     Households'problem

The household'
             s problem is given by:

                                               X
                                               1
                                                      t
                                     max E0               U (ct ; gt ; lt );
                                               t=0


subject to:


                   Et dt+1 rt+1 = dt + At lt      (1 +        t )ct ;

                             yt = At lt ;

                   ln At =A     =    A   ln At 1 =A + "A
                                                       t ;              "A
                                                                         t     N IID(0;   2
                                                                                          A );




and a no-Ponzi condition.



                                                     57
6.3.2   Lagrangian

The Lagrangian is given by

                       X
                       1
                              t                              t
              L = E0              U (ct ; gt ; lt ) +            t [dt     + At lt              (1 +          t )ct     dt+1 rt+1 ]:
                       t=1

The ...rst-order conditions are given by

                                                t                                  t
                              [ct ] :               Uct (ct ; gt ; lt )                  t (1    +       t)   = 0;
                                                t                                  t
                              [lt ] :               Ult (ct ; gt ; lt ) +                t At     = 0;
                                                     t                        t+1
                           [dt+1 ] :                     t Et rt+1    +                 Et      t+1      = 0:                            (41)


These ...rst-order conditions can be simpli...ed to


                                        Uct (ct ; gt ; lt ) =                 t (1       +       t );

                                         Ult (ct ; gt ; lt ) =                         t At ;


                                                    t Et rt+1       =         Et          t+1 :



6.3.3   Governments'ow budget constraint

The government'
              s ow budget constraint is given by


                                         Et d g           g
                                              t+1 rt+1 = dt                   gt +              t ct :



6.3.4   Implementability conditions

The implementability conditions are given by

                                                Ult (ct ; gt ; lt )
                             At =                                   (1 +               t)   =       t           (ct ; gt ; lt ;   t );
                                                Uct (ct ; gt ; lt )
               Uct (ct ; gt ; lt )
                                   =        t            (ct ; gt ; lt ;    t ):
                  1+ t




                                                                  58
        Following Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003),

                                         Uct
                                                   =        CAM :
                                        1+     t


From condition (41), it follows that

                                                                  t+1
                                       Et rt+1 = Et                        :
                                                                   t


Multiplying on both sides by debt:

                                                                   t+1
                                 Et rt+1 dt+1 =             Et                 dt+1 ;
                                                                       t
                                                                   t+1 g
                                 Et rt+1 dg
                                          t+1 =             Et        dt+1 :
                                                                    t


De...ne


                                       st          Et rt+1 dt+1 ;

                                       sg
                                        t          Et rt+1 dg
                                                            t+1 :



Hence:



                                                            t+1
                                     st =          Et             dt+1 ;
                                                             t
                                                            t+1 g
                                     sg
                                      t =          Et          dt+1 :
                                                             t


6.3.5     Ramsey problem

The Ramsey problem'
                  s Lagrangian takes the form:
                                8           P1                                          9
                                >
                                >                       t
                                                            U (ct ; gt ; lt )           >
                                                                                        >
                                >
                                >              t=1                                      >
                                                                                        >
                                >
                                >                                                       >
                                                                                        >
                                <           +       t                                   =
                                                        1;t [ t            At ]
                       L = E0
                                >
                                > + t 3;t [dt + At lt (1 + t )ct st ] >
                                                                      >
                                >
                                >                                     >
                                                                      >
                                >
                                >                                     >
                                                                      >
                                :       t       g
                                     + 4;t [dt gt + t ct st ]   g     ;

                                                   59
The ...rst-order conditions are given by:


                            [ct ] : Uct +                 1;t ct               3;t (1    +         t)   +        4;t t   = 0;

                            [lt ] : Ult +                1;t lt      +       3;t At      = 0;

                            [gt ] : Ugt +                 1;t gt               4;t   = 0;

                            [ t] :            1;t    t             3;t ct    +       4;t ct    = 0;

                       [dt+1 ] :                  3;t Et ( t+1 = t )             + Et          3;t+1        = 0;

                       [dg
                         t+1 ] :                  4;t Et ( t+1 = t )             + Et          4;t+1        = 0;

                       [    1;t ]    :        t     At = 0;

                       [    3;t ]    : dt + At lt                   (1 +         t )ct         st = 0;

                       [    4;t ]    : dg
                                        t           gt +           t ct        sg
                                                                                t = 0:




6.3.6   Parameterization

Preferences are given by

                                                    1 1=       c                     1 1=      g
                                      c                                  1    g                             1
                  U (ct ; gt ; lt ) = t                                      + t                                + log (1              lt );
                                        1                  1=        c          1             1=        g
                                                     1=    c                          1=   g                             1
                                 Uct = ct                      ; Ugt = gt                      ; Ult =                            :
                                                                                                                    1        lt

  The derivatives of    t   and          t   are given by

                                         Ult (ct ; gt ; lt )                1+ t
                             t      =                        (1 + t ) =                ;
                                         Uct (ct ; gt ; lt )             (1 lt )c 1= c
                                             1+ t                          1+ t
                            ct      =                 1 1= c
                                                                ; lt =             1=
                                                                                       ;
                                        c (1    lt )ct                  (1 lt )2 ct c
                                                              1
                            gt      = 0; t =                      1=
                                                                      :
                                                    (1 lt )ct c



                                                                          60
6.3.7   Dynamic system

The dynamic system consists of 13 endogenous and 1 exogenous variable, given by

                                         g         g
             fct ; lt ; gt ;   t ; dt ; dt ; st ; st ;         1;t ;      3;t ;        4;t ;     t ; yt g   and At ; respectively.


that are determined by 14 equations:




                                                      Uct +             1;t ct                  3;t (1   +    t)    +     4;t t   = 0;
                         1=    c                       1+        t
              [1] ct               +    1;t                      1 1=              c            3;t (1   +    t)    +     4;t t   = 0;
                                                 c (1       lt )ct



                                                                        Ult +             1;t lt        +    3;t At       = 0;
                                             1                           1+              t
                         [2]                          +     1;t                                1=
                                                                                                        +    3;t At       = 0;
                                        1        lt                (1             lt )2 ct          c




                                                 Ugt +             1;t gt                4;t        = 0;
                                                                     1=       g
                                                      [3] gt                             4;t        = 0;




                                                               1;t        t             3;t ct      +     4;t ct    = 0;
                                                           1
                               [4]       1;t                       1=     c             3;t ct      +     4;t ct    = 0;
                                               (1         lt )ct

                                       [5]              3;t Et ( t+1 = t )                + Et           3;t+1     = 0;

                                       [6]              4;t Et ( t+1 = t )                + Et           4;t+1     = 0;




                                                                                  61
                                                                          t          At = 0 ;
                                                   1+ t
                                      [7]                                            At = 0 ;
                                                (1 lt )c 1=               c




                                    [8] dt + At lt               (1 +               t )ct        st = 0;

                                         [9] dg
                                              t          gt +             t ct          sg
                                                                                         t = 0;


                                        [10] st+1 = Et (                           t+1 = t )dt+1 ;


                                        [11] sg
                                              t+1 = Et (
                                                                                             g
                                                                                   t+1 = t )dt+1 ;


                                                [12]        t             CAM           = 0;

                                                    [13] yt              At lt = 0;

               [14] ln At =A =                  A   ln At 1 =A + "A
                                                                  t ;                               "A
                                                                                                     t        N IID(0;      2
                                                                                                                            A );


with associated 6 parameters
                                                                                    2
                                                { c;     g;      ;        A;        A ; A}.




6.3.8   Steady state

The steady state is a system of 14 equations with 19 unknowns, comprised of 14 steady-state
variables
                                fc; l; g; ; d; dg ;             1;        3;        4 ; A; y;        ; s; sg g



and 5 parameters { c ;    g;    ;   A ; A;}:



                           1=                        1+
                  [1] c         c
                                    +    1                                                   3 (1   + )+         4   = 0;
                                                c (1  l)c1               1=    c


                                            1                  1+
                          [2]                       +   1                                        +       3A   = 0;
                                        1       l           (1 l)2 c                    1=   c


                                                            1=
                                                 [3] g               g
                                                                                    4   = 0;

                                                                 62
                                              1
                           [4]   1                 1=             3c   +    4c   = 0;
                                     (1      l)c        c


                                             1+
                                 [5]                    1=
                                                                   A = 0;
                                          (1 l)c              c



                              [6] d + Al           (1 + )c                 d = 0;

                                 [7] dg        g+ c                dg = 0;
                                          dg + d
                                  [8]                       DtoY = 0;
                                            Al
                                       [9]     t            CAM   = 0;

                                             [10] s = d;

                                             [11] sg = dg;

                                             [12] y = Al;

                            [13] ln A = (1                  A ) ln A   +    A   ln A;

                                             [14] dg = 0;

where we have added equations [8] and [14] so as to make the steady state consistent with
that of the incomplete asset markets case: dg = 0 and DtoY = 1:34. After calibrating the
remaining parameters (see text for details), we solve this system numerically.




                                                    63
              Figure 1. Country correlations between the cyclical components of real government expenditure and real GDP
64




     Notes: Sample is based on data availability and comprises 121 countries (22 OECD and 99 non-OECD) for the period 1960-2020. Black (dark) bars denote OECD
     countries and yellow (light) ones denote non-OECD (emerging) countries. OECD countries are those that where part of the OECD by 1973. The cyclical components
     were computed using the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Real government expenditure is defined as central government expenditure and net lending deflated by the GDP
     deflator. A positive (negative) correlation indicates procyclical (countercyclical) fiscal policy. The statistics shown in the figure correspond to the average of the country
     correlations for each group. The significance levels result from testing the hypothesis that the mean correlation is equal to zero within each group. Source: WEO
     (IMF).
                              Figure 2: Country correlations between the percentage changes in VAT and real GDP
65




     Notes: Sample is based on data availability and comprises 47 countries (15 OECD and 32 non-OECD) for the period 1960-2019. Black (dark) bars denote OECD countries
     and yellow (light) ones denote non-OECD (emerging) countries. OECD countries are those that where part of the OECD by 1973. A negative (positive) correlation indi-
     cates procyclical (countercyclical) fiscal policy. The cyclical components were computed using the Hodrick-Prescott filter. The statistics shown in the figure correspond
     to the average of the country correlations for each group. The significance levels result from testing the hypothesis that the mean correlation is equal to zero within each
     group. Sources of raw data are WEO (real GDP) and Vegh and Vuletin's (2015) updated tax database (VAT), available at http://www.guillermovuletin.com/data.
                            Figure 3: Frictions in DSGE model
                                 Debt-elasticity spread ()

                                                                          Persistency in TFP process




                A                                     B                                      C
        Financial Autarky                          One Bond                           Complete Markets

                                     Degree of Market Completeness
Notes: The figure illustrates, in a schematic format, the three frictions considered in the DSGE model and
their interactions. The horizontal axis captures the various degrees of completeness in financial markets,
with financial autarky and complete markets as two opposite extremes and a one-period, non-state con-
tingent bond as an intermediate case. In the latter case, a varying debt elasticity of spreads interacts as
the second friction considered, captured by the vertical axis. The third friction, illustrated by the diagonal
axis, captures varying degrees of persistence (and, hence, volatility) of the TFP process.




                                                 66
      Figure 4: Fiscal procyclicality and the intertemporal substitution of government spending in incomplete asset markets case
                                                                                  Corr(G,Y)
              1




            0.95




             0.9




            0.85




             0.8
               0.5          0.6           0.7            0.8           0.9           1             1.1           1.2           1.3           1.4            1.5
                                                                                      g
67




                                                                                  Corr( ,Y)
              1




             0.5




              0




            -0.5




              -1
               0.5          0.6           0.7            0.8           0.9           1             1.1           1.2           1.3           1.4            1.5
                                                                                      g


                                                      = 2.8          =1           = 0.125          = 0.01         = 0.001

     Notes: The figure shows the correlation between government consumption and output (top panel) and between tax rates and output (bottom panel) for various levels
     of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of governement spending in the incomplete asset markets model. Correlations are computed from (HP-filtered) simulated
     data for 100,000 quarters, randomly drawing TFP shocks only. Correlations are shown as a function of g for different values of the debt elasticity of the interest rate
     ( ). c is fixed at one.
        Figure 5: Fiscal procyclicality and the intertemporal substitution of government spending for different degrees of market
                                                               completeness
                                                                                      Corr(G,Y)
              1



            0.8



            0.6



            0.4



            0.2



              0
              0.5           0.6           0.7           0.8              0.9              1         1.1           1.2          1.3           1.4           1.5
                                                                                          g
68




                                                                                      Corr( ,Y)
              1




            0.5




              0




            -0.5




             -1
              0.5           0.6           0.7           0.8              0.9              1         1.1           1.2          1.3           1.4           1.5
                                                                                          g


                                                     Financial Autarky         Incomplete Markets   Complete Markets (*)

     Notes: The figure shows the correlation between government consumption and output (top panel) and between tax rates and output (bottom panel) for various levels
     of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of government spending (g ). c is fixed at one. Correlations are computed from (HP-filtered) simulated data for 100,000
     quarters, randomly drawing TFP shocks only. Results are shown for the three alternative cases of market completeness considered. Given that, under complete markets,
     government expenditure and consumption are fully smoothed, it is not possible to calculate the correlations between government expenditure and output and between
     tax rates and output. Therefore, in the complete markets case, the plot shows the covariance term.
                   Figure 6: Cyclical dynamics and the intertemporal substitution of government spending: A simulation
                                            A. GDP                                                                    B. Private Consumption
             14                                                                                  25

             12
                                                                                                 20
             10
                                                                                                 15
              8

              6                                                                                  10

              4
                                                                                                  5
              2
                                                                                                  0
              0

              -2                                                                                  -5
                     5       10      15      20        25    30      35        40                           5   10     15     20          25   30     35      40
                                            Quarters                                                                         Quarters
69




                                     C. Public Consumption                                                                  D. Tax Rate
             25                                                                                  15


             20                                                                                  10


             15                                                                                   5


             10                                                                                   0


              5                                                                                   -5


              0                                                                                  -10


              -5                                                                                 -15
                     5       10      15      20        25    30      35        40                           5   10     15     20          25   30     35      40
                                            Quarters                                                                         Quarters


                                                                          g
                                                                              =1      g
                                                                                          =0.5         g
                                                                                                           =2

     Notes: The figure shows, for the incomplete markets case, the deviations from the steady state for GDP, private consumption, public consumption, and tax rates from
     randomly drawing TFP shocks for 40 quarters. For visual purposes, in the simulation the parameter governing the debt elasticity of interest rates ( ) was set at a
     higher value (2.8) than in our benchmark calibration. Each of the three times series illustrated per variable is associated with an alternative value of the intertemporal
     elasticity of substitution of government spending (g ).
                                      Figure 7A: Varying degrees of market completeness: Impulse response functions
                       Financial Autarky ( g=0.5)                           Incomplete Markets ( g=0.5 &   =0.125) - Benchmark                 Complete Markets ( g=0.5)
                                                               1                                                             1                                                 1
              2                                                               2                                                      2
                                                               0.5                                                           0.5                                               0.5
              1                                                               1                                                      1

              0                                                0              0                                              0       0                                         0

             -1                                                              -1                                                     -1
                                                               -0.5                                                          -0.5                                              -0.5
             -2                                                              -2                                                     -2
                                                               -1                                                            -1                                                -1
                       5            10          15           20                        5          10            15         20                  5            10         15    20


                           Financial Autarky ( g=1)                                Incomplete Markets ( g=1 &    =0.125)                           Complete Markets ( g=1)
                                                               1                                                             1                                                 1
              2                                                               2                                                      2
                                                               0.5                                                           0.5                                               0.5
              1                                                               1                                                      1

              0                                                0              0                                              0       0                                         0
70




             -1                                                              -1                                                     -1
                                                               -0.5                                                          -0.5                                              -0.5
             -2                                                              -2                                                     -2
                                                               -1                                                            -1                                                -1
                       5            10          15           20                        5          10            15         20                  5            10         15    20


                           Financial Autarky ( g=2)                                Incomplete Markets ( g=2 &    =0.125)                           Complete Markets ( g=2)
                                                               1                                                             1                                                 1
              2                                                               2                                                      2
                                                               0.5                                                           0.5                                               0.5
              1                                                               1                                                      1

              0                                                0              0                                              0       0                                         0

             -1                                                              -1                                                     -1
                                                               -0.5                                                          -0.5                                              -0.5
             -2                                                              -2                                                     -2
                                                               -1                                                            -1                                                -1
                       5            10          15           20                        5          10            15         20                  5            10         15    20



                                              Productivity            Private Consumption       Public Consumption           GDP    Taxes (right axis)

     Notes: The figure shows the IRFs of private consumption, public consumption, GDP, and tax rates following a fall in TFP of one percentage point relative to the steady
     state. The responses are expressed in percentage deviation from steady state levels. The figure plots the IRFs for 20 quarters, including the initial one (t = 1) when
     the shock occurs. The three columns illustrate the three alternative cases of market completeness considered in the analysis. The difference across rows is the value of
     the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of government consumption (g ).
                              Figure 7B: Varying degrees of market completeness: Impulse response functions (cont.)
                       Financial Autarky ( g=0.5)                     Incomplete Markets ( g=0.5 &   =0.125) - Benchmark                             Complete Markets ( g=0.5)
              1                                          4             0.5                                                 0.05

                                                                                                                                          10
            0.5                                          2


              0                                          0              0                                                  0               0


            -0.5                                         -2
                                                                                                                                         -10

             -1                                          -4           -0.5                                                 -0.05
                       5         10          15        20                         5         10            15             20                          5         10         15     20


                       Financial Autarky ( g=1)                              Incomplete Markets ( g=1 &        =0.125)                                Complete Markets ( g=1)
              1                                          4             0.5                                                 0.05

                                                                                                                                          10
            0.5                                          2


              0                                          0              0                                                  0               0
71




            -0.5                                         -2
                                                                                                                                         -10

             -1                                          -4           -0.5                                                 -0.05
                       5         10          15        20                         5         10            15             20                          5         10         15     20


                       Financial Autarky ( g=2)                              Incomplete Markets ( g=2 &        =0.125)                                Complete Markets ( g=2)
              1                                          4             0.5                                                 0.05

                                                                                                                                          10
            0.5                                          2


              0                                          0              0                                                  0               0


            -0.5                                         -2
                                                                                                                                         -10

             -1                                          -4           -0.5                                                 -0.05
                       5         10          15        20                         5         10            15             20                          5         10         15     20



                                        Private Debt          Public Debt     Private Interest Rate (right axis)               Public Interest Rate (right axis)

     Notes: The figure shows the IRFs of private debt, public debt, private interest rate, and public interest rate following a fall in TFP of one percentage point relative
     to the steady state. Responses are expressed in percentage deviations from steady state levels, except for real interest rates and debt (linear deviations). The figure
     plots the IRFs for 20 quarters, including the initial one (t = 1) when the shock occurs. The three columns illustrate the three alternative cases of market completeness
     considered in the analysis. The difference across rows is the value of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of government consumption (g ).
                              Figure 8: Varying degrees of market completeness: Impulse response functions (cont.)
                           ( g=0.5 &   =2.8)                              ( g=0.5 &   =0.125) - Benchmark                                   ( g=0.5 &   =0.001)
                                                         1                                                         1                                                     1
              2                                                     2
                                                         0.5                                                       0.5           5                                       0.5
              1                                                     1

              0                                          0          0                                              0             0                                       0

             -1                                                    -1
                                                         -0.5                                                      -0.5          -5                                      -0.5
             -2                                                    -2
                                                         -1                                                        -1                                                    -1
                       5        10             15      20                   5          10             15         20                     5          10             15   20


                            ( g=1 &    =2.8)                                     ( g=1 &    =0.125)                                          ( g=1 &    =0.001)
                                                         1                                                         1                                                     1
              2                                                     2
                                                         0.5                                                       0.5           5                                       0.5
              1                                                     1

              0                                          0          0                                              0             0                                       0
72




             -1                                                    -1
                                                         -0.5                                                      -0.5          -5                                      -0.5
             -2                                                    -2
                                                         -1                                                        -1                                                    -1
                       5        10             15      20                   5          10             15         20                     5          10             15   20


                            ( g=2 &    =2.8)                                     ( g=2 &    =0.125)                                          ( g=2 &    =0.001)
                                                         1                                                         1                                                     1
              2                                                     2
                                                         0.5                                                       0.5           5                                       0.5
              1                                                     1

              0                                          0          0                                              0             0                                       0

             -1                                                    -1
                                                         -0.5                                                      -0.5          -5                                      -0.5
             -2                                                    -2
                                                         -1                                                        -1                                                    -1
                       5        10             15      20                   5          10             15         20                     5          10             15   20



                                Productivity        Private Consumption    Public Consumption              GDP          Private Debt   Taxes (right axis)

     Notes: The figure shows, for the incomplete markets case, the IRFs of private consumption, public consumption, GDP, private debt, and tax rates following a fall in
     TFP of one percentage point relative to the steady state. Responses are expressed in percentage deviations from steady state levels, except for real interest rates and
     debt (linear deviations). The figure plots the IRFs for 20 quarters, including the initial one (t = 1) when the shock occurs. The three columns assume three different
     values of the debt elasticity of the interest rate ( ). The difference across rows is the value of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of government consumption
     (g ).
                                                  Figure 9: Varying TFP persistence: Impulse response functions
                      Financial Autarky &   A
                                                =0.95                           ( =0.125 &   A
                                                                                                 =0.95) - Benchmark                              Complete Markets &   A
                                                                                                                                                                          =0.95
                                                             1                                                                   1                                                  1
                                                                        2
              2                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                        1
                                                             0.5                                                                                                                    0.5
              1                                                         0                                                        0       10

                                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                 -0.5
              0                                              0                                                                            0                                         0
                                                                       -2
                                                                                                                                 -1
             -1                                                                    5             10           15               20        -10
                                                             -0.5                                                                                                                   -0.5
                                                                              Lower persistency (     =0.125 &     A
                                                                                                                     =0.42)
             -2                                                                                                                  1       -20
                                                                        2
                                                             -1                                                                                                                     -1
                       5         10             15         20                                                                    0.5             5          10            15      20
                                                                        1

                                                                        0                                                        0
73




                      Financial Autarky &     =0.42                    -1                                                                        Complete Markets &       =0.42
                                            A                                                                                    -0.5                                 A
                                                             1                                                                            5                                         1
                                                                       -2
              2                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                   5             10           15               20
                                                             0.5                                                                                                                    0.5
              1                                                         Lower persistency and larger      (   =2.8 &    A
                                                                                                                            =0.42)
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                        2
              0                                              0                                                                            0                                         0
                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                        1

             -1                                                         0                                                        0
                                                             -0.5                                                                                                                   -0.5
                                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                 -0.5
             -2
                                                                       -2
                                                             -1                                                                  -1       -5                                        -1
                       5         10             15         20                      5             10           15               20                5          10            15      20



                                 Productivity           Private Consumption      Public Consumption                GDP           Private Debt   Taxes (right axis)

     Notes: The figure shows, for the incomplete markets case, the IRFs of private consumption, public consumption, GDP, private debt, and tax rates following a fall in
     TFP of one percentage point relative to the steady state. Responses are expressed in percentage deviations from steady state levels, except for real interest rates and
     debt (linear deviations). The figure plots the IRFs for 20 quarters, including the initial one (t = 1) when the shock occurs. The three columns illustrate the three
     alternative cases of market completeness considered in the analysis. The difference across rows in the leftmost and rightmost columns is the value for the persistence
     of the TFP process (A ). In the middle column, for the incomplete asset markets case, both A and the debt elasticity of the interest rate ( ) vary.
                                                 Figure 10: Fiscal procyclicality and persistence of TFP
                                                                                     Corr(G,Y)
              1



            0.8



            0.6



            0.4



            0.2



              0
                                  0.5                      0.6                       0.7                       0.8                   0.9                       1
                                                                                           A
74




                                                                                     Corr( ,Y)
            0.4


            0.2


              0


            -0.2


            -0.4


            -0.6


            -0.8


             -1
                                  0.5                      0.6                       0.7                       0.8                   0.9                       1
                                                                                           A


                                                    Financial Autarky        = 2.8             = 0.125   Complete Markets (*)

     Notes: The figure shows the correlation between government consumption and output (top panel) and between tax rates and output (bottom panel) for different levels
     of persistence in the TFP process, as governed by the AR(1) coefficient of the corresponding law of motion, plotted on the horizontal axis. Correlations are computed
     from (HP-filtered) simulated data for 100,000 quarters, randomly drawing TFP shocks only. Results are reported for the three different cases of market incompleteness
     covered in the analysis, though, for the case of incomplete markets, two values of the debt elasticity of the interest rate ( ) are considered. Given that, under complete
     markets, government expenditure and consumption are fully smoothed, it is not possible to compute the correlations between government expenditure and output and
     between tax rates and output. Therefore, the plot shows the covariance term. For this exercise, g and c are set at 0.5 and 1, respectively.
                                                                            Figure 11: Welfare costs
                                Corr(G,Y)                                               Corr( ,Y)                                      Welfare Cost
              1                                                 -0.92                                                0.04


                                                                -0.93
           0.995
                                                                                                                    0.035

                                                                -0.94
            0.99
                                                                                                                     0.03
                                                                -0.95
           0.985

                                                                -0.96                                               0.025

            0.98
                                                                -0.97
                                                                                                                     0.02
           0.975
                                                                -0.98

                                                                                                                    0.015
            0.97
                                                                -0.99


           0.965                                                   -1                                                0.01
                   0   0.2    0.4       0.6   0.8      1                0       0.2   0.4       0.6   0.8   1               0   0.2    0.4      0.6    0.8      1
75




     Notes: The figure shows the correlation between government consumption and output (leftmost plot), between tax rates and output (middle plot), and welfare costs
     expressed in percentage (rightmost plot) for different levels of financial frictions ( ). Correlations and welfare costs are computed from (HP-filtered) simulated data for
     100,000 quarters, randomly drawing TFP shocks only. Parameter values are the following: g = 0.5, c = 1, A = 0.0129, and A = 0.95.
                                       Table 1: Calibration
   Parameter                  Description               Value                         Source
        ¯
        A                TFP in steady state               1                         Assumed
                                                             1
       ¯
       R                   Real interest rate           1.04 4           Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                                     e and Uribe (2003)
     ¯+ d
    (d  ¯g )/y            Foreign debt share             1.34        NFA data (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2015)

       A                     TFP AR(1)                  varies           Neumeyer and Perri (2005)/MSM

       A                    SD TFP Shock                varies        Schmitt-Groh´
                                                                                  e and Uribe (2003)/MSM

       R                  Interest rate AR(1)            0.83                  Uribe and Yue (2006)

       R                SD Interest rate shock           0.007                 Uribe and Yue (2006)
                                                                 1
                            Discount factor            1/1.04 4                            ¯  = 1)
                                                                              Endogenous ( R

  c = g =                   Debt-elasticity             varies       Garcia-Cicco et al. (2010)/Own estimates

        c              IES Private consumption             1                         Assumed

        g              IES Public consumption           varies                        MSM

                   Debt adjustment cost parameter         0.1                        Assumed
                    in the financial autarky model

Notes: This table summarizes the quarterly calibration of the parameters in the DSGE model. These values
mostly rely on previous studies of small open economies noted in the column "Source." The persistence of
the TFP process (A ), the volatility of the TFP shocks (A ), the debt elasticity of the interest rate in both
private and public debt ( c and  g ), and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of public consumption
(g ) will vary across different experiments carried out in the analysis. In the benchmark case, however, these
parameters are set at 0.95, 0.0129, 0.125, and 0.5, respectively. Results from matching second moments (MSM)
are presented in Table 3.




                                                 76
 Table 2: Varying degree of market completeness: Second moments
                                  (1) c = 1; g = 0.5
 Moments        A. Fin. autarky      B. Incomplete markets   C. Complete markets (*)

   Std(y)            0.016                     0.018                   0.034

   Std(c)            0.026                     0.023                   0.000

   Std(g)            0.013                     0.012                   0.000

   Std( )            0.011                     0.010                   0.000

 Corr(, y )          -0.984                 -0.963                     0.000

 Corr(g,y)           1.000                     0.983                   0.000

 Corr(c,y)           1.000                     0.983                   0.000

Corr((c/g),y)        1.000                     0.983                   0.000

                                  (2) c = 1; g = 1
 Moments        A. Fin.autarky      B. Incomplete markets    C. Complete markets (*)

   Std(y)            0.017                     0.018                   0.034

   Std(c)            0.017                     0.015                   0.000

   Std(g)            0.017                     0.015                   0.000

   Std( )            0.000                     0.002                   0.000

 Corr(, y )          0.936                     0.909                   0.000

 Corr(g,y)           1.000                     0.985                   0.000

 Corr(c,y)           1.000                     0.985                   0.000

Corr((c/g),y)        -0.031                    0.993                   0.000

                                  (3) c = 1; g = 2
 Moments        A. Fin. autarky     B. Incomplete markets    C. Complete markets (*)

   Std(y)            0.017                     0.018                   0.034

   Std(c)            0.014                     0.012                   0.000

   Std(g)            0.028                     0.024                   0.000

   Std( )            0.012                     0.015                   0.000

 Corr(, y )          0.974                     0.997                   0.000

 Corr(g,y)           1.000                     0.985                   0.000

 Corr(c,y)           1.000                     0.985                   0.000

Corr((c/g),y)        -1.000                 -0.985                     0.000

Notes: This table reports second moments of key variables in the model. These mo-
ments are computed from (HP-filtered) simulated data for 100,000 quarters, randomly
drawing TFP shocks only. The three columns show the three alternative cases of
market completeness considered in the analysis. The difference across panels is the
value of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of government consumption (g ).
Given that, under complete markets, government expenditure and consumption are
fully smoothed, it is not possible to compute the correlations between government ex-
penditure and output and between tax rates and output. Therefore, in the complete
markets case, the table reports the covariance term.




                                          77
                    Table 3: Matching second moments

                   Targeted moments                  y ; c ; ,y ; g,y
                                                  g = 0.25, A = 0.005,
             Calibration obtained via MSM            = 1, A = 0.95
                        Moments                   Data        Model

                          Std(y)                 0.017         0.010

                          Std(c)                 0.026         0.018

                          Std(g)                 0.056         0.005

                          Std( )                 0.054         0.014

                        Corr(, y )              -0.104         -0.058

                        Corr(g,y)                0.142         0.143

                        Corr(c,y)                0.629         0.143

                        Corr((c/g),y)              0.126        0.143
Notes: The calibration procedure for this table consists of the following steps: (1) a
grid is defined with all the possible combinations of values that the parameters to be
calibrated can take. These parameters are the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
of government consumption (g ), the volatility of TFP shocks (A ), the debt elastic-
ity of the interest rate ( ), and the persistence of the TFP process (A ); (2) for each
point in the grid, the dynamics of the model are simulated and the targeted moments
(the volatility of output (y ), the volatility of consumption (c ), the correlation be-
tween tax rates and output (,y ), and the correlation between government spending
and output (g,y )) are computed from the Hodrick-Prescott filtered series. Both the
simulation of the model and the computation of the moments were carried out for
simultaneous random TFP shocks and world interest rate shocks; (3) a quadratic loss
function based on the estimated theoretical moments and the moments in the data is
computed; and (4) the combination of values of g , A ,  , and A for which the loss
function takes the lowest value is selected.




                                          78
                                  Table 4: Empirical Results
                                             (1) Procyclicality Measure
                                 Non-OECD                  OECD
   Procyclicality Measure          Average        SE      Average       SE        T Stat       C.V     Test Result
               G                   0.29***       0.029     -0.118*     0.052       6.916      1.306     Reject H0
          VAT rate                -0.224***      0.031    -0.056**     0.031       3.842      1.304     Reject H0
                                             (2) Market Incompleteness
                                 Non-OECD                  OECD
  Capital Controls Measure         Average        SD      Average       SD        T Stat       C.V     Test Result
              kai                    0.412       0.301      0.099      0.093       7.421      1.292     Reject H0
              boi                    0.387       0.367      0.031      0.104       7.041      1.292     Reject H0
              kao                    0.444       0.360      0.110      0.120       6.478      1.292     Reject H0
              boo                    0.506       0.404      0.149      0.171        5.73      1.292     Reject H0
                                             (3) Debt Elasticity - Panel
                                      Non-OECD                  OECD
              Reg                         Coeff                 Coeff           Wald Stat      C.V     Test Result
    1 (Total Public Debt)               0.125***                0.002              61.18       3.84     Reject H0
           2 (NFA)                      0.062***                0.026*             16.40       3.84     Reject H0
                                                 (4) GDP Volatility
                                 Non-OECD                  OECD
   Business Cycle Measure          Average        SE      Average       SE        T Stat       C.V     Test Result
              Y                   3.283***       0.306    1.472***     0.098        5.64      1.289     Reject H0
Note: In panels 1, 3, and 4, ***, **, and * indicate significance at, respectively, 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Notes
Panel 1: The statistics displayed in this panel are based on the full sample of countries for each procyclicality
measure. For G and tax rates (VAT) the number of countries is, respectively, 121 and 47. The last column
reports the result of the (one-tail) hypothesis test that the means for both groups of countries are equal for
each procyclicality measure. Notes Panel 2: We use the capital controls indices from the updated version of
Fernandez et al. (2016), which has a set of 87 countries that also have information on measures of procyclicality.
The four specific indices considered are: overall assets inflow restrictions index (kai); bond inflow restrictions
(boi); overall assets outflow restrictions index (kao); and bond outflow restrictions (boo). The indices for each
country are normalized from zero to one, with one indicating the highest degree of capital controls. The last
column shows the result of the (one-tail) hypothesis test that the means for both groups of countries, non-
OECD and OECD, are equal for each capital controls index. Notes Panel 3: OECD countries are those that
where part of the OECD by 1973. Non-OECD countries are the remaining countries for which we have data
on their spread index (EMBIG or UIP spread in the case of countries considered developed by the BofA Merril
Lynch Bond Index Guide that are not in our OECD group). The number of countries for each regression is 16
OECD and 20 non-OECD in regression 1, and 17 OECD and 29 non-OECD in regression 2. The last column
reports the result of the (one-tail) hypothesis test that the coefficients for both groups of countries are equal in
each regression. Notes Panel 4: The statistics displayed in this panel are based on a sample of 123 countries.
Y corresponds to the volatility of the cyclical component of the HP-filtered data for the yearly real GDP of
those countries. The last column reports the result of the (one-tail) hypothesis test that the means of Y for
both groups of countries are equal.




                                                  79
