                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INTERMEDIARIES IN BARGAINING:
EVIDENCE FROM BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS USED-CAR INVENTORY NEGOTIATIONS

                                         Bradley Larsen
                                       Carol Hengheng Lu
                                       Anthony Lee Zhang

                                       Working Paper 29159
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29159


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2021




An earlier version of this study was circulated under the title, "Mediation in Bargaining: Evidence
from Large-Scale Field Data on Business-to-Business Negotiations." We thank Rebecca Li for
outstanding research assistance, as well as Jack Fanning, Matt Grennan, Nagore Iriberri, Pranav
Jindal, Bruno Pellegrino, Joris Pinske, Renan Yoshida, Xingtan Zhang, and seminar and
conference participants at the University of Toronto, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
University of Chicago, Queens University, Penn State University, Stanford-Berkeley IO Fest,
the North America Winter Meetings of the Econometric Society, the European Winter
Meetings of the Econometric Society, IIOC 2021, and BEET 2021 (Bargaining: Experiments,
Empirics, and Theory). We acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation through
grants SES-1629060 and SES-1530632. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Bradley Larsen, Carol Hengheng Lu, and Anthony Lee Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intermediaries in Bargaining: Evidence from Business-to-Business Used-Car Inventory Negotiations
Bradley Larsen, Carol Hengheng Lu, and Anthony Lee Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 29159
August 2021
JEL No. C7,D8,L1,L81

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze data on tens of thousands of alternating-offer, business-to-business negotiations in
the wholesale used-car market, with each negotiation mediated (over the phone) by a third-party
company. The data shows the identity of the employee mediating the negotiations. We find that
who intermediates the negotiation matters: high-performing mediators are 22.03% more likely to
close a deal than low performers. Effective mediators improve bargaining outcomes by helping
buyers and sellers come to agreements faster, not by pushing disagreeing parties to persist, and
have real effects on efficiency for some negotiations, overcoming some of the inefficiency
inherent in incomplete-information settings.

Bradley Larsen                                 Anthony Lee Zhang
Department of Economics                        University of Chicago
Stanford University                            Booth School of Business
579 Jane Stanford Way                          5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Stanford, CA 94305                             Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                       anthony.zhang@chicagobooth.edu
bjlarsen@stanford.edu

Carol Hengheng Lu
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
United States
hhlu@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
Many real-world bargaining situations--among nations, businesses, investors, consumers, or
litigants--involve a third-party intermediary or mediator. These mediators are often at the
center of massive transactions and are highly paid for the role they play; consider, for example,
investment banks handling firm acquisitions or lawyers mediating pre-trial settlement. To
date, however, there is little quantitative evidence from real-world data on whether or how
such mediators make a difference for negotiation outcomes and welfare in practice.
    This paper provides an analysis of a large dataset containing 80,000 business-to-business
negotiations from the wholesale used-car industry. This industry consists of hundreds of
auction houses nationwide that facilitate trade of used cars between manufacturers, fleet
companies, banks, leasing companies, and used and new car dealerships. More than $80
billion worth of cars are traded through this industry each year. Each car is auctioned
individually in a rapid process, and when the auction fails to yield a sufficiently high price,
the auction house mediates a bilateral bargaining process between the highest bidder and
the seller of the car.
    The dataset we study is rich, containing information from six different auction houses
that sold thousands of cars from 2006­2010. For each attempt to sell a car, the data records
the auction price, the seller's secret reserve price, and every action taken by each party
in the negotiation process, including all back-and-forth offers. Importantly for our study,
the data contains the identity of the auction house employee who mediated the negotiation
over the phone. The data also contains detailed information on the characteristics of the
vehicle, the timing and location of the transaction, and the identities of the negotiators (the
buyer and seller on a given transaction). Such data is rare in the literature--only a handful of
existing studies analyze information on offers and counteroffers within a real-world bargaining
scenario, and we know of no other data setting containing information on the mediation as
well. We view this as an unprecedented opportunity to study bargaining intermediaries in
the field.
    The buyers and sellers negotiating in these transactions can be considered "professional"


                                               2
negotiators, and the auction house mediators "professional" mediators. They engage in these
negotiations--with different parties--on a weekly basis, as each auction house sells hundreds
to thousands of cars on a fixed day each week. For the buyers and sellers, the stakes are
high, especially for small used-car dealers, where each transaction can make the difference
between having the right amount of inventory on hand vs. not, and having the desired resale
profit margin vs. not.
   This data provides us with a setting in which mediators vary from transaction to trans-
action, allowing us to quantify the impact of mediators on negotiation outcomes. According
to our conversations with industry participants and with the mediators themselves, these
mediators (or intermediaries --we will use the two terms interchangeably throughout the
paper) are largely random. We find evidence that the assignment is not actually random,
and can depend on the features of a given negotiation that are determined before the bar-
gaining starts, such as car characteristics, buyer and seller identities, and outcomes of the
pre-bargaining stages of the game (the auction). Our detailed data allows us to control for
each of these features, and we demonstrate that our key findings are similar with or without
these controls.
   We first document that who is assigned as the mediator has a large effect on economic
outcomes. We measure this by a regression of various outcomes on mediator fixed effects. We
find that the 75th percentile-performing mediator leads to trade probability that is 22.03%
higher than the 25th percentile mediator. We find that this large heterogeneity in perfor-
mance persists as we include more rigorous controls for features of the negotiation. Some
variation in mediator performance would be expected in any dataset simply due to statistical
noise, even if true underlying performance was equal across mediators. To take this into ac-
count, we perform a number of placebo tests in which we randomly permute the assignment
between bargaining outcomes to mediators in the data. These tests reveal that the observed
performance heterogeneity we document is wider than can be explained by random statistical
error, suggesting that mediator skill is a real phenomenon.
   We then use this heterogeneity to study several questions that relate both to the ne-
gotiation literature in social psychology and organizational behavior, and to foundational

                                             3
mechanism design concepts in economics. The classical theoretical mechanism design liter-
ature on bilateral trade (Myerson and Satterthwaite 1983) demonstrates that bargaining is
generically inefficient: incomplete information leads to information rents in order to achieve
incentive compatibility, and hence also leads to inefficiency. This inefficiency exists even
when the mechanism designer is able to implement the theoretically most-efficient mecha-
nism. In practice, however, the actual shortfall in efficiency may be far greater than would
be explained by these traditional information constraints alone, suggesting that market de-
signers in practice may either have different objective functions than posited by theory, or
may simply be incapable of implementing the efficient mechanism.
       In our setting, the objective function of the mechanism designer -- the used-car clear-
inghouse -- is well known: to maximize the probability of trade. This objective function
is stated clearly in industry reports and industry blogs, and has been confirmed in personal
interviews of many industry participants (Lacetera et al. 2016, Treece 2013).1 We posit here
that any efficiency shortfall in bilateral bargaining in this setting is therefore not due to a
different designer objective function but rather to an inability of the designer to execute the
theoretically preferred mechanism.
       To study this inability, we exploit the variation in mediator performance. As in the theo-
retical discussion in Myerson (2008), we think of different mediators as constituting different
mechanisms, achieving outcomes that differ in performance relative to the theoretically pre-
ferred mechanism. The goal of each mediator/mechanism is to maximize trade, but some
mediators may be unable to commit to or lack an understanding of how to execute the opti-
mal strategy, and may instead attempt to push bargaining agents to keep negotiating, even
when trade is unlikely.
       The theoretically optimal mechanism for maximizing trade can be implemented as a
static mechanism--it does not require long, drawn-out negotiations between parties. A key
feature of this mechanism is that the designer commits to not let certain trades occur,
even if the buyer values the car more than the seller. This is also true of the surplus-
   1
     Our findings are consistent with this objective: We find that they have small and statistically insignificant
effects on the prices at which trades occur. Thus, mediators affect trade probabilities without substantially
changing how the pie is split between buyers and sellers.

                                                        4
maximizing mechanism studied in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and Williams (1987).
This commitment is necessary in order to achieve incentive compatibility: without some
failed, efficient trades, the Myerson-Satterthwaite Theorem demonstrates that the mechanism
cannot be incentive compatible and cannot be profitably operated by the mechanism designer.
A mediator who cannot commit to the optimal mechanism will be tempted to do the following:
after learning or believing that there are gains from trade, even if the optimal mechanism
requires that trade fail for a given pair of buyer and seller valuations, the noncommittal
mediator is tempted to try again, to relax the mechanism constraints and get this one trade to
occur. Parties knowing this non-commitment, on the other hand, will exploit this knowledge
and not truthfully report their valuations to the mediator upfront, resulting in a self-fulfilling
prophecy that the game drags on into later periods. This dilemma faced by mediators is
analogous to the Coase Conjecture--the dilemma faced by a durable good monopolist who
cannot commit to not lower prices in the future.2
       We construct a simple framework for decomposing bargaining success into two distinct
components. We show that, in an alternating-offer bargaining game, the probability of
bargaining success can be decomposed into two sets of probabilities for each bargaining round:
the probability that participants agree and conclude bargaining, which we call an agreement
probability ; and the probability that participants disagree, but continue to the next round,
which we call continuation probability. We find empirically that effective mediators improve
bargaining outcomes by increasing agreement probabilities, not continuation probabilities.
In fact, continuation probabilities appear to be somewhat lower for effective mediators.
       We then offer a structural exercise that estimates the actual trade mechanism corre-
sponding to mediators of different abilities. Following the Revelation Principle, a bilateral
trade mechanism can be summarized by a probability of trade assigned to each pair of agent
types (a buyer valuation and a seller valuation)--the allocation function in a direct revela-
tion mechanism. We estimate this direct revelation mechanism separately for mediators of
differing skills. We combine these estimated mechanisms with estimates of the distributions
   2
    The Coase Conjecture in fact has a long and intimate relationship with the bilateral negotiation literature.
See Gul et al. (1986), as well as Ausubel and Deneckere (1992) and Cramton (1992).



                                                       5
of buyer and seller valuations in this marketplace from Larsen (2021). With these objects,
we then compute surplus in the trade-maximizing (efficient) mechanism as well as the actual
surplus achieved by mediators of different skill levels.3 We find that mediators who achieve
a higher probability of trade are not doing so simply by capturing low-surplus trades (i.e.,
cases where the buyer values the car only slightly more than the seller). Rather, these higher
trade-volume mediators increase the total realized gains from trade --thus creating significant
value. This is particularly the case for car transactions in which the seller is a large fleet or
lease institution.
        The effects we document in this paper are much larger than effects of mediators in trade
in non-bargaining context, such as auctions (Lacetera et al. 2016). We believe this is because
bargaining games are complex, theoretically less determinate, and therefore richer mecha-
nisms than auctions. In negotiation settings, game-theoretic concerns, such as dominant-
strategy solvability, as in the second-price or VCG auctions, or even Nash equilibrium, have
little bite or predictive power. This, in theory, suggests that there is a large space for soft
factors, such as mediators' ability, to influence outcomes; one could think of mediators as
playing a kind of equilibrium selection role, with different mediators corresponding to less or
more efficient equilibria. We view a contribution of this paper as empirically demonstrating
a situation in which the size of these mediators' effects on outcomes are precisely measurable
and quantitatively large.



2         Related Literature
There is a growing theoretical literature in economics and political science on the influence
of bargaining mediators, such as Goltsman et al. (2009), H¨
                                                          orner et al. (2015), and Fanning
(2021). These studies suggest possible ways in which mediators can and cannot affect out-
comes. For example, Fanning (2021) demonstrates that mediators can improve bargaining
    3
     Note that the first-best mechanism maximizes the gains from trade as well as the probability of trade.
With incentive constraints, the second-best mechanism that maximizes gains from trade and the second-best
mechanism that maximizes the volume of trade are not exactly equivalent. In our paper, we evaluate the
first-best mechanism as well as the surplus-maximizing second-best.



                                                    6
outcomes by committing to, with some probability, withhold information from each nego-
tiating agent about her opponent's willingness to trade. Basak (2015) finds that if agents
have sufficiently close bargaining strengths, mediation can strictly improve efficiency. Kydd
(2003) provides a model in which a bargaining party will only follow the advice of a medi-
ator who she views as sufficiently "on her side." Other theoretical studies suggesting that
mediation in bargaining can improve efficiency include Copic and Ponsati (2008), Glode and
Opp (2016), and Kim (2017). More broadly, a mediator might be viewed as a mechanism for
helping agents execute something closer to the efficient direct mechanism (e.g. Myerson and
Satterthwaite 1983) by withholding some trades between players--even when the mediator
knows the buyer values the good more than the seller--in order to keep agents' reporting in-
centive compatible. Zhang (2019) demonstrates theoretically that more informed mediators
can indeed achieve greater efficiency.4
       A number of studies in at the intersection of economics and organizational behavior/psy-
chology gain insights on the impact of mediation via controlled laboratory experiments, find-
ing evidence that a third-party mediator decreases the probability of trade and increases the
price, depending on the mediator's incentives and what the mediator knows (Bazerman et al.
1992, Valley et al. 1992). Experiments, and also studies of international conflict, have shown
that bargaining parties tend to prefer mediation (over un-mediated bargaining) in cases with
uncertainty about negotiation outcomes or unequal bargaining power (Neale 1984, Bercovitch
and Jackson 2001). A mediator might also be able to help by convincing one side or the other
that the market demand or supply is different than that agent initially expected. For exam-
ple, if the agent has overly optimistic beliefs or other biases, the mediator may be able to help
the agent correctly adjust these beliefs (Babcock and Loewenstein 1997). Other experimental
work along these lines includes Yavas et al. (2001), and Eisenkopf and Bachtiger (2013). Our
work takes the analysis of intermediaries beyond the lab to a business-to-business setting: a
   4
     Lang (2020) describes a model in which agents' ability to tell and interpret narratives can improve
efficiency in bilateral bargaining, and Kim (2020) shows that an intermediary with the objective of maximizing
trade (as opposed to revenue) is more likely to truthfully reveal agents values to one another. In Gottardi
and Mezzetti (2019), the mediator is more informed than the negotiating agents about their own values, and
the mediator finds it optimal to limit the flow of information to the agents.



                                                      7
high-stakes negotiation in the field between professional negotiators.5
       Our study relates to other empirical studies that document heterogeneous outcomes in
sales situations in the field, such as Barwick and Pathak (2015), Kim (2020), Robles-Garcia
(2020), and Gilbukh and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2021), studying real estate agents/brokers;
Lacetera et al. (2016), studying auctioneers in wholesale used-car markets; Bruno et al.
(2018), studying art auctions; and Jindal and Newberry (2020), studying heterogeneity across
sellers in large-scale appliances. Relative to this literature, our core contribution is to analyze
large, detailed data on the inner workings of the negotiations (most studies only observe the
final negotiated price, and only for consummated sales, unlike our data) and to demonstrate
that mediator effects are surprisingly quantitatively large.
       Finally, our study relates to the empirical literature studying bargaining under two-sided
incomplete information (Keniston 2011, Larsen and Zhang 2018, Larsen 2021). The data
we use overlaps to some extent with the alternating-offer bargaining data studied in Larsen
(2021), although that study does not exploit information on the identity of the mediator.
That study provides structural welfare analyses of the performance of the bilateral bargaining
but leaves unanswered the question of why bargaining is inefficient at all, and what explains
variation in outcomes across negotiating pairs. The current paper takes a first step in this
direction, demonstrating that a large fraction of the variation in the outcomes can be ex-
plained by mediator influence. In laboratory experiments, Valley et al. (2002) and Bochet
et al. (2020) study two-sided incomplete-information bargaining, as in our paper, and demon-
strate that other factors contributing to efficiency are agents' ability to communicate with
one another and their ability to bundle together multiple issues in their price offers.
   5
    In legal settings, McEwen and Maiman (1981) find that small claims suits resolved through mediation
result in higher compliance and satisfaction rates than claims resolved through adjudication, and Emery
et al. (1991) finds that mediation improved satisfaction in child custody cases. Dixon (1996) finds that, in
the setting of international military disputes, various forms of third-party intermediation are associated with
higher settlement rates.




                                                      8
3     Institutional Background and Data
The wholesale used-car auction industry is the backbone of the supply-side of the used-car
market, both in the U.S. and many other parts of the world. Millions of used-cars arrive
each year to used-car lots as trade-in vehicles and then are never sold on those lots, but
are instead brought to a wholesale used-car auction house, where the inventory is sold to
other car dealerships. We refer to these cars as cars sold by dealers. Millions of company-
fleet vehicles, rental cars, repossessed vehicles owned by banks, or off-lease or lease-buy-back
vehicles are also offered for sale at these auction houses. We refer to these as cars sold by
fleet/lease sellers. Total revenue at these auction houses is more than $80 billion annually.
    At the auction houses we study, for each car brought to an auction house, the auction
house runs a rapid (approximately 90-second) ascending auction, and if the auction price fails
to reach the seller's secret reserve price, the auction house facilitates a bilateral negotiation
between the high bidder and the seller. This negotiation proceeds over the phone. The
auction house employee--the mediator--first calls up the seller and reports the outcome of
the auction (the auction price). The seller can choose to accept this price, give a counteroffer,
or quit (ending the negotiation). If the seller gives a counteroffer, the mediator calls up the
buyer and the buyer is given the same choice. This process continues until one party accepts
or quits. The auction house records all actions taken by either party, as well as the identity
of each party and the identity of the mediator.
    The data consists of several hundred thousand realizations of bargaining sequences at six
different auction house locations between 2006 and 2010. We take several steps to clean the
data. We first drop observations for which the following variables lie outside their respective
0.01 and 0.99 percentiles: the auction price, the reserve price, and the auction house's esti-
mated market value of the car (which we will refer to as the blue book price ). We will use
the term thread to refer to a bargaining sequence. The auction house creates a new record
for each action taken during a given bargaining thread, allowing us to see the timing of each
action and also allowing us to see that some threads involve several different mediators fa-
cilitating different stages of the negotiation. Among all the bargaining threads, 68.76% of


                                               9
                   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics at Bargaining-Thread Level


                                       Mean            Std. Dev.     0.1 Quantile      0.9 Quantile
          Agreement reached              .589             .492             0                  1
          Final price ($)               5,659            4,948            900             12,800
          Bluebook price ($)            6,969            5,261           1,550            14,475
          Auction price ($)             5,575            4,932            800             12,700
          Reserve Price ($)             7,361            5,412           1,900             15,000
          # Offers in a thread           1.37             .687             1                 2
          Length of a thread (hours)     5.92             15.3            .33               19.8
          Fleet/lease car                .473             .499             0                  1
          Car age (years)               6.35              3.59             2                 11
          Mileage                      93,265           50,734          30,257            157,766
          Engine displacement (liters) 3.61               1.52             2                5.7
          No. Threads                  78,950

Notes: This table presents the descriptive statistics at the thread level. Final price is conditioned on trade
occurring. See Appendix Tables A1­A2 for descriptive statistics of cars from the fleet/lease and dealer
subsamples.


them are handled by one mediator per thread, 28.84% are handled by two mediators, and the
remaining by more than two. We exclude threads involving multiple mediators. Because we
want a sufficient number of observations per mediator to estimate trade probabilities, we re-
strict our sample to mediators that we observe participating in at least 50 separate bargaining
threads. In the end, we are left with 119 mediators and 78,950 bargaining threads.
       The primary measure of mediators' performance in this industry is the probability with
which they achieve agreement. The auction house makes it clear that its main goal is to
facilitate as many trades as possible, offering a liquid two-sided marketplace that can attract
both buyers and sellers (Lacetera et al. 2016).6 We will evaluate differences in mediator
performance by this metric. We also look at heterogeneity in other outcomes across mediators,
such as the final price of a successful deal. To make final prices more comparable across
various cars, for much of our analysis we normalize prices by the auction house's blue book
estimate for the car.
   6
    In contrast, an objective of maximizing prices--the target in many auction-design problems--would be
attractive to sellers but unattractive to buyers.




                                                     10
                        Table 2: Descriptive Statistics at Mediator Level


                                      Mean         Std. Dev.     0.1 Quantile     0.9 Quantile
           Agreement reached          .558            .225           .309              .896
           Final price/bluebook price .836           .0757           .753              .933
           Final price/reserve price  .797           .0612           .729              .869
           Final price/auction price  1.02            .012             1               1.03
           Female                     .468            .501             0                 1
           # Threads mediated          663             707            97              1,542
           Years of employment         4.1            5.25           .396              9.44
           No. Mediators               119

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics of our main sample at the mediator level. The selected
119 mediators each handled at least 50 threads during the sample period.


       Tables 1 and 2 show summary statistics of our primary estimation sample, at the level
of threads and mediators respectively. Table 1 shows that the average probability of trade is
58.9%. The average final price for a successful trade is $5,659, lower than the average blue
book price of $6,969. The average final price is also in between the average auction price
of $5,575 and average secret reserve price of $7,361, though it is much closer to the former.
A bargaining thread ends after 1.37 rounds of offers on average, and within six hours. An
average car is 6.35 years old, has an odometer reading of 93,265 miles and 3.61 liters of
engine displacement. There is substantial variation in car characteristics. 47.3% of the cars
in our sample are from fleet/lease sellers and the rest come from dealers. Fleet/lease cars are
on average newer and have higher trade probability and negotiated price. Appendix Tables
A1­A2 show descriptive statistics of cars from both types of sellers separately, where we limit
to mediators who handled at least 25 threads of fleet/lease cars or 25 threads of dealer cars,
retrospectively. We focus on the full sample for most of our results in the body of the paper,
but use these subsamples in Section 6.
       Table 2 shows mediators' characteristics and their negotiation outcomes. Among the
119 mediators, 46.8% of them are female. An average mediator has worked in the auction
house for four years.7 During the sample period, she handles 663 bargaining threads and
   7
    We obtain years of employment for a mediator by first calculating the mediator's employment length up
through the date of each bargaining thread and then taking the average of this quantity across all threads


                                                   11
successfully facilitates 55.8% of them. The achieved final price is, on average, 80% of the
reserve price and 2% higher than the auction price. Dispersion in average trade probability
is quite large across mediators, with a standard deviation of 0.23, while the dispersion in
prices is much smaller.



4     Heterogeneity in Outcomes Across Mediators
In this section, we provide empirical evidence on mediators' heterogeneous performance as
measured by their probability of achieving agreement rate and by the final price of their
mediated bargaining threads.


4.1     Mediator Effects on Agreement Rates

We begin by evaluating the raw differences across the 119 mediators in our sample in terms
of their probability of achieving agreement. Let Yi be an indicator variable representing
whether trade/agreement occurs for thread i, which is mediated by intermediary k (i). Let
Jk be the set of all threads mediated by k , and |Jk | the number of elements in this set. We
estimate the average of Yi over the subset of threads mediated by intermediary k ,


                                        ¯k  1
                                        Y           Yi .                                   (1)
                                           |Jk | iJ
                                                    k



These probabilities are shown in Figure 1, sorted from smallest to largest. This figure illus-
trates a core stylized fact of our study: different mediators have very different probabilities
of bargaining success. The best to worst mediators span a difference of 98.4% in the proba-
bility of trade. The 90­10 percentile spread is 58.6%. The 25th percentile mediator achieves
agreement with probability 40.6%, while the 75th percentile mediator probability is 75.4%
(these are shown with the horizontal dotted lines in Figure 1). We will refer to a mediator
with a higher probability of trade as a higher-skilled mediator, as the probability of trade is
the primary metric upon which individual mediators are evaluated by the auction house.
she handles during the sample period.

                                              12
                      Figure 1: Mediator Differences in Trade Probability




Notes: This figure shows the average trade probability for each of the 119 mediators in the data. We rank
mediators from low to high based on this performance metric. Dashed lines represent the trade probability
achieved by the 25th and 75th percentile mediators.


   To better understand the industry, we spent time in these auction houses, observing
the bargaining/mediation process and interviewing mediators, buyers, and sellers. Through
this effort, we learned about potential drivers of mediator heterogeneity and the mediator
assignment process. These conversations reveal that each seller typically has an auction house
employee assigned to manage the relationship between that seller and the auction house, and,
where possible, this employee is assigned to mediate negotiations involving that seller. This
default mediator is often unavailable, however, and in such cases an alternative mediator
handles the negotiation. This is particularly the case for dealer-sold cars, where, for several
exciting hours each week, the sales room in which the mediating phone calls occur is alive
with activity, akin to a miniature stock market trading floor, with no pre-specified protocol
determining which mediator ends up handling a given thread. With fleet/lease cars, it is
more often the case that the pre-assigned mediator is available, but even there this is not
always the case.
   Mediator assignment for a given negotiation thus involves an element of randomness, but
is by no means completely random. We evaluate the extent of this non-random assignment

                                                   13
here, and identify a number of features of the negotiation that we can control for to help
account for non-random assignment. We first construct a leave-one-out estimate of a media-
tor's agreement rate--the average probability of trades for all threads other than i that are
mediated by intermediary k --given by


                                       ¯-i,k(i)          1
                                       Y                                   Yj .
                                                     |Jk | - 1 j :j =i,j J
                                                                         k



We then estimate the following regression:


                                                 ¯-i,k(i) = Z  + i ,
                                                 Y                                                             (2)
                                                             i



where Zi contains characteristics of negotiation thread i that are determined before the
mediator is assigned, and hence before the negotiation begins. These include fixed effects for
the auction house location, as well as controls for vehicle mileage, age, engine displacement,
the auction house blue book estimate, and the high bid and reserve price from the auction.
We also include in Zi a leave-one-out average of the agreement probability of the agent
who is the seller on thread i. This seller leave-one-out average is constructed similarly to
the mediator leave-one-out rate, taking the empirical frequency with which seller s(i) (the
seller on thread i) comes to agreement, using only threads in which seller s was involved but
omitting thread i. We construct a similar leave-one-out agreement probability for the buyer.8
       We first plot the estimated coefficients from estimating (2) with the outcome being the
main agreement indicator; that is, we regress Yi (rather than the leave-one-out agreement
     ¯-i,k(i) ) on thread characteristics Zi . These estimates are shown in panel A of Figure 2.
rate Y
95% confidence intervals are shown around each estimated coefficient. Panel A shows that
each of these thread features is significantly related to the likelihood that a thread ends in
agreement. In particular, threads are more likely to end in agreement if they have a lower
   8
     In similar notation to Y     ¯-i,k(i) , we can write the seller leave-one-out agreement rate as Y   ¯ seller 
                                                                                                          -i,s(i)
   1
|Js |-1   j :j =i,j Js Yj , where Js is the set of all threads with s as the seller. The buyer leave-one-out agree-
ment rate can be written Y      ¯ buyer        1
                                                              Yj , where Jb is the set of all threads with b as the
                             -i,b(i)   |Jb |-1     j :j =i,j Jb
buyer.



                                                           14
reserve price or higher auction price, if the car is a less-expensive car (lower blue book price),
or if the buyer or seller is a priori a more agreeable agent (i.e. more likely to agree as measured
by the buyer's or seller's leave-one-out agreement rate).
       Nonrandom assignment is potentially a concern if good mediators are systematically as-
signed to threads with characteristics associated with higher probabilities of trade: for exam-
ple, if effective mediators are systematically assigned to less expensive cars, or cars with lower
reserve prices. To test whether this holds in our data, we regress the leave-one-out estimates
of mediator fixed effects on characteristics: formally, we estimate (2), using the leave-one-out
               ¯-i,k(i) as the outcome variable. If good mediators are not systematically
agreement rate Y
assigned to better threads, then the coefficients on this regression should be 0.
       We show these estimated coefficients in panel B of Figure 2, again with 95% confidence
intervals surrounding each point. The results suggest that assignment is not completely
random: better mediators--those with a higher leave-one-out average trade probability--
tend to be assigned to threads with lower reserve prices and higher auction prices. We also
find that these better mediators are more likely to be assigned to bargaining pairs in which
the buyer or seller has a higher probability of coming to agreement.9 However, these effects
are small relative to the magnitudes in panel A: the F-statistic decreases from 453 to 22,
and the coefficients are about five times smaller. This implies that thread-level features have
much less power to predict leave-one-out agreement rates, compared to realized agreements.
These results suggest that, while there is some element of randomness in mediator assignment,
part of the raw heterogeneity in mediator performance from Figure 1 is not specifically due
to the mediator, but instead arises from characteristics of the thread. This highlights the
importance of conditioning on these factors as we pursue estimating the effect of the mediator
on bargaining outcomes.
       To measure mediator performance incorporating these controls, we expand (1) to estimate
   9
     In Appendix A, we offer an alternative test of how mediators are assigned to bargaining threads. We
find that mediators are fairly randomly assigned to car types and buyers. However, the assignment to sellers
is less likely to be random, especially for the fleet/lease subsample.




                                                    15
                                Figure 2: Mediator Assignment Test

                   (A) Agreement                                        (B) Leave-one-out Agreement




Notes: This figure shows coefficients from (2). Panel A shows coefficients when the outcome is the main
agreement indicator Yi . Panel B shows estimates from the same regression but with the leave-one-out
agreement rate Y¯-i,k(i) as the dependent variable. We show 95% confidence intervals, computed by clustering
at the mediator level. See Appendix Tables A4­A5 for the assignment test results using fleet/lease and dealer
subsamples separately.


a fixed effect for each mediator conditional on thread-level characteristics, as follows:


                                          Yi = k(i) + Xi  + i .                                          (3)


In (3), k(i) is the effect for mediator k and Xi is a vector of controls varying from specification
to specification. For each specification, we follow Lacetera et al. (2016) and re-position the
mediator fixed effects so they have mean zero, as follows:
                                          
                                           ^k -   1        M
                                                                  ^j   f or k = 1
                                                  M        j =2
                              ^norm,k =
                              
                                          0 -
                                                 1     M      ^j
                                                                       f or k = 1,
                                                 M     j =2




                                                      16
   Figure 3: Mediator Fixed Effects for Trade Probability Under Different Specifications




Notes: This figure shows normalized mediator fixed effect estimates for probability of trade under increasingly
stringent specifications for Xi from regression (3).


where 1 denotes the omitted mediator in regression (3).
    Figure 3 displays estimates of mediator fixed effects from increasingly stringent specifi-
cations for Xi . In our base case, specification 1, Xi includes various thread-level features:
the car's age, blue book value, engine displacement and mileage; a dummy for whether the
car is sold by a fleet/lease seller; and the reserve price and auction price. These latter two
variables are among those that Figure 2 demonstrates are particularly important to include
to control for mediator assignment.
    We then sequentially add a number of other fixed effects to regression (3). In specification
2, we add fixed effects for the make and model of the car and the date of the negotiation.
In specification 3, we add buyer fixed effects. Specification 4 replaces buyer fixed effects
with seller fixed effects. These seller and buyer fixed effects help control for the possibility
(highlighted in Figure 2) that mediator assignment may depend on the buyer or seller. In


                                                      17
the most-saturated version of our model--specification 5--we include all of these controls
together. Figure 3 shows results comparing these different specifications, ranking mediator
fixed effects from smallest to largest as in Figure 1. While adding these various controls
changes the shape of the mediators' fixed effect curve to some extent, the heterogeneity
remains relatively consistent and large across specifications. The inner-quartile range is large
in each specification: the minimum value of the 75th to 25th percentile gap is 22.03%.
   Figure 4 illustrates how mediator fixed effects are correlated across these specifications.
In each panel, we plot, on the vertical axis, a mediator's rank (from 1 to 119) as measured
by her fixed effect from the most-saturated specification (specification 5 from Figure 3). On
the horizontal axes we plot the mediator's rank from other specifications (1­4). We find that
our ranking of mediator performance is highly correlated across specifications. Regardless of
which controls we include, we find strong evidence for mediators having heterogeneous effects
on the probability of trade, and the ranking of mediator performance are estimated relatively
consistent across our different regression specifications.


4.2    Mediator Effects on Prices

We repeat the estimation of (3) but using final negotiated prices (normalized by the auction
house bluebook price) as the outcome of interest rather than the agreement indicator. Panel
B of Figure 5 shows the estimated mediator fixed effects under the saturated model (specifi-
cation 5), along with pointwise 95% confidence intervals surround these estimated mediator
effects. Panel A shows the estimates of the trade-probability effects (also under specification
5) for comparison. The estimated mediator fixed effects on normalized final prices are smaller
in magnitude than those on trade probability outcomes. A one-standard-deviation increase
in mediator performance is only associated with a 3.8 percentage point increase in the final
price, but with a 32.2 percentage point increase in the trade probability. Confidence intervals
for each estimated effect are also wider in terms of price measure: 118 out of 119 mediator
effects are not significantly different from zero. None of these results are surprising given the
objective of the mediators, which is clearly delineated as a goal to increase the probability


                                               18
                          Figure 4: Mediator Rank Across Specifications




Notes: This figure presents mediators' rank in trade probabilities across different specifications. Each data
point represents a mediator. The y-axis shows mediator fixed effects from specification 5, and the x-axis
shows fixed effects from other specifications. We add a 45 degree dashed line as a reference.


of the trade irrespective of the price. Our results here demonstrate that indeed mediators
do not differ in terms of the final prices at which they get parties to agree, and do differ
drastically in their agreement probabilities.



                                                     19
             Figure 5: Mediator Fixed Effects Under Most-Saturated Specification

                                          (A) Probability of Trade




                                         (B) Normalized Final Price




Notes: Panel A shows mediator fixed effect estimates for trade probability along with 95% confidence intervals,
under fully specified model (specification 5 of Equation (3)). Panel B shows results from the same exercise
but using final prices normalized by bluebook value as the outcome variable. Dashed lines represent the
estimated fixed effect for the 25th and 75th percentile mediators.




                                                      20
4.3        Sampling Error

A concern with any study of heterogeneity is that at least part (and potentially all) of the
observed heterogeneity may be driven by sampling error: even if true mediator performance
is constant across mediators, some variance in outcomes would arise in any finite sample.
To examine this possibility, we conduct a placebo test by repeatedly shuffling bargaining
outcomes, assigning the outcome from each observation to a randomly chosen mediator, and
then re-estimating specification 5 of regression (3). We repeat this 100 times, and construct
a 95% pointwise confidence band for the CDFs of estimated fixed effects under random
assignment. We plot CDF of the median placebo estimates, as well as these 95% confidence
bands, together with the CDF of the real mediator fixed effect estimates from specification
5, both for trade probabilities and for prices.
       The results are shown in Figure 6. The estimated mediator fixed effects for prices fall
within the 95% confidence band of the placebo estimates. This implies that we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that mediators have no effect on prices (and that any apparent effect
observed in panel B of Figure 5 is due to sampling error). As a robustness check, we run the
same placebo test for the final prices normalized by the auction price and reserve price rather
than the blue book price. We do not find that mediators differ by these measures either (see
Appendix Figure A8).
       In contrast, the distribution of trade probability fixed effects is quite dispersed, lying well
outside the 95% confidence bands of the placebo distribution, suggesting that the hetero-
geneity in trade probability is not simply an artifact of sampling noise. Our analysis suggests
that, if heterogeneity were purely driven by sampling error, we would expect the difference
in trade probability between the 75th percentile and 25th percentile mediator to be about
6.1%; the actual inner quartile range is much larger than this, and thus cannot simply be
explained by finite-sample error.10
  10
    A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test comparing the actual CDF of trade probability fixed effects to the CDF of
the median placebo effect yields a p-value of 0.00. A similar test for price fixed effects yields a p-value of
0.13, implying that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the price heterogeneity is driven by sampling
error. Note that this placebo analysis captures an idea analogous to what would be captured by applying a
method of Bayes' shrinkage to the mediator fixed effects.



                                                     21
                 Figure 6: Placebo Test of Heterogeneity from Sampling Error

              (A) Probability of trade                                   (B) Final price




Notes: Panel A presents placebo test results for trade probability. Panel B presents results for final price
normalized by bluebook value. To obtain the placebo estimates and confidence intervals, we first shuffle
bargaining outcomes, assign the outcome from each observation to a randomly chosen mediator, and then
re-estimate specification 5 of regression (3). We repeat this process 100 times. Estimated distribution of
fixed effects from the actual data are shown in blue; placebo median and 95% pointwise confidence bands are
shown in black. See Appendix Figures A6­A7 for placebo test results from fleet/lease and dealer samples
separately.


5     Decomposing Bargaining Success
Having established that mediators differ substantially in their ability to help negotiating
parties reach an agreement, we now turn to the question of how they do so. Because we
have detailed data on the back-and-forth offers that buyers and sellers make in the process
of bargaining, we can study how the bargaining threads of effective mediators differ from
those of less-effective mediators. In this section, we propose a simple way to decompose the
probability of bargaining success into two sets of probabilities: agreement probabilities and
continuation probabilities. We show that effective mediators improve bargaining outcomes
entirely by increasing the former set of probabilities.
    Formally, for any given bargaining thread, we index rounds by t, where t = 1 is the
first round. Let T represent the max number of rounds observed in data. If a bargaining
thread reaches round t, the round t agent has three mutually exclusive choices: agree to
trade and end bargaining, an event which we denote Agreet ; disagree and leave bargaining,

                                                    22
which we denote Leavet ; or disagree but continue to the next round, which we denote Contt .
Let Pt (Agreet ), Pt (Leavet ), and Pt (Contt ) denote the probabilities of each event occurring,
conditional on bargaining reaching round t; hence, these three probabilities always sum to 1.
Let Disagreet  Leavet  Contt represent disagreement in round t, which results in either
leaving (Leavet ) or continuing to the next round (Contt ). Define

                                                       Pt (Contt )
                      Pt (Contt | Disagreet ) 
                                                 Pt (Contt ) + Pt (Leavet )

as the probability of continuing to round t + 1 conditional on disagreeing in round t.
   Let P (Success) represent the probability that bargaining ultimately ends in agreement,
and let Pt (Success), with a t subscript, denote the probability that bargaining ultimately
ends in agreement conditional on bargaining reaching round t. Bargaining can succeed either
if agents agree in round t, or if agents disagree but continue to round t + 1 and agree in some
subsequent round; that is, we can inductively define Pt (Success) as


  Pt (Success) = Pt (Agreet ) + (1 - Pt (Agreet )) Pt (Contt | Disagreet ) Pt+1 (Success) , (4)


with the terminal condition Pt (Success) = PT (AgreeT ). Applying (4) to t = 1, we can
represent the unconditional probability of bargaining success as:


  P (Success) = P1 (Agree1 ) + (1 - P1 (Agree1 )) P1 (Cont1 | Disagree1 ) P2 (Success) .     (5)


   Expressions (4) and (5) show that bargaining outcomes in period t can be summa-
rized by two numbers: Pt (Agreet ), the probability that agents agree in period t, and
Pt (Contt | Disagreet ), the probability that agents do not agree and continue on to period
t + 1. Moreover, the probability of success is an increasing function of all of these terms:
increasing either Pt (Agreet ) or Pt (Contt | Disagreet ) for any round, holding all other terms
fixed, increases P (Success). The terms Pt (Agreet ) and Pt (Contt | Disagreet ) thus allow us
to decompose the ultimate probability of bargaining success into two conditional probabilities
for each bargaining round.

                                               23
                     Table 3: Bargaining Decomposition and Counterfactuals

        A. Probabilities                 Agreement Prob.                  Continuation Prob.
                                     Low Medium            High        Low Medium             High
        Round    1                   0.341 0.509           0.667       0.643 0.593            0.404
        Round    2                   0.129 0.131           0.148       0.298 0.229            0.199
        Round    3                   0.503 0.538           0.614       0.627 0.713            0.693
        Round    4                   0.401 0.477           0.485

        B. Counterfactuals              Change Pt (Agreet )            Change Only P1 (Agree1 )
                                     Low Medium High                   Low Medium             High
        Actual Probability           0.465 0.587 0.704                 0.465 0.587            0.704
        Counterfactual               0.738 0.725 0.704                 0.729 0.720            0.704
        Ratio                        1.588 1.234 1.000                 1.569 1.226            1.000

Notes: The first three columns in panel A shows agreement probabilities across rounds for 1st, 2nd, and
3rd terciles of mediators, ranked by their agreement fixed effects. The last three columns in panel A shows
continuation probabilities across rounds for 1st, 2nd, and 3rd terciles of mediators, ranked by their agreement
fixed effects. The first three columns in panel B shows counterfactual trade probabilities, assuming all
mediators' agreement probabilities are equal to agreement probabilities for the top tercile of mediators. The
last three columns in panel B shows counterfactual trade probabilities, assuming all mediators' first-round
agreement probabilities are equal to first-round agreement probabilities for the top tercile of mediators.


    Formally, this decomposition is an accounting identity; it does not rely on any eco-
nomic or statistical model of the world. Intuitively, however, the terms Pt (Agreet ) and
Pt (Contt | Disagreet ) can be thought of as representing "soft" versus "hard" behavior in
bargaining. Increases in Pt (Agreet ) are increases in "soft" behavior, in the sense that agents
back down and simply accept offers. Increases in Pt (Contt | Disagreet ) are increases in "per-
sistence", in the sense that agents do not agree more, but persist to round t + 1 rather than
giving up and leaving bargaining.
    In panel A of Table 3, we first show Pt (Agreet ) and Pt (Contt | Disagreet ) separately
for the top, middle, and bottom terciles of mediators (titled low, medium, and high ), ranked
by their estimated fixed effects for the probability of trade. We see that Pt (Agreet ) is
higher for better mediators. In round 1, low-skilled mediators achieve agreement 34% of
the time, medium-skilled mediators 51% of the time, and high-skilled mediators 67% of the
time. This increasing pattern holds true in each round of the game. In contrast, continuation
probabilities, Pt (Contt | Disagreet ), are not monotonically related to mediator skill, and in

                                                      24
most rounds are actually somewhat lower for higher-skilled mediators. In round 1, disagreeing
negotiating pairs continue on to the next round 64% of the time when the negotiation is
handled by a low-skilled mediator, 59% of the time under a medium-skilled mediator, and
only 40% of the time under a high-skilled mediator.
    Using our decomposition, we can also quantitatively measure the relative contributions
of agreement and continuation probabilities to increased bargaining success rates as follows.
Holding all continuation probabilities fixed at the level of low-skilled mediators, we change
agreement probabilities Pt (Agreet ) for each round to the level corresponding to high-skiled
mediators and then calculate the counterfactual bargaining success probability using expres-
sions (4) and (5). The results are shown in the first three columns of panel B of Table
3. We find that Pt (Agreet ) explains more than 100% of the effect of good mediators; that
is, effective mediators improve outcomes because they increase agreement probabilities, not
continuation probabilities.
    Finally, most of the effect can be explained purely using P1 (Agree1 ), the probability of
period 1 agreement. The last three columns of panel B of Table 3 shows counterfactual trade
probabilities, assuming we increase P1 (Agree1 ) to the round-1 agreement probability of high-
skilled mediators. The results suggest that the probability of agreement in the first round
explains over 100% of the effect of middle and top tercile probabilities, again consistent with
quicker agreement--not persistence--being the key explanatory factor in eventual success.



6     The Effect of Mediators on Welfare
In this section, we analyze the effects of mediator skill on welfare. In particular, we ask
whether mediators who achieve a higher probability of trade also achieve higher overall
efficiency as measured by their expected gains from trade, or whether instead these high-
trade-probability mediators are simply capturing low-surplus trades (i.e., cases where the
buyer values the car only slightly more than the seller, which adds little to overall efficiency).
For this analysis, we construct a structural model building on the incomplete-information,
mechanism design framework for bilateral trade of Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983).

                                               25
       For a given bargaining pair, we treat the buyer as having a private value, B  FB (with
density fB ), and the seller as having a private value, S  FS (with density fS ), where B and
S are assumed to be independent. We also assume that the actions observed in bargaining
sequences mediated by a given mediator represent play from a Bayes Nash equilibrium (BNE).
By the Revelation Principle (Myerson 1979), such an equilibrium has an equivalent direct
revelation mechanism in which agents truthfully report their types to a mechanism designer
who ensures outcomes occur as they would have had the original game played out. The key
function for summarizing any such mechanism is the allocation function, which specifies the
probability with which a given seller and buyer pair should trade.
       In the post-auction bargaining setting we study, a direct mechanism can be thought of as
x(s, b; pA ) = 1{b  g (s; pA )}, where g (·) is some function of the seller's value that, conditional
on the auction price P A being equal to pA , defines the region in (s, b) space where trade occurs
and where it does not.11 Larsen (2021) demonstrates that, in any BNE of this game, the
allocation function does indeed take this step-function form, and that the secret reserve price
is a strictly increasing function of s, which we denote r = (s). Hence, we can re-write
the allocation function as a function of r (which is observable to the econometrician) rather
than s, which is privately known only to the seller. The expected gains from trade in the
bargaining stage of the game under any mechanism x(r, b; pA ) can be computed as

                   b    b        s
                                         (b - s)x((s), b; pA )fS (s|pA )fB (b|pA )ds db fpA (pA )dpA ,         (6)
               b       b(pA )   s(pA )


                            fS (s)                               fB (b)
where fS (s|pA ) =       1-FS (s(pA ))
                                           and fB (b|pA ) =   1-FB (b(pA ))
                                                                              are the densities of seller and buyer
values conditional on the auction price P A and on bargaining occurring. The objects s(pA )
and b(pA ) are the lower bound on seller and buyer types, respectively, conditional on bar-
gaining occurring. The unconditional support of B is given by [b, b], and s is the upper
bound of the support of S . To estimate (6), we import estimates of these conditional den-
sities and supports from Larsen (2021). We depart from Larsen (2021), however, in that we
  11
   Throughout this section, we use uppercase letters to denote random variables and lowercase letters to
denote realizations.


                                                              26
estimate the mechanism x(r, b; pA ) separately for low-, medium-, and high-skilled mediators.
In essence, we allow for each of these three mediator skill types to be implementing a distinct
mechanism, allowing these mechanisms to differ in the gains from trade they achieve (i.e.
how efficient they are).
       To simplify exposition in the body of the paper, we ignore game-level heterogeneity in
explaining the identification and estimation of the function g . Let A be the event that
trade occurs. The function g in 1{b  g (r; pA )} is related to the conditional probability of
agreement as follows:

                                              A    1 - FB g (r, pA )
                                                     A
                             Pr(A|R = r, P = p ) =                   .                                    (7)
                                                      1 - FB (pA )

Given the objects R, P A , and A observed in data, the left-hand side of (7) can be non-
parametrically estimated; we use a tensor product of cubic b-splines. The object g (·) can
then be estimated given knowledge of FB (the distribution of buyer values) by inverting the
right-hand side. We perform estimation of g (·) separately for bargaining sequences in the
data handled by low-, medium-, and high-skilled mediators, and denote these estimates g L ,
g M , and g H .
       With these estimates in hand, we can evaluate total surplus, i.e. the gains from trade,
given by (6). To perform this step, we import estimated upper and lower bounds on FS
and point estimates of FB from Larsen (2021), who estimates these objects separately for
fleet/lease vs. dealer cars. We therefore estimate the mediator-specific allocation functions
-- g L , g M , and g H -- separately for fleet/lease vs. dealer cars. This requires merging our
identifiers of mediator ability with the data used in Larsen (2021), which only partially
overlaps with our data because some observations used in his study do not have mediator
identifiers, and some observations used in our paper do not have variables recorded that are
used in his analysis.12
       In practice, we implement a much more sophisticated estimation process than that de-
  12
    This merge yields the following samples of low-, medium-, and high-skilled mediators, respectively: 5,879,
9,113, and 6,483 in the dealers sample, and 1,006, 4,851, and 6,470 in the fleet/lease sample.



                                                     27
scribed by (7), allowing for heterogeneity at the game level that is observable to agents and
to the econometrician (such as the make, model, year, trim of the vehicle, as well as a rich set
of other characteristics), and also heterogeneity that is observable to agents but unobserved
to the econometrician (capturing features such as dents or odors in the car). We describe
the technical details for these estimation steps in Appendix B. An underlying assumption of
this analysis is that, after controlling for observed and unobserved game-level heterogeneity,
the distributions of seller and buyer valuations (FB and FS ) do not vary with the assigned
mediator, and thus these objects can be taking directly from Larsen (2021). It is only the
mechanism -- summarized by g L , g M , and g H -- that we allow to vary by mediator.13
       In addition to evaluating the gains from trade achieved in practice by each mediator type,
we also estimate, for comparison, the gains from trade that would be achieved if mediators
could implement the theoretically (ex-ante) efficient mechanism. Myerson and Satterthwaite
(1983) derived this mechanism under the condition that both bargaining parties (the buyer
and seller) have equal welfare weights. Williams (1987) extended this analysis, deriving the
theoretical Pareto frontier--a continuum of mechanisms that maximize the gains from trade
under different welfare weights for the buyer and seller.14 The first-best, ex-post-efficient
mechanism for bilateral trade is simply an indicator function for whether the buyer values
the good more than the seller. The seminal Myerson-Satterthwaite Theorem shows that this
first-best mechanism is infeasible whenever the supports of buyer and seller values overlap.15
Our estimates of mediator-specific mechanisms allow us to study whether better mediators,
as measured by their ability to achieve trade, are also able to move significantly closer to
the Pareto frontier, potentially overcoming some of the inefficiency inherent in incomplete-
  13
     As described in the Appendix B, the estimation of bounds on FS relies on the seller's decision to accept or
reject the auction price. For most sales, this decision occurs immediately following the auction, without any
mediated phone call taking place, but for about 20% of sales this decision could potentially be influenced by
the mediator, and our choice to hold FS fixed regardless of which mediator handles the negotiation abstracts
away from this possibility.
  14
     Williams (1987) shows that the Pareto frontier is a function of FS and FB , and demonstrates how to
compute the frontier in the case where these distributions satisfy regularity (Myerson 1981). Larsen (2021)
demonstrates how to compute the frontier in a way that is robust to nonregularity, and we follow this approach
here. Loertscher and Marx (2021) extends the theoretical analysis of Williams (1987) to the case of multiple
buyers/sellers.
  15
     Specifically, their impossibility result states that no individually rational, incentive-compatible mecha-
nism achieves ex-post efficiency while maintaining ex-ante budget balance.


                                                      28
information bargaining.

            Figure 7: Bargaining Relative to Second-Best and First-Best Frontiers
     (A) Dealers, Using Seller Lower Bound                (B) Fleet/lease, Using Seller Lower Bound




     (C) Dealers, Using Seller Upper Bound                (D) Fleet/lease, Using Seller Upper Bound




Notes: Each panel displays estimated expected seller and buyer surplus on the ex-post efficient frontier
(dashed line), on ex-ante efficient frontier (solid line), and in real-world bargaining under mediator skills
(solid dots, with low-skill in blue, medium-skill in red, and high-skill in yellow). Top panels use seller
distribution lower bound and bottom panels use seller distribution upper bound. Panels on left use dealers
sample and on right use fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.


    In Figure 7 we display the expected gains under each of the three mediator skill levels.
The dashed line shows the first-best (infeasible) frontier, corresponding to the outcome if
trade were to occur whenever the buyer values the car more than the seller. The solid line
shows the second-best frontier derived by Williams (1987). In each panel, the horizontal axis

                                                     29
represents the expected gains from trade of the seller and the vertical axis the expected gains
from trade of the buyer. We display these plots separately using the upper bound on FS and
lower bound on FS . The units are $1,000.
       We observe larger differences across skill groups for the fleet/lease sample (panels B and
D) than for the dealers sample (panels A and C). Figure 7 also suggests that efficiency
gains across mediator skill levels are primarily achieved by increasing the expected surplus
of the seller rather than the buyer. In the fleet/lease sample, we find that high-skilled
mediators achieve a level of efficiency that lies approximately on the second-best frontier
(and close to the first-best as well). This suggests that the most-effective mediators are
able to overcome much, if not all, of the inefficiency described in Myerson and Satterthwaite
(1983) and documented empirically in Larsen (2021).

                  Figure 8: Surplus Lost Relative to Ex-Post Efficient Bargaining
        (A) Dealers, Using Seller Lower Bound             (B) Fleet/lease, Using Seller Lower Bound




Notes: Each panel displays bounds on the difference in total welfare in the real-world mechanism and the
first-best (ex-post efficient bargaining), separately for negotiation sequences mediated by low, medium, or
high-skilled mediators. Dashed lines show 95% confidence bounds. Panel A uses the dealers sample and
panel B uses the fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.


       In Figure 8, we illustrate bounds on the gap between the first-best and the mechanism
implemented by each mediator type, along with 95% confidence intervals.16 These represent
  16
    These confidence bounds are constructed by taking 40 bootstrap replications of our estimation procedure
and reporting the 0.025 quantile of the estimated lower bound on the gap between the first-best and mediator
mechanism and the 0.975 quantile of the estimated upper bound on this gap.


                                                     30
bounds on the deadweight loss in bargaining: gains that real-world bargaining fails to achieve
but that would be realized in a first-best world because they correspond to a buyer valuing
the car more than the seller. A larger number in this figure thus represents a larger loss
relative to the first-best efficient outcome.
    In both panels, confidence intervals overlap between different mediator skill levels. This
overlap is consistent with the possibility that, even though some mediators systematically
achieve a higher probability of trade, they achieve similar outcomes as low-performing medi-
ators in terms of welfare; under this interpretation, their higher probability of trade would
come from realizing additional low-surplus trades missed by lower-skilled mediators.
    However, the estimated bounds also offer a story of better mediators improving efficiency.
In particular, the upper bound on the loss relative to first best is lower for high-skilled
than for low skilled mediators in both panels A and B (and drastically so in panel B, the
fleet/lease sample). For example, in panel A, we cannot rule out the possibility that low-
skilled mediators miss out on $2,000 of trade gains, but we can rule out this possibility to
medium- or high-skilled mediators. In panel B, the results are much starker: we can rule
out that high-skilled mediators lose any more than about $350 of surplus. This is consistent
with better-skilled mediators potentially significantly increasing overall welfare by realizing
high-surplus trades that low-skilled mediators fail to consummate.



7     Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown that mediators have statistically significant and economically
large effects on bargaining outcomes. Quantitatively, we find that the 75th percentile in-
termediary is 22% more likely to close a deal than the 25th percentile intermediary. Our
estimated mediator effects are robust to a variety of different controls, and are not driven by
sample noise.
    We proposed a way to decompose bargaining success into acceptance and continuation
probabilities, and show that effective mediators improve outcomes entirely through improv-
ing acceptance probabilities. This result suggests that, in our context, a higher likelihood of

                                                31
bargaining success comes from getting negotiating parties to agree more, not bargain longer
or harder; indeed, most of the effects can be explained by good mediators increasing the
probability of agreement soon or even immediately. These results suggest that better medi-
ators may be those who understand, early on in a negotiation, the propensity of a given pair
to agree.
       Our structural exercise demonstrated that better mediators can not only improve the
probability that agreement is reached, but can also have real effects on realized gains from
trade. Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) demonstrated that incomplete-information bilateral
bargaining generically results in deadweight losses--cases where a buyer values the item more
than the seller but they nonetheless fail to trade. These represent potential gains from trade
that are left on the table. Our findings in this paper demonstrate that, relative to low-
performing mediators, higher-performing mediators are able to execute a mechanism that
lies much closer to the efficient outcome. Implementing something close to the Myerson and
Satterthwaite (1983) second-best-efficient mechanism requires commitment on the part of the
mediator--the discipline to let some trades fail even when gains from trade exist in order to
preserve incentive compatibility.17 We see each of these key findings of our study as starting
points for future experimental, theoretical, and empirical work in incomplete-information
bargaining settings.


References
Ausubel, L. M. and Deneckere, R. J. (1992). Durable goods monopoly with incomplete
 information. Review of Economic Studies, 59(4):795­812.

Babcock, L. and Loewenstein, G. (1997). Explaining bargaining impasse: The role of self-
  serving biases. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(1):109­126.

Barwick, P. J. and Pathak, P. A. (2015). The costs of free entry: an empirical study of real
  estate agents in greater boston. RAND Journal of Economics, 46(1):103­145.

Basak, D. (2015). Transparency and delay in bargaining. Working paper, New York Univer-
  sity.
  17
    A similar force arises in the theoretical model of Fanning (2021), where a mediator improving efficiency
requires being able to commitment to not always let the parties trade even if when the mediator knows both
parties are privately in favor of it.

                                                    32
Bazerman, M. H., Neale, M. A., Valley, K. L., Zajac, E. J., and Kim, Y. M. (1992). The effect
  of agents and mediators on negotiation outcomes. Organizational Behavior and Human
  Decision Processes, 53(1):55­73.

Bercovitch, J. and Jackson, R. (2001). Negotiation or mediation?: An exploration of factors
  affecting the choice of conflict management in international conflict. Negotiation Journal,
  17(1):59­77.

Bochet, O., Khanna, M., and Siegenthaler, S. (2020). Beyond dividing the pie: An experi-
  mental study on bargaining over multiple issues. Available at SSRN 3414288.

Bruno, B., Garcia-Appendini, E., and Nocera, G. (2018). Experience and brokerage in asset
  markets: Evidence from art auctions. Financial Management, 47(4):833­864.

Copic, J. and Ponsati, C. (2008). Robust bilateral trade and mediated bargaining. Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3):570­580.

Cramton, P. C. (1992). Strategic delay in bargaining with two-sided uncertainty. Review of
  Economic Studies, 59(1):205­225.

Dixon, W. J. (1996). Third-party techniques for preventing conflict escalation and promoting
  peaceful settlement. International Organization, 50(4):653­681.

Eisenkopf, G. and Bachtiger, A. (2013). Mediation and conflict prevention. Journal of
  Conflict Resolution, 57(4):570­597.

Emery, R. E., Matthews, S. G., and Wyer, M. M. (1991). Child custody mediation and
 litigation: Further evidence on the differing views of mothers and fathers. Journal of
 consulting and clinical psychology, 59(3):410.

Fanning, J. (2021). Mediation in reputational bargaining. American Economic Review,
  111(8):2444­72.

Gallant, A. and Nychka, D. (1987). Semi-nonparametric maximum likelihood estimation.
 Econometrica, 55(2):363­390.

Gilbukh, S. and Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. (2021). Heterogeneous real estate agents and the
  housing cycle. Working paper, City University of New York.

Glode, V. and Opp, C. (2016). Asymmetric information and intermediation chains. American
  Economic Review, 106(9):2699­2721.

Goltsman, M., H¨orner, J., Pavlov, G., and Squintani, F. (2009). Mediation, arbitration and
 negotiation. Journal of Economic Theory, 144(4):1397­1420.

Gottardi, P. and Mezzetti, C. (2019). Mediation design. Working paper, University of
 Queensland.


                                             33
Gul, F., Sonnenschein, H., and Wilson, R. (1986). Foundations of dynamic monopoly and
 the Coase conjecture. Journal of Economic Theory, 39(1):155­190.

Haile, P., Hong, H., and Shum, M. (2003). Nonparametric tests for common values at first-
  price sealed-bid auctions. Working paper, Yale University.

H¨
 orner, J., Morelli, M., and Squintani, F. (2015). Mediation and peace. Review of Economic
  Studies, 82(4):1483­1501.

Jindal, P. and Newberry, P. (2020). The profitability of revenue-based quotas under price
  negotiation,. Working paper, Penn State. Forthcoming, Management Science.

Keniston, D. (2011). Bargaining and welfare: A dynamic structural analysis. Working Paper,
  Yale University.

Kim, J. Y. (2017). Interim third-party selection in bargaining. Games and Economic Behav-
  ior, 102:645­665.

Kim, S. (2020). Informed agent's advice: Theory and evidence. Working paper, University
  of Buffalo.

Kotlarski, I. (1967). On characterizing the gamma and normal distribution. Pacific Journal
 of Mathematics, 20(1):69­76.

Kydd, A. (2003). Which side are you on? Bias, credibility, and mediation. American Journal
 of Political Science, 47(4):597­611.

Lacetera, N., Larsen, B. J., Pope, D. G., and Sydnor, J. R. (2016). Bid takers or market
  makers? The effect of auctioneers on auction outcomes. American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics, 8(4):195­229.

Lang, M. (2020). Mechanism design with narratives. CESifo Working Paper 8502.

Larsen, B. and Zhang, A. L. (2018). A mechanism design approach to identification and
  estimation. NBER Working Paper 24837.

Larsen, B. J. (2021). The efficiency of real-world bargaining: Evidence from wholesale used-
  auto auctions. Review of Economic Studies, 88(2):851­882.

Loertscher, S. and Marx, L. M. (2021). Incomplete information bargaining with applications
  to mergers, investment, and vertical integration. Working paper, University of Melbourne.

McEwen, C. A. and Maiman, R. J. (1981). Small claims mediation in maine: An empirical
 assessment. Me. L. Rev., 33:237.

Myerson, R. and Satterthwaite, M. (1983). Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading. Journal
 of Economic Theory, 29(2):265­281.


                                             34
Myerson, R. B. (1979). Incentive compatibility and the bargaining problem. Econometrica:
 journal of the Econometric Society, pages 61­73.

Myerson, R. B. (1981). Optimal auction design. Mathematics of Operations Research,
 6(1):58­73.

Myerson, R. B. (2008). Perspectives on mechanism design in economic theory. American
 Economic Review, 98(3):586­603.

Neale, M. A. (1984). The effects of negotiation and arbitration cost salience on bargainer be-
  havior: The role of the arbitrator and constituency on negotiator judgment. Organizational
  Behavior and Human Performance, 34(1):97­111.

Robles-Garcia, C. (2020). Competition and incentives in mortgage markets: The role of
  brokers. Working paper, Stanford University.

Treece, J. B. (2013). Manheim exec: Why do so few sales at auctions close? Automotive News.
  Url: http://www.autonews.com/article/20131202/RETAIL04/312029992/manheim-exec-
  why-do-so-few-sales-at-auctions-close. Posted Dec. 2, 2013. Retrieved Dec. 2, 2013.

Valley, K., Thompson, L., Gibbons, R., and Bazerman, M. H. (2002). How communication
  improves efficiency in bargaining games. Games and Economic Behavior, 38(1):127­155.

Valley, K. L., White, S. B., Neale, M. A., and Bazerman, M. H. (1992). Agents as information
  brokers: The effects of information disclosure on negotiated outcomes. Organizational
  Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51(2):220­236.

Williams, S. (1987). Efficient performance in two-agent bargaining. Journal of Economic
 Theory, 41(1):154­172.

Yavas, A., Miceli, T. J., and Sirmans, C. (2001). An experimental analysis of the impact of
  intermediaries on the outcome of bargaining games. Real Estate Economics, 29(2):251­276.

Zhang, X. (2019). Efficient bargaining through a broker. Available at SSRN 2753074.




                                             35
A      An Alternative Test of Assignment
Here we offer an alternative test of how mediators are assigned to bargaining threads. We
begin by randomly shuffling a car-type (make-by-model) identifier across observations within
a given auction house location, year, and month. We repeat this 500 times. We perform this
same exercise but instead of car types we randomly shuffle buyers, and then we repeat the
exercise a third time shuffling sellers.
    In Figures A1, A2, and A3 respectively, we plot the number of unique car makes, buyers,
and sellers that a mediator interacts with in the real data, against the mean number of unique
car makes, buyers, and sellers that the mediator interacts with in the simulated data. Each
data point represents one mediator. If mediators are indeed randomly assigned to buyers, for
example, mediators should interact with roughly the same number of unique buyers in the
real data as in the shuffled data, so all points in Figure A2 should lie close to the 45-degree
line; conversely, if buyers are assigned mediators non-randomly, a mediator should see more
unique buyers in the shuffled dataset than in the real dataset. In this analysis, we separately
analyze assignment for cars in the fleet/lease vs. dealers subsamples.
    In Figures A1 and A2, most data points lie close to the y = x line, suggesting that the
assignment of mediators to car types and to buyers appears to be fairly random. On the other
hand, Figure A3 shows that mediators interact with fewer sellers in the real data than they
do in the shuffled dataset (particularly for fleet/lease cars), suggesting that the assignment
of mediators to sellers is less likely to be random, and highlighting the importance of the
seller fixed effects we include in our preferred specification (specification 5) of regression (3).




                                                36
                           Figure A1: Car Random Assignment Test

                   (A) Fleet/lease sample                      (B) Dealer sample




Notes: Each data point is a mediator. The x-axis shows the number of car make-models the mediator
interacts with in the data. The y-axis shows the mean number of car make-models the mediator interacts
with when assignments of car make-models to mediators are randomly reshuffled.

                          Figure A2: Buyer Random Assignment Test
                   (A) Fleet/lease sample                      (B) Dealer sample




Notes: Each data point is a mediator. The x-axis shows the number of buyers the mediator interacts with
in the data. The y-axis shows the mean number of buyers the mediator interacts with when assignments of
buyers to mediators are randomly reshuffled.




                                                  37
                           Figure A3: Seller Random Assignment Test
                    (A) Fleet/lease sample                      (B) Dealer sample




Notes: Each data point is a mediator. The x-axis shows the number of sellers the mediator interacts with
in the data. The y-axis shows the mean number of sellers the mediator interacts with when assignments of
sellers to mediators are randomly reshuffled.


B      Technical Details of Model Estimation
In this section, we describe the key pieces for estimating a distinct mechanism for low,
medium, and high-skilled mediators. This description largely follows Larsen (2021), and we
refer the reader to that paper for details on other estimation steps, including the distributions
of private valuations; we import these estimates directly from Larsen (2021) as they are not
specific to mediator skill.
    Let Rraw and P A,raw be random variables representing the reserve price and auction price
in the raw data, prior to any adjustments for heterogeneity. Let W be a random variable rep-
resenting game-level heterogeneity that is observable to players but not the econometrician.
Let X be a random variable representing game-level heterogeneity that is instead observed
by the econometrician and players, with X independent of W , S , and B . Let realizations of
Rraw , P A,raw , X , and W for game j be denoted by lowercase letters with subscript j . We
specify the total game-level heterogeneity (observed plus unobserved) for observation j to be
xj  + wj , where  is a vector of parameters to be estimated.
    We use a standard homogenization approach (Haile et al. 2003) to account for observable


                                                  38
heterogeneity by estimating the following joint regression of reserve prices and auction prices
on observables:
                                                                           
                                        raw
                                       rj              xj             r
                                                                      ~j
                                               =             +             ,                                 (8)
                                      pA,raw
                                       j               xj            ~A
                                                                     p j



where r              ~A
      ~j = rj + wj , p      A
                       j = pj + wj . The vector xj includes a rich set of controls.
                                                                                   18
                                                                                      An
                                                       raw
estimate of r
            ~j is then given by subtracting xj ^ from rj                       ~A
                                                           , and similarly for p j . Variation in

these two quantities can then be attributed to unobserved game-level heterogeneity and to
players' private values.
    To account for heterogeneity W in the game that is observed by the players but not by the
econometrician, we apply a result due to Kotlarski (1967), which implies that observations
   ~ = R + W and P
of R             ~ A = P A + W are sufficient to recover the densities fW , fR , and fP A . We

estimate these densities using a flexible maximum likelihood approach, where the likelihood
                         ~ P
of the joint density of (R, ~ A ) is given by


                    L(fP A , fR , fW ) =                 pA
                                                   fP A (~j - w )fR (~
                                                                     rj - w)fW (w)dw                         (9)
                                           j


We approximate each of the densities fP A , fR , and fW using fifth-order Hermite polynomials
   18
      We take our estimate of   ^ directly from Larsen (2021), who includes the following in xj : fifth-order
polynomials in the auction houses' blue-book estimate, the odometer reading, run number within an auction-
house-by-day combination, and the run number within an auction-house-by-day-by-lane combination (where
run number refers to the order in which cars are auctioned); the number of previous attempts to sell the car;
the number of pictures displayed online; a dummy for whether or not the odometer reading is considered
accurate, and the interaction of this dummy with the odometer reading; the interaction of the odometer
reading with car-make dummies; dummies for each make-model-year-trim-age combination (where age refers
to the age of the vehicle in years); dummies for condition report grade (ranging from 1-5, observed only for
fleet/lease vehicles); dummies for the year-month combination and for auction house location interacted with
hour of sale; dummies for 32 different vehicle damage categories recorded by the auction house; dummies
for each seller who appears in at least 500 observations; dummies for discrete odometer bins (four equally
sized bins for mileage in [0, 20000), eight equally sized bins for mileage in [20000, 100000), four equally sized
bins for mileage in [100000, 200000), one bin for mileage in [200000, 250000), and one bin for mileage greater
than 250000); several measures of the thickness of the market during a given sale. These market thickness
measures are computed as follows: for a given car on a given sale date at a given auction house, we compute
the number of remaining vehicles still in queue to be sold at the same auction house on the same day lying
in the same category as the car in consideration. The six categories we consider are make, make-by-model,
make-by-age, make-by-model-by-age, age, or seller identity.



                                                       39
(as in Gallant and Nychka 1987).
   Accounting for these heterogeneity components, the conditional probability of trade de-
scribed in (7) in the body of the paper becomes


          ~=r  ~A = p                1 - FB g (~      ~A - w)
                                               r - w, p                    Mg (~  ~A , w)
                                                                               r, p
     Pr(A|R ~, P    ~A ) =                                                                       dw      (10)
                                                  pA - w )
                                          1 - FB (~                        Mg (~  ~A , z )dz
                                                                               r, p

where Mg (~  ~A , w)  fR (~
          r, p                        pA - w)fW (w) is the joint density of (R, P A , W ). To ex-
                          r - w)fP A (~
                                                                  1-FB (g (r,pA ))
ploit the relationship in (10), we approximate hg (r, pA )          1-FB (pA )
                                                                                     using a flexible bilinear
spline parameterized by g , with 25 knots in each dimension, uniformly spaced between the
                             ~ and P
0.001 and 0.999 quantiles of R     ~ A . We estimate g using constrained least squares by

evaluating the left-hand side and right-hand side of (10) on a fixed grid of points and search-
ing for the parameters g to minimize the distance between the left- and right-hand sides.
                                                                ~=r
This requires first estimating the conditional probability Pr(A|R    ~A = p
                                                                  ~, P    ~A ), which we do
using a tensor product of cubic b-spline functions with fifteen uniformly spaced knots in each
dimension. With estimates of ^g , we then obtain g (r, pA ) = F -1 (1 - (1 - FB (pA ))hg (r, pA ; ^g )).
                                                               B

We perform this exercise separately using observations handled by low-, medium-, or high-
skilled mediators, to obtain estimates of g L , g M , and g H .
   The other objects required to evaluate the expected gains from trade in (6) are the distri-
butions FB and FS . Estimates of FB are obtained using a standard order statistics inversion,
and bounds on FS are obtained using rationality assumptions combined with observations of
the seller's decision to accept or reject the auction price. Bayes updating of agents' beliefs
translates these marginal distributions to distributions conditional on the auction price P A
and on the agents having arrived at the bargaining stage of the game. We refer the reader to
Larsen (2021) for details on these estimation steps, as well as nonparametric identification
proofs for each of these objects.




                                                  40
                   Table A1: Descriptive Statistics at Bargaining-Thread Level

                                     Mean               Std. Dev.     0.1 Quantile      0.9 Quantile
        Agreement reached              .747                .435              0                 1
        Final price ($)               5,678               4,747           1,000            12,300
        Bluebook price ($)            7,157               5,189           1,650            14,375
        Auction price ($)             5,604               4,720            900             12,100
        Reserve Price ($)             7,566               5,174           2,000             14,700
        # Offers in a thread           1.15                .462              1                 2
        Length of a thread (hours)     5.31                13.5            .369              7.73
        Fleet/lease car                  1                   0               1                 1
        Car age (years)                 5.6                3.31              2                10
        Mileage                      88,616              50,092          28,722            151,486
        Engine displacement (liters) 3.59                  1.56              2                5.7
        No. Threads                  37,266

Notes: This table shows the descriptive statistics of the fleet/lease sample at the thread level. Final price is
conditioned on trade occurring.




                   Table A2: Descriptive Statistics at Bargaining-Thread Level

                                     Mean              Std. Dev.      0.1 Quantile      0.9 Quantile
        Agreement reached              .448               .497               0                 1
        Final price ($)               5,636              5,227             800             13,400
        Bluebook price ($)            6,803              5,317            1,500            14,600
        Auction price ($)             5,552              5,112             800             13,100
        Reserve Price ($)             7,211              5,577            1,800             15,308
        # Offers in a thread           1.57               .789               1                 2
        Length of a thread (hours)     6.42               16.6             .286              21.5
        Fleet/lease car                  0                  0                0                 0
        Car age (years)               7.03                3.69               2                12
        Mileage                      97,439             50,877           31,884            162,438
        Engine displacement (liters) 3.62                 1.49               2                5.7
        No. Threads                  41,641

Notes: This table shows the descriptive statistics of the dealers sample at the thread level. Final price is
conditioned on trade occurring.




                                                      41
                         Figure A4: Assignment Test, Fleet/lease sample


                   (A) Agreement                                      (B) Leave-one-out Agreement




Notes: This figure shows coefficients from (2) estimated only on the fleet/lease subsample. Panel A shows
coefficients when the outcome is the main agreement indicator Yi . Panel B shows estimates from the same
                                                     ¯-i,k(i) as the dependent variable. We show 95%
regression but with the leave-one-out agreement rate Y
confidence intervals, computed by clustering at the mediator level.




                                                     42
                            Figure A5: Assignment Test, Dealer sample


                   (A) Agreement                                      (B) Leave-one-out Agreement




Notes: This figure shows coefficients from (2) estimated only on the dealers subsample. Panel A shows
coefficients when the outcome is the main agreement indicator Yi . Panel B shows estimates from the same
                                                     ¯-i,k(i) as the dependent variable. We show 95%
regression but with the leave-one-out agreement rate Y
confidence intervals, computed by clustering at the mediator level.




                                                     43
    Figure A6: Placebo Test of Heterogeneity from Sampling Error, Fleet/lease Sample


               (A) Probability of trade                                    (B) Final price




Notes: This figure presents placebo test results for the fleet/lease sample. Estimated distribution of fixed
effects from the actual data are shown in blue; placebo median and 95% pointwise confidence bands are
shown in black.


         Figure A7: Placebo Test of Heterogeneity from Sampling Error, Dealer Sample


               (A) Probability of trade                                    (B) Final price




Notes: This figure presents placebo test results for the dealer sample. Estimated distribution of fixed effects
from the actual data are shown in blue; placebo median and 95% pointwise confidence bands are shown in
black.




                                                      44
   Figure A8: Placebo Test of Heterogeneity from Sampling Error, Other Price Measures


         (A) Final Price Over Reserve Price                     (B) Final Price Over Auction Price




Notes: This figure presents placebo test results for the main sample, where the outcome of interest is the
final price divided by the reserve price in panel A and the final price divided by the auction price in panel
B. Estimated distribution of fixed effects from the actual data are shown in blue; placebo median and 95%
pointwise confidence bands are shown in black.




                                                     45
