                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             A WATERSHED MOMENT:
                     THE CLEAN WATER ACT AND INFANT HEALTH

                                         Patrick Flynn
                                       Michelle M. Marcus

                                       Working Paper 29152
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w29152


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2021




For their helpful comments, we thank Anna Aizer, Brian Beach, Lindsey Bullinger, Will
Wheeler, Barton Willage, and participants at the NBER Health Economics meeting and seminar
participants at Ball State, Singapore Management University, Tilburg University, and the
Vanderbilt Empirical Applied Microeconomics seminar. The authors have no relevant or material
financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Patrick Flynn and Michelle M. Marcus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Watershed Moment: The Clean Water Act and Infant Health
Patrick Flynn and Michelle M. Marcus
NBER Working Paper No. 29152
August 2021
JEL No. H51,I1,Q51,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

The Clean Water Act (CWA) significantly improved surface water quality, but at a cost
exceeding the estimated benefits. We quantify the effect of the CWA on a direct measure of
health and incorporate health benefits into a cost-benefit analysis. Using a difference-in-
differences framework, we compare health upstream and downstream from wastewater treatment
facilities before and after CWA grant receipt. Pollution only decreased downstream from
facilities required to upgrade their treatment technology, and we leverage this additional variation
with a triple difference. CWA grants increased average birth weight by 8 grams. A back-of-the-
envelope calculation bounds infant health benefits below $29 billion.


Patrick Flynn
415 Calhoun Hall
Vanderbilt University
United States
patrick.j.flynn@vanderbilt.edu

Michelle M. Marcus
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
310 Calhoun Hall
Nashville, TN 37240
and NBER
michelle.marcus@vanderbilt.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w29152
A Watershed Moment: The Clean Water Act and Infant
                     Health
               Patrick Flynn                           Michelle Marcus
            Vanderbilt University               Vanderbilt University and NBER
                                          August 6, 2021


                                               Abstract
            The Clean Water Act (CWA) significantly improved surface water quality, but at a
        cost exceeding the estimated benefits. We quantify the effect of the CWA on a direct
        measure of health and incorporate health benefits into a cost-benefit analysis. Using a
        difference-in-differences framework, we compare health upstream and downstream from
        wastewater treatment facilities before and after CWA grant receipt. Pollution only
        decreased downstream from facilities required to upgrade their treatment technology,
        and we leverage this additional variation with a triple difference. CWA grants increased
        average birth weight by 8 grams. A back-of-the-envelope calculation bounds infant
        health benefits below $29 billion.

      The Clean Water Act is a landmark, yet controversial, policy. Originally enacted in
1948 as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Congress significantly expanded the CWA
in 1972 to regulate the discharge of "point source" pollution (i.e. pollution that can be
traced back to a specific discharge point) into navigable waters. Improvements in water
quality stemming from the CWA have come at a high cost; projects funded through grants
to wastewater treatment facilities between 1960 and 2005 cost about $870 billion over their
lifetimes (in 2017 dollars) (Keiser and Shapiro, 2019b). In total, US government and industry
have spent over $1.9 trillion to abate surface water pollution (Keiser et al., 2019). Existing
cost-benefit analyses of the Clean Water Act estimate that the costs of this policy exceed
  
    Flynn: Department of Economics, Vanderbilt University (e-mail: patrick.j.flynn@vanderbilt.edu ).
   
    Marcus: Department of Economics, Vanderbilt University and Faculty Research Fellow at the National
Bureau of Economic Research (e-mail: michelle.marcus@vanderbilt.edu ). For their helpful comments, we
thank Anna Aizer, Brian Beach, Lindsey Bullinger, Will Wheeler, Barton Willage, and participants at the
NBER Health Economics meeting and seminar participants at Ball State, Singapore Management University,
Tilburg University, and the Vanderbilt Empirical Applied Microeconomics seminar. All remaining errors are
our own.

                                                   1
its benefits (e.g. Lyon and Farrow (1995); Freeman (2010); Keiser et al. (2019)), but these
analyses have not generally included improvements in health caused by the Clean Water Act
because there has not been a systematic ex-post measurement of the health benefits of the
CWA.
       Incorporating health benefits into a cost-benefit analysis may matter for a number of
reasons. Historically, policies targeting improvements in child health generate high returns
to public funds (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2020), and previous economics literature shows
that even small increases in child and infant health can lead to large improvements in later
life outcomes.1 Health benefits often account for a large portion of the total benefits of
environmental regulation, with health effects accounting for over 95 percent of all benefits
of air pollution regulation (Keiser et al., 2019).
       To our knowledge, this paper is the first to incorporate infant health benefits into a cost-
benefit analysis of the CWA and consider how health effects might alter the cost-benefit
ratio of the policy. We quantify these effects using a difference-in-differences framework that
compares infant health outcomes upstream and downstream from wastewater treatment fa-
cilities before and after the facility receives a CWA grant. Comparing up and downstream
births addresses the endogenous distribution of grants as well as any economic shocks caused
by grant receipt, however, estimates may still be biased if individuals sort into downstream
areas or if these areas experience differential trends relative to upstream areas after grant
receipt. To address this concern, we show that improvements in surface water quality as-
sociated with CWA grants are only driven by facilities that were required to upgrade their
treatment technology to comply with new treatment technology standards. This finding mo-
tivates a triple difference design that uses counties up and downstream from facilities where
these treatment technology requirements were not binding as an additional control group.
By using already compliant facilities that receive grants as an additional control group, we

1
    For example, Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004) documents the effect of intrauterine nutrient intake on adult
    health and earnings and Royer (2009) finds cross-generational effects of low birth weight. Comparing lighter
    and heavier twins, Black et al. (2007) shows that a 10 percent increase in birth weight reduces one year
    mortality by approximately five deaths per 1,000 births. It is also associated with a 1 percent increase in
    adult earnings. Also comparing twins, Figlio et al. (2014) finds that a ten percent increase in birth weight
    is associated with a one twentieth standard deviation increase in high school test scores. Additionally,
    hospital stays for regular weight births are, on average, $8319 cheaper than those for low birth weight
    births (Almond et al., 2005).


                                                        2
can account for differential sorting into downstream areas after grant receipt, so the health
benefits we capture with this design are likely caused by improvements in water quality.
   Existing economics research estimates the benefits of improved surface water using hedo-
nic analysis that measures the effect of CWA grants on nearby housing prices. Comparing
areas up and downstream from wastewater treatment facilities, Keiser and Shapiro (2019a)
find that the CWA's grant program led to a reduction in downstream pollution. These im-
provements in water quality were capitalized into housing prices, but the increases in home
values were substantially smaller than the CWA's costs. By quantifying how downstream
residents value water quality, Keiser and Shapiro (2019a) improve upon previous cost-benefit
calculations that only account for changes in pollution, however, as noted in Keiser et al.
(2019), hedonic analysis assumes housing values reflect the implicit value that households
place on the quality of nearby surface water. If households are uninformed about nearby
surface water quality or do not understand the benefits of reduced surface water pollution,
housing values will not reflect the health benefits of the program. In this historic context,
it is unlikely that households fully understood the range and extent of the negative health
effects from surface water contamination, especially the negative impacts on developing fe-
tuses in utero. By directly estimating the health effects of the CWA, our results complement
those in Keiser and Shapiro (2019a) by quantifying one of the largest benefits of the CWA
that hedonic analysis is least likely to capture.
   Public water systems, including those that draw from a surface water source such as a lake
or river, often violate health-based water quality standards, and there is evidence that these
violations impact infant and child health (Currie et al., 2013; Grossman and Slusky, 2019;
Marcus, 2019). A report by the US Geological Survey (USGS) found that more than one in
five source-water samples from public water systems contained one or more contaminants at
concentrations dangerous to human health. In an analysis of matched water samples from
94 water sources and their associated public water systems, the same organic contaminants
detected in source water consistently appeared at similar concentrations in drinking water
after treatment (Toccalino and Hopple, 2010), suggesting that policies targeting improve-
ments in surface water quality may have important impacts on health. At the time the CWA
came into effect, surface waters were still very polluted; Smith and Wolloh (2012) estimate


                                               3
that 35 percent of lakes were too polluted to safely swim in in 1975. With over 70 percent
of community water system users receiving drinking water from a surface water source as
of 1970 (Dieter, 2018), addressing surface water pollution was likely to reduce exposure to
contaminated drinking water. For infants in utero, this could have affected birth weight
directly, by reducing fetal exposure to contaminants that affect development, and indirectly,
by reducing the likelihood that a mother will become ill while pregnant.
   We expect grants to lead to the largest surface water quality improvements in areas
downstream from facilities that had not yet upgraded to new treatment technology required
by the CWA. We find that CWA grants are only associated with a statistically significant
decline in dissolved oxygen deficit, a common measure of surface water quality, for waters
downstream from facilities for which the new treatment technology requirement was binding.
These declines are statistically larger than changes to water quality downstream from all
other facilities. We leverage this variation in treatment technology in a triple difference
specification that uses births near facilities where CWA treatment technology requirements
were not binding as an additional control group.
   Across specifications, we consistently find that CWA grants had a statistically significant
impact on downstream birth weight. Our results show that reductions in surface water
pollution from the CWA are associated with an 8 gram increase in average birth weight.
The magnitude of this effect is the same as the estimated effect of stress in utero due to
nearby landmine explosions on birth weight (Camacho, 2008). Using data on public water
systems sources, we show that these results are driven by counties whose public water systems
draw from surface rather than groundwater, suggesting that these improvements in infant
health are primarily driven by reductions in exposure to contaminated drinking water.
   Our results, along with those in Alsan and Goldin (2019), demonstrate that treatment at
drinking water plants is not the only way to improve health through water policy. Until now,
evidence of the complementarity between drinking water initiatives and sewerage improve-
ments, along with most of our understanding of the effect of water quality on human health,
came primarily from studies of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century (Troesken,
2001, 2002; Cutler and Miller, 2005; Beach et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2020). By studying
the CWA, which came into effect long after filtration and chlorination of drinking water


                                              4
became widespread, we show that the complementarity between clean water and sewerage
policies holds well into the twentieth century and is not limited to settings where drinking
water is untreated.
    While the monetary benefits of improvements to infant health are substantial, incorporat-
ing infant health alone does not alter the conclusion of a cost-benefit analysis of the CWA. A
back-of-the-envelope calculation bounds the monetary benefits of the CWA on infant health
under 29 billion dollars, 19 percent of the amount necessary to consider the Clean Water Act
grants program cost-effective. For grant funds targeted towards facilities requiring upgrades
to treatment technology, which experienced the largest improvements in downstream water
quality, the infant health benefits alone account for as much as 29 percent of the amount
necessary for grants to be considered cost effective. It is important to note that this anal-
ysis incorporates just one of potentially many dimensions of health impacted by the CWA.
Including other health outcomes, such as reduced hospital admissions, reduced school ab-
sences, and health effects for adolescents and adults would likely improve this benefit/cost
ratio further and should be the subject of future research.



1     Background
    The transition to public provision of drinking water in the late nineteenth century led to
large reductions in diarrheal diseases and typhoid fever, and occurred when urban mortality
rates fell more rapidly than at any other time in US history (Ferrie and Troesken, 2008). Early
drinking water interventions, such as water filtration, contributed in part to this reduction in
mortality (Cutler and Miller, 2005; Anderson et al., 2020). The effects of reduced exposure to
contaminated water in utero and childhood can persist throughout life; for example, Beach
et al. (2016) find that eradicating early-life exposure to typhoid fever would have increased
earnings in later life by one percent and increased average educational attainment by one
month.
    Examining water policy in early 20th century Massachusetts, Alsan and Goldin (2019)
show that these historical reductions in mortality were driven by a combination of clean water
initiatives, which removed contaminants at drinking water treatment plants before distribut-


                                               5
ing water for consumption and washing, and effective sewerage, which reduced contamination
of drinking water at the source. Watson (2006) shows that federal sanitation policies explain
much of the convergence in Native American and White infant mortality rates in the US
since 1970, demonstrating that, at least in in certain contexts, this complementarity holds
into the later 20th century. By improving sewerage systems and reducing pollution of source
water throughout the US at a time when almost all publicly provided drinking water was
treated, the CWA provides a new context to examine the complementarity between sewerage
infrastructure and clean water nationwide.
      The Clean Water Act aimed to slow the flow of contaminants from point sources, such as
municipal waste treatment facilities and industrial pollution sources, into rivers and lakes.
The CWA required all industrial polluters to obtain a permit from the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) before discharging waste water.2 Although much
of the contamination of US waterways comes from sources that cannot be traced back to a
specific facility, such as agricultural runoff, the Clean Water Act did not directly regulate
these "non-point" pollution sources. The CWA did not directly regulate drinking water
supplies either; drinking water is regulated through the Safe Drinking Water Act, which sets
minimum standards for drinking water quality that apply to every public water system in
the United States.
      This paper focuses on the part of the CWA regarding municipal waste treatment, where
the policy had different effects across facilities and time. Most communities in the US
employ a system of sewers and wastewater treatment plants where sewers collect municipal
wastewater from homes, businesses and industries and deliver it to wastewater treatment
facilities for treatment and discharge into local waterways (USEPA, 2004). Municipal waste
is almost entirely organic (Hines, 1966), and microorganisms from human sewage can cause a
range of gastrointestinal illnesses and infections (Reynolds et al., 2008). The CWA addressed
pollution from municipal waste treatment plants through two arms: grants to wastewater
treatment facilities, and regulation of wastewater treatment technology. Newly combined
data on which facilities were bound by new treatment technology requirements and the

2
    Regulation through the NPDES led to reductions in both profits (Rassier and Earnhart, 2010) and the
    number of environmental employees (Raff and Earnhart, 2019) at newly regulated polluters.



                                                    6
placement and timing of grants facilitate our research design.


1.1    Grants

   From 1972 to 1988, the EPA distributed an estimated $153 billion (in 2014 dollars)
worth of grants to municipal governments for capital upgrades to wastewater treatment
facilities. The EPA allocated CWA grant money to states according to a formula based on
total population, forecast population, and wastewater treatment needs (Rubin, 1985). States
then distributed grants to municipalities according to priority lists based on the severity of
nearby surface water pollution, the size of the population affected, the need for conservation
of the affected waterway, and that waterway's specific category of need (USEPA, 1980).
   Since state governments wrote their own priority lists, they had some discretion about
where they distributed funds, so it is unlikely that we can treat grant placement as random.
Grants themselves could also cause increases in birth weight that are unrelated to changes
in pollution by improving economic conditions with an influx of federal dollars. Instead of
treating grant timing and location as exogenous, we compare the difference in birth outcomes
in areas up and downstream from a given wastewater treatment facility before and after grant
receipt between facilities that were required to make treatment technology upgrades and all
other facilities. To the extent that other policies were changing during this time period, and
that grants improved local economic conditions, these changes were likely to affect upstream
and downstream areas similarly.


1.2    Regulation

   In 1972, about a quarter of all US municipal wastewater treatment facilities reported
using relatively inexpensive, but less effective, primary treatment (USEPA, 2000). Primary
treatment, depicted in Figure 1a, forces wastewater through a series of screens to remove
large debris, then allows organic material to settle out in sedimentation tanks. While this
removes large detritus and heavy biosolids, it still discharges all but the heaviest organic
material into waterways (USEPA, 1998).
   The Clean Water Act required all municipal treatment plants to upgrade to secondary


                                              7
treatment by 1977.3 Plants use secondary treatment technology, shown in Figure 1b, in
addition to primary treatment. After screens filter out large debris, wastewater sits in an
aeration tank where bacteria in the water consume organic material. Secondary treatment
removes about 85 percent of organic matter from wastewater, much more than primary treat-
ment removes. Effluent from secondary treatment is also usually disinfected with chlorine
before it is discharged into receiving waters, which kills more than 99 percent of harmful
bacteria (USEPA, 1998). Additionally, many states required facilities to meet more stringent
treatment technology requirements than the CWA's mandate (USEPA, 2000).
       The potential benefits of upgrading a facility's treatment technology were well under-
stood, but waste treatment capital upgrades were expensive. The National Environmental
Research Center estimated that upgrading to secondary treatment technology could increase
a facility's operating costs by up to 60 percent and require capital investments of as much
as 30 percent of the initial cost of the facility (National Environmental Research Center,
1972). Because of these costs, 53 percent of plants in the 1972 Clean Watershed Needs
Survey (CWNS) were not in compliance with both state and federal treatment technology
mandates.
       Treatment plants that were not in compliance with both state and federal capital man-
dates in 1972, which we refer to as "non-compliant" facilities, had a strong incentive to
use CWA grants to offset the costs of upgrading their treatment technology.4 Permits dis-
tributed to polluters through the NPDES required municipal treatment plants to satisfy the
treatment technology mandate, and violating the terms of a permit resulted in a compliance
order or civil suit by the EPA. Violators could be fined up to $25,000 per day (Copeland,
2016).
       Many facilities already in compliance with both state and federal mandates still received
CWA grants. While these facilities could still make capital improvements, such as increasing

3
    This goal was not met by 1977, however almost all facilities used at least secondary treatment technology
    by the end of our study period. In 1988, only 48 of the over 17,000 wastewater treatment facilities in the US
    were using only primary treatment, and these 48 facilities served less than one percent of the US population
    (Daigger, 1998).
4
    In early work, Flynn and Smith (2021) show that grants to non-compliant municipalities led to a dollar for
    dollar increase in sewerage capital spending up to the point where facilities were in compliance with new
    treatment technology standards.



                                                         8
capacity, they had relatively little incentive to do so. Since the CWA did not mandate these
upgrades, there was no binding constraint requiring these facilities to spend grant money on
sewerage capital upgrades, and the municipalities that operated them faced pressure to use
grant money to offset the operating costs of their water and sewerage utilities in an attempt
to lower costs for consumers and become more competitive (Daigger, 1998).5
       Since non-compliant facilities had a clear channel through which to improve surface water
quality and were more likely to spend CWA grant money on capital upgrades, we expect
the reductions in downstream pollution associated with CWA grants to be largest for non-
compliant facilities. This motivates a triple difference design that uses areas near facilities
that were not indicated as pre-CWA non-compliant in the 1972 CWNS as an additional
control group.



2        Data
CWA Grants and Municipal Wastewater Treatment Plants
       We obtain data on all 33,429 grants that the EPA distributed to 14,285 wastewater
treatment plants from the EPA's Grant Information Control System. Most facilities received
multiple grants, so we define a facility as "treated" after it receives its first CWA grant.
Treatment is an absorbing state.
       Using a unique facility code, we merge grant data with the Clean Watershed Needs Survey.
The CWNS is an assessment of the capital investment needed nationwide for publicly-owned
wastewater treatment facilities to meet the water quality goals of the Clean Water Act.
This linked data provides information on a facility's geographic location, whether or not it
received a grant and when, and whether the facility was in compliance with state and federal
capital mandates in 1972.6

5
    Flynn and Smith (2021) find evidence that CWA grants to facilities already in compliance with state and
    federal capital mandates crowded out funds that municipalities were already spending on sewerage capital
    rather than causing an increase in sewerage capital spending.
6
    There are 1,930 facilities in our analysis sample that are missing data on pre-CWA treatment technology.
    We assume that these facilities were already in compliance with state and federal treatment technology
    requirements. Throughout the paper, we refer to the set of "compliant" facilities, which includes all facilities
    that were not explicitly "non-compliant" in the 1972 CWNS. Our results are similar when we exclude
    facilities with missing information on treatment technology.


                                                          9
Spatial Data on Waterways
      We define treatment in terms of the flow direction of waterways. We determine if an area
is up or downstream from a facility with the National Hydrography Data Set, an electronic
atlas that maps the location and flow direction of all waterways in the contiguous United
States.
      We follow both the EPA and other researchers studying the Clean Water Act by focusing
on areas 25 miles up and downstream from treatment facilities.7 Keiser and Shapiro (2019a)
finds that changes in pollution levels associated with CWA grants are concentrated within
25 miles downstream of wastewater treatment plants. Similarly, this is the distance used
by an EPA engineering study on the spread of contaminants from point sources (USEPA,
2001). We define a county as downstream if it contains any waterway that is within 25 miles
downstream of a treated facility.

Water Pollution
      We examine how CWA grants affected trends in downstream pollution and the rela-
tionship between pre-CWA wastewater treatment technology and downstream surface water
quality with pollution data from STORET legacy, which includes over 200 million readings
from pollution monitoring stations across the US.8 We include readings from pollution mon-
itors on rivers and lakes located 25 miles up or downstream from any facility in the CWNS
data.
      We focus on changes in dissolved oxygen deficit, a continuous measure of water quality
defined as 100 minus dissolved oxygen saturation (dissolved oxygen level divided by water's
maximum oxygen level).9 Water loses dissolved oxygen when microorganisms consume oxy-
gen to decompose pollution. Since upgrading treatment technology reduces the amount of
organic material released by a facility, we expect treatment technology upgrades to decrease
downstream dissolved oxygen deficit.

7
    Table A4 shows that our results are robust to concentrating on areas 5 or 10 miles downstream from
    treatment facilities.
8
    We follow the data cleaning steps laid out in the appendix of Keiser and Shapiro (2019a).
9
    Dissolved oxygen deficit is one of the most common measures of omnibus water pollution in research, and
    it responds to a wide variety of pollutants (Keiser and Shapiro, 2019a).


                                                      10
Infant Health
       We use birth certificate data from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) to
measure infant health. These data contain information on birth weight, as well as birth
order and mother's age and race. NCHS data also contain county of residence for each birth,
which allows us to link births to CWA treatment.10 Table 1 presents summary statistics
for births in 1970, two years before the first CWA grants were distributed, from up and
downstream counties, as well births in counties that drew at least some drinking water from
a surface water source, and counties that drew exclusively from groundwater. These means
are calculated from micro data on individual level births.
       We collapse birth weight data to county means, calculating the average birth weight,
the probability of low birth weight (less than 2500 grams), the percent of non-white births,
average mother's age, and the probability of being a mother's first, second, third, or fourth
or higher birth in each county year.11

Population Density
       We expect the health effects of improved surface water quality to be concentrated near
treated waterways. The exposed fraction of a county's population depends on the number
of individuals living near a treated waterway, so defining treatment in a binary way at the
county level would include many untreated births in our treatment group.12 This could cause

10
     Data in years prior to 1972 constitutes a 50 percent random sample of all births in the US. Years after
     1972 contain information on every birth in the US from some states, and a 50 percent sample from the
     remaining states. Six states had full sample data in 1972, and all states and the District of Columbia had
     full sample data by 1985. Table A10 shows the year in which each state switched to a full sample. To
     ensure that our results are not driven by the changes in samples, we re-estimate our main specifications on
     a data set that takes a 50 percent sample of births from state-years that report full sample data in Figure
     A3 and Table A11.
     While exact address of where children are born is available in some states, this information is not collected
     nationally and not all states record or allow researchers to access this information. Importantly for the
     CWA context, addresses are generally not available until the 1990s, after the adoption of the 1989 US
     Standard Birth Certificate revision and the use of electronic birth certificates. We were only able to find
     address data from the 1970s from Florida, but the field was missing for too many births to use these data
     reliably.
11
     We also calculate county means of one year mortality using data from NCHS (National Center for Health
     Statistics, 1968-1988b). We find no significant effect of CWA grants on this outcome in Table A3, however
     our estimates are imprecise. Gestation is not consistently recorded in our sample, so we cannot repeat our
     analysis with gestation length or pre-term birth as the dependent variable.
12
     We see similar but attenuated results if we define treatment with a binary variable. We present these


                                                         11
our reduced form estimates to understate the CWA's true effect. Instead, we use 1990 census
block population density data from the US Census Bureau to scale our results by the percent
of a county's population living within a mile of a treated waterway.13 Figure 2 shows the
distribution of this treatment measure.



3        First Stage: Water Pollution

3.1        Methods

       Before comparing birth outcomes up and downstream from wastewater treatment facil-
ities, we examine the first stage relationship between grant receipt and downstream water
quality with equation 1.




                                Qpdy = gpy  dd + Wpdy + py + pd +              pdy                         (1)


       Qpdy is a measure of dissolved oxygen deficit and gpy equals one after a facility receives its
first CWA grant. There are two observations for each treatment plant p for each year y , which
describe average dissolved oxygen deficit upstream (dd = 0) and downstream (dd = 1) from
that plant. Since dissolved oxygen deficit varies inversely with temperature, Wpdy measures
water temperature.
       We include plant-by-downstream and plant-by-year fixed effects, pd and py , respec-
tively. Plant-by-downstream fixed effects allow waters up and downstream from a given
wastewater treatment plant to have different mean levels of dissolved oxygen deficit, which
controls for pollution sources that are only up or downstream from a plant that are con-

     results in the Appendix.
13
     We use data from 1990, because it is the first census for which population density data is available at
     the census block level. Table A5 shows that our results are robust to scaling by the percent of a county's
     population living within other bandwidths around treated waterways. In the appendix, we also leverage
     information on the location of community water system service areas to define the treated population as
     the percent of the county's population served by a public drinking water system that is near a treated
     waterway. Despite a large reduction in sample size due to missing data on water system service areas, our
     results are robust to this alternate definition.



                                                       12
stant over time. Plant-by-year fixed effects ensure that we are only comparing waters up
and downstream from the same facility, which controls for any time variant shocks that
affect waters both up and downstream from a facility. All standard errors in our pollution
estimates are clustered at the facility level.
       These estimates give us a sense of how grants and regulations worked together by seeing
whether pollution evolved differently in waters downstream from non-compliant facilities and
compliant facilities following grant receipt.


3.2        Pollution Results

       Table 2 estimates the effect of CWA grant receipt on downstream water quality. Columns
1-3 present estimates of equation 1 on the full sample, non-compliant facilities, and com-
pliant facilities, respectively. Column 4 presents coefficients from the associated triple dif-
ference. Dissolved oxygen deficit only decreased significantly in water downstream from
non-compliant facilities, and the effect size for non-compliant facilities is consistent with the
decrease in dissolved oxygen deficit downstream from any facility that received a CWA grant
found in Keiser and Shapiro (2019a). Since dissolved oxygen deficit is defined as 100 minus
dissolved oxygen saturation, this result show that waters downstream from non-compliant
facilities had a 1.6 percentage point higher dissolved oxygen saturation after grant receipt
relative to waters upstream from the same facility. This represents a 2 percent increase
relative to a mean of 79 percent oxygen saturation in our sample. The coefficient for wa-
ters downstream from compliant facilities in column 2 is small and statistically insignificant,
and the reduction in dissolved oxygen deficit downstream from non-compliant facilities is
statistically larger than any change downstream from compliant facilities, as shown by the
significant negative triple difference coefficient in column 4.
       Figure 3 presents results from the event study corresponding to the triple difference in
column 4.14 This figure shows that reductions to downstream pollution were significantly
larger in waters downstream from non-compliant facilities relative to compliant facilities.

14
     In all of our event studies, we report coefficients for four years before and eight years after grant receipt,
     which allows us to only report balanced coefficients in our infant health specifications. These specifications
     also includes bins for five or more years before the grant and nine or more years after the grant, but our
     results are not sensitive to this choice of binning.


                                                         13
In addition, there does not appear to be any trend in pollution prior to grant receipt,
which might have arisen from complaint facilities early adoption of more advanced treatment
technology. In the analysis of the impact of CWA grants on infant health that follows, we
leverage this comparison between non-compliant and compliant facilities in a triple difference
specification.



4     Infant Health

4.1    Methods

    We begin our reduced-form analysis of the impact of CWA grants on infant health with
the most general specification by comparing birth outcomes in counties downstream from
treated facilities to all other areas. We check for the existence of parallel trends in birth
outcomes prior to treatment and examine how infant health evolved in counties downstream
from treated facilities after grant receipt with the following event study

                 -2                            9
                                                             
       Ycy =          t 1{y -   yc   = t} +         t 1{y - yc = t}  pctcy + Xcy + c + y +   cy   (2)
               t=-5                           t=0


                                                                     
where Ycy is an average birth outcome in county c in year y , 1{y - yc = t} measures time
relative to county c being downstream from a facility that received a grant, and pctcy is
the percent of county c's population living within a mile of a treated waterway in year y .
Controls in Xcy include the percent of births that were a mother's first, second, third, or
fourth, and county averages of mother's age and race. c and y are county and year fixed
effects. Observations are at the county-year level and standard errors are clustered at the
county level. Since we collapse birth weight data to county means, we weight all of our
results by the total number of births that occurred in a county-year.
    After presenting this flexible framework, we impose a difference-in-difference structure
with equation 3.


                                     Ycy = pctcy + Xcy + c + y +        cy                        (3)



                                                        14
This compares birth weight between counties downstream from any facility that received a
grant and all other counties.
       The presence of local area trends specific to a facility's location could mean that an
upstream county is only a good counterfactual for a county located downstream from the
same facility. We address this concern in our next specification by collapsing our data to
the facility rather than the county level. The outcome variable of interest is now Ypy , the
mean birth weight in all counties downstream from a facility minus the mean birth weight
in all counties upstream from the same facility in each year. We estimate the following
specification15


                                    Ypy = pctpy + Xpy + p + y +                  py                        (4)


where p indexes facilities, and pctpy measures the percent of downstream counties' popula-
tions living within a mile of a treated waterway. We include facility and year fixed effects,
p and y , respectively.16 Standard errors are clustered at the facility level.
       This specification assumes that, in the absence of grant receipt, birth outcomes would
have evolved similarly in areas up and downstream from the same facility after grant receipt.
This assumption would be violated if, for example, downstream areas were experiencing
greater economic growth relative to upstream areas, even in the absence of CWA grants.
       To address concerns regarding differential trends in downstream relative to upstream
areas in terms of economic growth or positive sorting of households into downstream areas,
we employ a triple difference design.

                DD
          Ypy = 0  pctpy +  DDD pctpy  tp + Xpy + Xpy  tp + y  tp + p + y +                          py    (5)


       In this specification, the first difference comes from where and when CWA grants were
distributed, the second comes from if a birth occurred up or downstream from a wastewater

15
     This specification is similar to adding facility-by-year fixed effects to equation 3.
16
     Controls in facility-level specifications are averages from all births in up and downstream counties. Our
     results are robust to controlling for the difference between average demographic characteristics in up and
     downstream counties instead.



                                                          15
treatment facility, and the third difference comes from the facility's compliance with the
required treatment technology mandate.
   Keiser and Shapiro (2019a) show that downstream housing prices increase after grant
receipt, which may cause healthier mothers to sort into downstream communities. Our
triple difference design addresses this concern; even if grants are placed endogenously, or if
individuals sort into downstream communities, so long as the sorting pattern induced by
grant receipt is similar for both compliant and non-compliant facilities, using compliance as
a third difference will capture unobserved changes to up and downstream counties occurring
contemporaneously with CWA grants.
   We test this assumption by exploring how maternal characteristics evolve relative to grant
timing in upstream and downstream areas across non-compliant and compliant facilities.
Table 3 estimates the effect of treatment on demographic characteristics that are correlated
with birth weight, such as race, age, and birth order, by estimating


                               xpy = pctpy + p + y +        py                              (6)


where xpy is the difference between demographic characteristic in counties up and down-
stream from facility p in year y . Column 1 of Table 3 estimates this equation on non-
compliant facilities and column 2 reports the result from estimating the same specification
on compliant facilities. Column 3 presents results from the associated triple difference.
   Columns 1 and 2 show that areas downstream from facilities that received CWA grants
had smaller non-white populations, slightly older mothers, and fewer higher order births.
While we control for these demographic characteristics directly, there might have also been
shifts in unobservable characteristics of individuals downstream relative to upstream follow-
ing grants, which could bias specifications that rely only on comparisons between up and
downstream communities. These changes in demographic characteristics downstream are
very similar across non-compliant and compliant facilities. The triple difference coefficients
presented in column 3 are small and statistically insignificant for all observed demographic
outcomes, indicating that there was no observable differential sorting into downstream areas
across non-compliant and compliant facilities after grant receipt. These results provide some


                                             16
evidence that the identification assumption for the triple difference specification is likely to
hold.


4.2     Infant Health Results

   Figure 4a presents event study coefficients from estimating equation 2 with county average
birth weight as the dependent variable. The precisely estimated null effects in the four years
before grant receipt support a research design that leverages location on a waterway relative
to wastewater treatment facilities by showing the existence of parallel trends in birth weight
in up and downstream communities prior to treatment. The estimates begin to increase
shortly after the arrival of CWA grants, and continue to rise after treatment.
   The impact of the CWA on birth weight may not be uniform across the distribution of
birth weight. Even though Figure 4a shows a modest increase in average birth weight, the
overall health of the population may improve substantially if there are fewer low birth weight
infants. Figure 4b presents event study coefficients from re-estimating equation 2 with the
probability of low birth weight as the dependent variable. There is no evidence of a pre-trend
and, similar to the results in Figure 4a, we see a small decrease in the probability of low
birth weight after treatment.
   Panel A of Table 4 shows that the effects on birth weight are robust across a variety
of specifications. Column 1 compares births in counties downstream from grant facilities
to those in any other county by estimating equation 3 using a sample of births from every
county in the contiguous US. Column 2 adds demographic controls to this specification, which
reduces the magnitude of the estimate by about half. Since births occurring in counties that
are not near wastewater treatment facilities might not make a good control group, column 3
excludes counties that are not up or downstream from a wastewater treatment facility. This
compares births in a downstream county to those in any upstream county, and the results
are similar to those from the full sample.
   Counties upstream from the same facility are likely to make even better counterfactuals
for downstream counties than counties upstream from any facility. Column 4 estimates
equation 4, which compares birth weight in counties up and downstream from the same
facility. The point estimate is slightly larger in magnitude with a smaller confidence interval.

                                              17
Figure 5a shows the associated event study. Relative to Figure 4a, these estimates are
similar in shape but are more precise. Again, there is no evidence of a trend prior to grant
receipt, and we see a small and significant increase in birth weight in downstream, relative
to upstream, counties after the facility receives a grant.17
       Panel B of Table 4 presents results from re-estimating our difference-in-difference specifi-
cations with probability of low birth weight as the dependent variable. The point estimates
are consistently negative, although not always significant, and range from -0.09 to -0.29
percentage points. About 7 percent of births in our sample were low birth weight, so this
represents a change of 1 to 4 percent from the mean. Figure 5b shows the facility level event
study results for low birth weight. Similar to the birth weight results, the probability of low
birth weight decreases after grant receipt and this decline grows over time.


4.3        Triple Difference Results

       We then estimate our triple difference specification on birth outcomes. Columns 1 and 2
of Table 5 present results from estimating equation 4 on sub-samples of non-compliant and
compliant facilities, respectively. Consistent with our pollution results in Table 2, we see a
relatively large and statistically significant improvement in birth weight downstream from
non-compliant facilities. The effect in areas downstream from compliant facilities is also
positive, but smaller; improvements in infant health in areas downstream from compliant fa-
cilities may be driven by demographic or economic changes that coincide with grant timing.
Since there were similar demographic changes in areas downstream from non-compliant facil-
ities, as shown in Table 3, the difference between the effects downstream from non-complaint
and compliant facilities likely comes from the differences in surface water quality shown in
Table 2, rather than shifting demographics.
       Figure 6 presents the event studies for the corresponding triple difference. As before,
there is no evidence of pre-treatment trends in infant health outcomes. For birth weight,
17
     These results are identified off of comparisons of newly treated facilities relative to never-treated facilities,
     newly treated facilities relative to facilities that have not yet been treated, and newly treated facilities
     relative to already-treated facilities (Goodman-Bacon, 2019). The third type of comparison can be wrong
     signed and render our results uninterpretable, but we show in the Appendix that our results are robust to
     using stacked difference-in-difference and aggregated group-time treatment effect designs (Callaway and
     Sant'Anna, 2019) which only rely on the first two types of comparisons.

                                                           18
there is a statistically significant increase in downstream (relative to upstream) counties
after a non-compliant facility receives a grant (relative to other facilities).18 For low birth
weight, the point estimates are similar in shape but are statistically insignificant. Of the
infant health specifications, this is the closest analogue to our triple difference pollution
specification. Importantly, the shapes of these event studies are similar to the patterns in
pollution shown in Figure 3.
       We summarize the effect of changes in surface water quality downstream from non-
compliant facilities on infant health by estimating equation 5 on the pooled sample, which
leverages all of our variation in one regression. Since equation 5 includes a full set of in-
teractions, our estimate of  DDD , reported in column 3 of Table 5, will be equivalent to
the difference of the estimates of equation 4 from each sub-sample. As with the pollution
estimate, the improvements in birth outcomes downstream from non-compliant facilities are
statistically larger than improvements downstream from compliant facilities.19
       The results from this triple difference show that going from having zero to 100 percent of a
county's population living within a mile of a treated waterway is associated with an 8.21 gram
increase in average birth weight in counties downstream from facilities that were required
to make upgrades to their treatment technology. In terms of magnitude, the effect on birth
weight is about half of the estimated effect of any exposure to Ramadan during pregnancy
(Almond and Mazumder, 2011), and about the same magnitude as the effect of stress in utero
due to nearby landmine explosions on birth weight (Camacho, 2008). Estimates of the effect
on the probability of low birth weight shown in Panel B of Table 5 are not significant, but
they do bound improvements above a 0.236 percentage point decrease, or about 3 percent
from the mean of low birth weight. This is slightly smaller than the estimated effect of
drinking water contamination in utero on low birth weight estimated in a modern context

18
     As with all of our event studies, we report coefficients for four years before and 8 years after grant receipt.
     All of these coefficients are balanced. While unbalanced event study coefficients should be interpreted with
     caution, we present a version of Figure 6a with 16 years of post-treatment data in Figure A2. This Figure
     suggests that the effect of CWA grants on infant health flattens out by 10 years after treatment, consistent
     with grant projects taking up to 10 years to complete (USEPA, 2002).
19
     We show that this heterogeneity in effects is not driven by differences in facility size, population served
     or non-treatment technology upgrades in Table A8, which provides further evidence that improvements in
     downstream infant health are driven by upgrades to treatment technology.




                                                          19
(Currie et al., 2013).


4.4        Mechanisms

       If reductions in contaminated public drinking water are driving health improvements,
we would expect to find larger effects in areas that source public water from surface water
rather than groundwater, as CWA grants directly affected surface water quality. We use
USGS water use data from Solley et al. (1988) to divide our sample into counties that had
any public water system that drew from surface water in 1985, and counties whose public
water systems drew exclusively from ground water.20
       We show that our results are driven by counties that had some public water systems that
drew from surface water sources in Table 6. Column 1 of Table 6 re-estimates equation 5 on
facilities whose downstream counties had some public water systems that drew from surface
water sources, while column 2 estimates the same specification on facilities whose downstream
counties' public water systems drew from groundwater exclusively. CWA grants significantly
increased birth weight for counties where some drinking water is sourced from surface water,
but there is no significant effect among counties that provide drinking water exclusively from
groundwater sources. In fact, the point estimate is negative for these counties.21
       We disaggregate these results further in Table 7 by estimating a triple difference where
the first difference comes from where and when CWA grants were distributed, the second
difference comes from if a birth occurred up or downstream from a wastewater treatment
facility, and the third difference comes from whether downstream public water systems drew
from surface or groundwater. Panels A and B estimate this triple difference on a sample of
non-compliant facilities. We see strongly significant increases in birth weight and marginally
significant decreases in the probability of low birth weight in areas that drew from surface wa-
ter sources. Our estimates for areas that drew exclusively from groundwater are statistically
insignificant and wrong-signed, and the birth weight effect in areas that drew from surface

20
     We use data from 1985 because it is the earliest year for which information on county level water usage is
     available. While water service areas and county borders do not always perfectly align, community water
     systems generally serve areas no larger than counties (USEPA, 1997).
21
     Columns 6 and 7 of Table 1 suggest that communities served by surface and groundwater systems serve
     similar populations.


                                                       20
water is statistically greater than the effect in areas that only drew from groundwater. In
Panels C and D, we re-estimate these specifications on samples of compliant facilities. These
estimates can be thought of as a placebo test since these facilities experienced no improve-
ment in downstream water quality. We find no significant effects of treatment in areas whose
community water systems drew from either surface or ground water sources, as we would
have expected. This suggests that our results are almost completely driven by counties that
are downstream from non-compliant facilities in which some public water systems draw from
surface water.22


4.5        Heterogeneity

       We examine the heterogeneity of our estimates across race in Table 8 by estimating
equation 5 on sub-samples of white and non-white births from counties with sizable non-
white populations.23 The point estimates for both white and non-white births are similar
to the estimates of effects on average birth weight for any race, and results by race are not
statistically distinguishable.
       Next, we look for heterogeneity by the timing of grant receipt. If states wrote their
priority lists to address the most severe pollution problems first, we would expect grants
from the first few years of the CWA to have the largest effect on infant health. This is
especially true if we think there is a convex relationship between pollution and health.
       We address this in columns 3 and 4 of Table 8. In column 3, we drop all observations
from facilities that received a grant after 1976 and re-estimate equation 4, and in column 4

22
     We provide further evidence that the effect of CWA grants on birth weight is driven by reduced contam-
     ination of publicly provided water in the Appendix. Rather than defining the treated population as the
     percent of a county's population living within 1 mile of a treated waterway, we instead leverage information
     on the location of community water system service areas to define the treated population as the percent of
     the county's population served by a public drinking water system that is near a treated waterway. Despite
     a large reduction in sample size due to missing data on water system service areas, our results are robust
     to this alternate definition.
     We also explore whether our results are driven by states with higher spending on water recreation activities
     in the Appendix, but our estimates lack power to detect these effects.
23
     The sample is restricted to counties where both the white and non-white average birth weight is calculated
     from 5 or more births. This ensures that we are making comparisons that rely on the same set of counties,
     in which there are sufficient individuals in both racial groups, rather than making comparisons between
     majority white and majority non-white communities. Results are not sensitive to this sample restriction.



                                                        21
we drop all observations from facilities that received a grant in or before 1976. The results
are similar, so there is little evidence of heterogeneous effects by grant timing.



5     Discussion & Conclusion
    The preceding evidence suggests that the Clean Water Act led to small but significant
improvements in infant health, with reductions in pollution associated with CWA grants
leading to an eight gram increase in average birth weight in counties downstream from
facilities that were required to make treatment technology upgrades. Given that previous
studies have found statistically significant relationships between water quality and infant
health, how do our results relate to the current literature, and how do they affect our
understanding of the relationship between water and health generally?
    We know that reductions in the contamination of drinking water lead to improvements
in infant health. Specifically, in a modern context, Currie et al. (2013) found that in utero
exposure to drinking water from drinking water facilities where contaminants were detected
is associated with a 0.32 percentage point increase in the the probability of low birth weight.
We estimate somewhat smaller, but similar effects for low birth weight. Consistent with this
channel, we only detect effects in areas whose public water systems drew from surface water.
These effects are largest for areas downstream from facilities that were required to upgrade
their treatment technology, which saw the greatest improvements to surface water quality.
This shows that, similar to contamination of municipal water and ground water, surface
water contamination affects a direct measure of human health. Even as recently as 2010,
studies found that the organic contaminants detected in source water consistently appeared
at similar concentrations in drinking water after treatment (Toccalino and Hopple, 2010),
suggesting that the threats to health from surface water contamination are not limited to
an historic context.
    We use this information on the relationship between surface water quality and infant
health to incorporate one measure of health benefits into a cost benefit analysis of the Clean
Water Act. In total, CWA grants to wastewater treatment facilities cost an estimated $153
billion (in 2014 dollars). About 46.4 million births occurred in treated counties that had


                                              22
some public water systems that drew from surface water sources between 1972 and 1988,
and we estimate that about 29.7 million of those births occurred within a mile of a treated
waterway. While our preferred triple difference specification does not show statistically
significant changes to the probability of low birth weight in areas that draw from surface
water sources, it does bound improvements below a 0.261 percentage point reduction in the
probability of low birth weight (as shown in Panel B of Table 6).
       Almond et al. (2005) estimates that low birth weight increases hospital costs by $8319
and increases 1 year mortality by 37 per 1000 births, and Oreopoulos et al. (2008) finds that
low birth weight reduces lifetime earnings by 3.8 percent. We combine these estimates with
the EPA's value of a statistical life (VSL) of $7.4 million and the census bureau's work-life
earnings estimate of $2.4 million to calculate a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the infant
health benefits of the CWA. While a more comprehensive calculation of the health benefits
of the CWA would include other potentially impacted health outcomes, such as reduced
hospital admissions for gastrointestinal illness, reduced school absences, and health effects
for adolescents and adults, we estimate the infant health benefits of the CWA are bounded
below $29 billion, about 19 percent of the amount needed to make the CWA cost effective.24
       The $153 billion figure includes grants to compliant facilities, which did not lead to
improvements in downstream water quality. If CWA grants had been targeted only towards
facilities requiring treatment technology upgrades, the cost-benefit ratio may have been more
favorable, as health improvements were detected only downstream of these facilities. Health
effects alone can account for as much as 29 percent of the $101 billion (in 2014 dollars) in
grants distributed to non-compliant facilities.
       Using increased housing prices to value the benefits of the CWA, Keiser and Shapiro
(2019a) estimate a benefit to cost ratio of 0.26. Assuming that hedonic estimates do not
capture any health benefits, grants to non-compliant facilities might have a benefit to cost
ratio as high as 0.55 after incorporating improvements to infant health. Considering that
infant health is only one dimension of health potentially impacted by the Clean Water Act,
this is a sizable improvement in the benefit-cost ratio and including additional measures of
24
     Estimates of VSL vary. Kniesner and Viscusi (2019) finds that estimates of the VSL for the United States
     are around $10 million. Using this figure instead of the EPA estimate bounds the infant health benefits of
     the CWA below $36.4 billion and yields a benefit-cost ratio around 0.24.

                                                       23
health would likely increase this ratio even further. Moreover, this research establishes the
importance of cleaner water at the source and that the complementarity between clean water
and sewerage initiatives for improving human health holds well into the twentieth century.


References
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder, "Health capital and the prenatal environ-
 ment: the effect of Ramadan observance during pregnancy," American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (4), 56­85.

  , Kenneth Y Chay, and David S Lee, "The costs of low birth weight," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (3), 1031­1083.

Alsan, Marcella and Claudia Goldin, "Watersheds in child mortality: the role of effec-
 tive water and sewerage infrastructure, 1880­1920," Journal of Political Economy, 2019,
 127 (2), 586­638.

Anderson, D Mark, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Daniel I Rees, "Re-Examining the
 Contribution of Public Health Efforts to the Decline in Urban Mortality," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 2020.

Arizona Department of Water Resources, "CWS Service Area," Technical Report 2020.

Arkansas GIS Office, "Public Water Systems," Technical Report 2013.

Beach, Brian, Joseph Ferrie, Martin Saavedra, and Werner Troesken, "Typhoid
 fever, water quality, and human capital formation," The Journal of Economic History,
 2016, 76 (1), 41­75.

Behrman, Jere R and Mark R Rosenzweig, "Returns to birthweight," Review of Eco-
 nomics and statistics, 2004, 86 (2), 586­601.

Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes, "From the cradle to the
  labor market? The effect of birth weight on adult outcomes," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2007, 122 (1), 409­439.

Bureau of Economic Analysis, "State Outdoor Recreation Data," 2012-2017.

Callaway, Brantly and Pedro HC Sant'Anna, "Difference-in-differences with multiple
 time periods," Available at SSRN 3148250, 2019.

   and Pedro HC Sant'Anna, "did: Difference in Differences," 2020. R package version
  2.0.1.906.

  , Andrew Goodman-Bacon, and Pedro H. C. Sant'Anna, "Difference-in-Differences
  with a Continuous Treatment," 2021.


                                             24
Camacho, Adriana, "Stress and birth weight: evidence from terrorist attacks," American
 Economic Review, 2008, 98 (2), 511­15.

Copeland, Claudia, "Clean Water Act: a summary of the law," Technical Report, Con-
 gressional Research Service 2016.

CT State Department of Public Health, "Buffered Community Public Water Supply
 Service Areas," Technical Report 2020.

Currie, Janet, Joshua Graff Zivin, Katherine Meckel, Matthew Neidell, and
 Wolfram Schlenker, "Something in the water: Contaminated drinking water and infant
 health," Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'´
                                                           economique, 2013, 46 (3),
 791­810.

Cutler, David and Grant Miller, "The role of public health improvements in health
 advances: the twentieth-century United States," Demography, 2005, 42 (1), 1­22.

Daigger, Glen T, Upgrading wastewater treatment plants, Vol. 2, CRC Press, 1998.

Dieter, Cheryl A, Water availability and use science program: Estimated use of water in
 the United States in 2015, Geological Survey, 2018.

Ferrie, Joseph P and Werner Troesken, "Water and Chicago's mortality transition,
  1850­1925," Explorations in Economic History, 2008, 45 (1), 1­16.

Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth, "The
  effects of poor neonatal health on children's cognitive development," American Economic
  Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3921­55.

Flynn, Patrick and Tucker Smith, "Rivers, Lakes and Revenue Streams: The Heteroge-
  neous Effects of Clean Water Act Grants on Local Spending," Technical Report, Working
  Paper at Vanderbilt University Department of Economics 2021.

Forstall, Richard, "Population of Counties by Decennial Census: 1900 to 1990.," Technical
  Report 1995.

Freeman, A Myrick, "Water pollution policy," in "Public policies for environmental pro-
  tection," Routledge, 2010, pp. 179­224.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew, "Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment tim-
 ing," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Grossman, Daniel S and David JG Slusky, "The impact of the Flint water crisis on
 fertility," Demography, 2019, 56 (6), 2005­2031.

Hendren, Nathaniel and Ben Sprung-Keyser, "A unified welfare analysis of govern-
 ment policies," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (3), 1209­1318.

Hines, N William, "Nor Any Drop to Drink: Public Regulation of Water Quality Part I:
 State Pollution Control Programs," Iowa L. Rev., 1966, 52, 186.

                                           25
Kansas Water Office, "Public Water Supply System," Technical Report 2020.

Keiser, David A and Joseph S Shapiro, "Consequences of the Clean Water Act and the
 demand for water quality," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (1), 349­396.

  and , "US Water Pollution Regulation over the Past Half Century: Burning Waters to
  Crystal Springs?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2019, 33 (4), 51­75.

  , Catherine L Kling, and Joseph S Shapiro, "The low but uncertain measured
  benefits of US water quality policy," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  2019, 116 (12), 5262­5269.

Kniesner, Thomas J and W Kip Viscusi, "The value of a statistical life," Forthcoming,
 Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance, 2019, pp. 19­15.

Kuwayama, Yusuke, Sheila Olmstead, and Jiameng Zheng, "The Value of Water
 Quality: Separating Amenity and Recreational Benefits," Technical Report, Working Pa-
 per at the University of Texas, Austin LBJ School of Public Policy 2018.

Lyon, Randolph M and Scott Farrow, "An economic analysis of Clean Water Act
  issues," Water Resources Research, 1995, 31 (1), 213­223.

Marcus, Michelle, "Testing the Water: Drinking Water Quality, Public Notification, and
 Child Outcomes," Technical Report 2019.

National Center for Health Statistics, "Natality Detail Data," 1968-1988.

  , "Vital Statistics Compressed Mortality File," 1968-1988.

National Environmental Research Center, "Upgrading Existing Wastewater Treatment
 Plants," Technical Report 1972.

NCDEQ, "Public Water Supply Water Sources," Technical Report 2017.

NJDEP, "NJDEP Public Community Water Purveyor Service Areas, 1998," Technical Re-
 port 2004.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld, and Leslie L Roos, "Short-,
 medium-, and long-term consequences of poor infant health an analysis using siblings
 and twins," Journal of human Resources, 2008, 43 (1), 88­138.

PASDA, "Public Water Supply 2015," Technical Report 2015.

Raff, Zach and Dietrich Earnhart, "The effects of Clean Water Act enforcement on
 environmental employment," Resource and Energy Economics, 2019, 57, 1­17.

Rassier, Dylan G and Dietrich Earnhart, "The effect of clean water regulation on
 profitability: testing the Porter hypothesis," Land Economics, 2010, 86 (2), 329­344.



                                            26
Reynolds, Kelly A, Kristina D Mena, and Charles P Gerba, "Risk of waterborne ill-
 ness via drinking water in the United States," in "Reviews of environmental contamination
 and toxicology," Springer, 2008, pp. 117­158.

Royer, Heather, "Separated at girth: US twin estimates of the effects of birth weight,"
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 49­85.

Rubin, Kenneth, "Efficient Investments in Wastewater Treatment Plants," in "in" US
 Congress, Congressional Budget Office 1985.

Smith, V Kerry and Carlos Valcarcel Wolloh, "Has Surface Water Quality Improved
 Since the Clean Water Act?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2012.

Solley, Wayne B., Charles F. Merk, and Robert R. Pierce, "Estimated Use of Water
  in the United States in 1985," Technical Report 1988.

Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, "Public Drinking Water Supply," Tech-
  nical Report 2020.

Toccalino, Patricia and Jessica A Hopple, The Quality of Our Nation's Waters: Quality
 of Water from Public-supply Wells in the United States, 1993-2007: Overview of Major
 Findings, US Geological Survey, 2010.

Troesken, Werner, "Race, disease, and the provision of water in American cities, 1889­
  1921," The Journal of Economic History, 2001, 61 (3), 750­776.

  , "The limits of Jim Crow: Race and the provision of water and sewerage services in
  American cities, 1880-1925," Journal of economic history, 2002, pp. 734­772.

USEPA, "STORET Legacy," 1968-1988.

  , "Handbook of Procedures: Construction Grants Program for Municipal Wastewater
  Treatment Works," Technical Report, 1980.

  , "1995 Community water system survey," 1997, Volume 1.

  , "How Wastewater Treatment Works," Technical Report, 1998.

  , "Progress in water quality: an evaluation of the national investment in municipal wastew-
  ater treatment," Technical Report, 2000.

  , "The National Costs to Implement TMDLs," Technical Report, 2001.

  , "The Clean Water and Drinking Water Infrastructure Gap Analysis," Technical Report,
  2002.

  , "Primer for municipal wastewater treatment systems," Technical Report, Document No.
  Tech. rep. EPA 832-R-04-001 2004.


                                             27
Watson, Tara, "Public health investments and the infant mortality gap: Evidence from
 federal sanitation interventions on US Indian reservations," Journal of Public Economics,
 2006, 90 (8-9), 1537­1560.




                                           28
Figures




                    (a)
                                                                 (b)

                 Figure 1: Primary vs Secondary Treatment Technology

                                     Source: USEPA (1998)
                          4
                          3
                      Density
                        2 1
                          0




                                0   .2      .4        .6    .8    1


Figure 2: Percent of County Population Living Within a Mile of a Treated Waterway in 1988




                                                 29
                                                                     1          0
                                                       Dissolved Oxygen Deficit
                                                             -2       -1
                                                                     -3
                                                                     -4


                                                                                    -5           0                                                            5              10
                                                                                                     Years Since Treatment



                                                                                    Figure 3: Pollution Triple Difference
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2
Notes: The figure plots the estimated coefficients on 1{y - yp = t}  dd  tp from Qpdy = t=-5 t 1{y - yp      =
                 9                                 - 2                             9              
t}  dd  tp + t=0 t 1{y - yp = t}  dd  tp + t=-5 t 1{y - yp = t}  dd + t=0 t 1{y - yp = t}  dd +
Wpdy + Wpdy  tp + py + pd + pdy . Qpdy measures dissolved oxygen deficit, dd is a dummy equaling
one for observations downstream from a facility, and tp is an indicator that equals one for non-compliant
facilities. The model includes facility-by-downstream fixed effects and facility-by-year fixed effects, pd and
py respectively, as well as controls for temperature.
Source: USEPA (1968-1988)
                 20




                                                                                                                                     .002         .001
                                                                                                                     Probability Birth Weight < 2500
   County Average Birth Weight
                        10




                                                                                                                           -.001         0
      0




                                                                                                                 -.002               -.003
                 -10




                                 -5      0                                               5           10                                                  -5            0                           5        10
                                             Years Since Treatment                                                                                                         Years Since Treatment


                                      (a) Birth Weight                                                                                                   (b) Probability of Low Birth Weight

                                      Figure 4: Birth Outcomes Downstream from Grant Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                  -2                                   9
Notes: These figures plot the t and t from estimating Ycy = t=-5 t 1{y - yc        = t} + t=0 t 1{y - yc   =
t}  pctcy + Xcy + c + y + cy . pctcy is a continuous variable that takes values from zero to one, and
indicates the percent of county c's population living within a mile of a treated waterway in year y . The
model includes county and year fixed effects, c and y respectively, as well as controls for the percent of
a county's births of a given birth order, and county averages of mother's age and race and child gender.
The estimates are weighted by total number of births in a county-year. The dependent variable is the the
average birth weight in county c in year y in sub-figure (a), and the probability of being born weighing less
than 2500 grams in county c in year y in sub-figure (b).
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a)



                                                                                                          30
                        30




                                                                                                                                                                          .002
                                                                                                                            Difference in Up/downstream Prob Low Birth Weight
   Difference in Up/downstream Birth Weight




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                   20




                                                                                                                                                       -.002
                      10




                                                                                                                                    -.006     -.004
          0




                                                                                                                         -.008
                        -10




                                                                                                                                                                                 -5        0                           5       10
                                              -5      0                           5   10                                                                                                       Years Since Treatment
                                                          Years Since Treatment


                                                   (a) Birth Weight                                                                                                      (b) Probability of Low Birth Weight

                               Figure 5: Difference in Birth Outcomes Up and Downstream from Grant Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                      -2                                   9
Notes: These figure plot the t and t from estimating Ypy = t=-5 t 1{y - yp         = t} + t=0 t 1{y - yp  =
t}  pctpy + Xpy + p + y + py . pctpy is a continuous variable that takes values from zero to one, and
indicates the percent of downstream counties' populations living within a mile of a treated waterway in year
y . The model includes facility and year fixed effects, p and y respectively, as well as controls for the
percent of up and downstream counties' births of a given birth order, and averages of up and downstream
mother's age and race and child gender. The estimates are weighted by total number of births in counties up
and downstream from facility p in year y . The dependent variable is the difference in birth weight between
up and downstream counties in year y in sub-figure (a), and the difference in the probability of being born
weighing less than 2500 grams between up and downstream counties in year y in sub-figure (b).
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a)
                                                                                                                                               .002
                        30




                                                                                                Difference in Up/downstream Prob Low Birth Weight
   Difference in Up/downstream Birth Weight
                               20




                                                                                                                  -.002           0
                 10




                                                                                                  -.004
                        0




                                              -5      0                           5   10                                                                                -5                 0                           5        10
                                                          Years Since Treatment                                                                                                                Years Since Treatment


                                                   (a) Birth Weight                                                                                                      (b) Probability of Low Birth Weight

                                                                    Figure 6: Birth Outcome Triple Difference
                                                                                                                                                                                      -2                                   9
Notes: These figures plot the t and t from estimating Ypy = t=-5 t 1{y - yp         = t} tp + t=0 t 1{y - yp  =
                 -2                       9            
t} pctpy  tp + t=-4 t 1{y - yp = t} + t=0 t 1{y - yp = t} pctpy + Xpy + Xpy  tp + y  tp + p + y + py . tp
is an indicator that equals one for non-compliant facilities and the remaining variables are defined analogously
to those in Figure 5. The dependent variable is the difference in birth weight between up and downstream
counties in year y in sub-figure (a), and the difference in the probability of being born weighing less than
2500 grams between up and downstream counties in year y in sub-figure (b).
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a)



                                                                                           31
Tables

                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics

                            (1)              (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)     (7)
                       Full Sample      Downstream   Upstream   Non-compliant    Compliant       Surface Ground
 birth weight            3279.61          3277.83     3297.25      3279.70        3279.37        3275.67 3296.68
 probability bw < 2500     .078             .079        .074         .078           .077           .078   .077
 nonwhite                  .166             .170        .115         .155           .193           .161    .185
 age of mother            24.58            24.58       24.62        24.66          24.39          24.63   24.40
 education of mother      11.83            11.83       11.83        11.87          11.65          11.86   11.72
 birth order               2.40             2.39        2.42         2.42           2.34           2.37    2.52
 Observations           1788138          1571197      206017      1300614         487524         1452552 335586
Notes: This table presents the mean of birth weight, the probability of low birth weight, the percent of
non-white births, average age and education of mothers, and average birth order for all counties, births
in counties that were ever downstream from a facility that received a CWA grant, counties that were ever
upstream from a facility that received a CWA grant, counties up or downstream from non-compliant facilities,
counties up or downstream from compliant facilities, counties that had at least some public water systems
that drew from surface water, and counties that used exclusively ground water. These means are calculated
using individial birth data from 1970, two years before the CWA came into effect.
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a)




                                    Table 2: Pollution Triple Difference

                                                   (1)            (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                              full sample   non-compliant         compliant             DDD
 grant X downstream                            -0.974          -1.566               -0.371             -0.371
                                            [-1.364,-0.584] [-2.125,-1.008]     [-0.911,0.170]     [-0.911,0.170]

 grant X downstream X non-compliant                                                                   -1.196
                                                                                                   [-1.973,-0.419]
 weather controls                                 X                 X                X                    X
 facility by downstream fixed effects             X                 X                X                    X
 facility by year fixed effects                   X                 X                X                    X
 N                                              114148            46968            67180               114148
 95% confidence intervals in brackets
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < .01
Notes: This table describes the effects of Clean Water Act grants on downstream pollution. Columns 1, 2
and 3 estimate Qpdy = gy  dd + Wpdy + pd + py + pdy for areas up and downstream from all facilities
in our sample, non-compliant facilities, and all other facilities respectively. Qpdy is dissolved oxygen deficit,
gy is a dummy variable equaling one after a facility receives a CWA grant, and dd is a dummy equaling one
for observations downstream from a facility.
                                                                                DD
Column 4 presents estimates from the associated triple difference: Qpdy = 0        gy  dd +  DDD gy  dd  tp +
Wpdy + Wpdy  tp + py + pd + pdy where tp is a dummy variable equaling one for observations from non-
compliant facilities. All regressions include controls for water temperature, as well as facility-by-downstream
and facility-by-year fixed effects, pd and py .
Source: (USEPA, 1968-1988)




                                                       32
                              Table 3: Controls as Dependent Variables

                                          non-compliant            compliant                  DDD
                                               (1)                     (2)                     (3)
 Panel A.                                                      percent non-white
 pct pop 1 mile                              -0.0223               -0.0176                  -0.0176
                                         [-0.0281,-0.0165]     [-0.0229,-0.0123]        [-0.0229,-0.0123]

 pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant                                                             -0.00471
                                                                                       [-0.0126,0.00313]
 mean                                           .116                   .105                    .11
 Panel B.                                                          mother's age
 pct pop 1 mile                              0.126                   0.0784                 0.0784
                                          [0.0557,0.197]          [0.0149,0.142]         [0.0150,0.142]

 pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant                                                           0.0479
                                                                                     [-0.0470,0.143]
 mean                                         24.563              24.569                  24.566
 Panel C.                                             probability first or second birth
 pct pop 1 mile                              -0.00210             0.00109                0.00109
                                        [-0.00916,0.00496] [-0.00390,0.00608] [-0.00390,0.00608]

 pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant                                                         -0.00319
                                                                                   [-0.0118,0.00545]
 mean                                           .653                .645                  .648
 Panel D.                                             probability third or higher birth
 pct pop 1 mile                              -0.0105            -0.00618              -0.00618
                                        [-0.0145,-0.00646] [-0.00965,-0.00271] [-0.00964,-0.00271]

 pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant                                                             -0.00429
                                                                                       [-0.00958,0.00100]
 mean                                           .338                   .347                   .343
 unit and year fixed effects                     X                      X                       X
 collapsed to facility level                     X                      X                       X
 N                                             34188                  48132                  82320
 95% confidence intervals in brackets
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < .01
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 present results from estimating xpy = pctpy + p + y + py on subsamples of non-
compliant and compliant facilities. xpy is a measure of the difference between demographic characteristic
in counties up and downstream from facility p in year y , and pctpy is a continuous variable that takes values
from zero to one, and indicates the percent of downstream counties' populations living within a mile of a
treated waterway in year y . The model includes facility and year fixed effects, p and y . Column 3 presents
                                                       DD
estimates of the associated triple difference, xpy = 0     pctpy +  DDD pctpy  tp + y  tp + p + y + py , where
tp is an indicator that equals one for non-compliant facilities. Each panel represents a different demographic
variable. Means of each variable in 1970 from up and downstream counties are reported at the bottom of
each panel.
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a)




                                                       33
                                                Table 4: Difference in Difference

                                                       full sample                             up/downstream only
                                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)
 Panel A                                                              county average birth weight
 pct pop 1 mile                                12.80                6.718                 7.134                8.999
                                            [6.709,18.89]        [2.034,11.40]         [2.444,11.82]        [5.721,12.28]
 Panel B                                                       probability birth weight < 2500 grams
 pct pop 1 mile                             -0.00288              -0.000874             -0.000963            -0.00177
                                       [-0.00419,-0.00156]   [-0.00190,0.000152] [-0.00198,0.0000584] [-0.00256,-0.000985]
 demographic controls                                                   X                     X                    X
 unit and year fixed effects                     X                      X                     X                    X
 collapsed to county level                       X                      X                     X
 collapsed to facility level                                                                                       X
 N                                             64239                 64239                 64008                82320
                               
    p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < .01
Notes: This table presents (weighted) estimates of the effect of CWA grants on downstream infant health.
Columns 1-3 present estimates from the following model: Ycy = pctcy + Xcy + c + y + cy . In Panel
A, the dependent variable is the average birth weight in a county-year, and in Panel B, it is the probability
of being born weighing less than 2500 grams. pctcy is a continuous variable that takes values from zero to
one, and indicates the proportion of county c's population that lived within a mile of a treated waterway
in year y . All estimates include unit and year fixed effects, and columns 2 through 4 include controls for
the percent of a county's births in a given birth order bin, and county averages of mother's age and race
and child gender. Columns 1 and 2 use data from every county in the US, while columns 3 and 4 restrict
the sample to counties that are up or downstream from a wastewater treatment facility. In columns 1
through 3, data is collapsed to the county level. In column 4, data is collapsed to the facility level, and
we estimate Ypy = pctpy + Xpy + p + y + py , where Ypy is the difference between birth outcomes
in counties up and downstream from facility p in year y , and pctpy measures the percent of downstream
counties' populations living within a mile of a treated waterway. This means that the results in columns 1
and 2 come from comparisons between counties downstream from facilities that received grants and any other
county, the results in column 3 come from comparisons between counties downstream from facilities that
received grants and any county upstream from a facility, and the results in column 4 come from comparisons
between counties up and downstream from the same facility. Source: National Center for Health Statistics
(1968-1988a)




                                                                     34
                                        Table 5: Triple Difference

                                          non-compliant           compliant              DDD
                                               (1)                   (2)                  (3)
 Panel A.                                                county average birth weight
 pct pop 1 mile                               13.36                5.153                5.153
                                           [8.012,18.72]        [1.129,9.177]        [1.130,9.176]

 pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant                                                           8.211
                                                                                       [1.519,14.90]
 Panel B.                                            probability birth weight < 2500 grams
 pct pop 1 mile                              -0.00216               -0.00138            -0.00138
                                        [-0.00334,-0.000979] [-0.00244,-0.000325] [-0.00244,-0.000325]

 pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant                                                            -0.000780
                                                                                      [-0.00236,0.000803]
 demographic controls                           X                      X                       X
 unit and year fixed effects                    X                      X                       X
 collapsed to facility level                    X                      X                       X
 N                                            34188                  48132                   82320
 95% confidence intervals in brackets
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < .01
Notes: This table describes the effects of Clean Water Act grants on downstream birth weight depending on
pre-CWA treatment technology. Columns 1 and 2 estimate Ypy = pctpy + Xpy + p + y + py for areas
up and downstream from non-compliant facilities (those that were required to make treatment technology
upgrades) and compliant facilities (those that were not) separately. Column 3 estimates the associated triple
                     DD
difference: Ypy = 0     pctpy +  DDD pctpy  tp + Xpy + Xpy  tp + y  tp + p + y + py . All regressions
include demographic controls and unit and year fixed effects, p and y respectively. Average birth weight
is the dependent variable in Panel A, and probability of low birth weight is the dependent variable in Panel
B.
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a)




                                                      35
                             Table 6: Effects by Public Water Source

                                            Surface Water        Ground Water
                                                   (1)                 (2)
          Panel A                               county average birth weight
          pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant        8.893                -5.137
                                             [1.874,15.91]       [-21.34,11.06]
          Panel B                        probability birth weight < 2500 grams
          pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant       -0.000952            0.000132
                                         [-0.00261,0.000705] [-0.00375,0.00401]
          demographic controls                      X                   X
          unit and year fixed effects               X                   X
          collapsed to facility level               X                   X
          N                                      67032                15288
          95% confidence intervals in brackets
          
            p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < .01
Notes: This table re-estimates the specification in column 3 of Table 5 on sub-samples of counties that had
some public water systems that draw from surface water and counties whose public water systems only draw
from groundwater.
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a); Solley et al. (1988)




                                                    36
                          Table 7: Public Water Source Triple Difference

                                          Surface               Ground                DDD
                                            (1)                    (2)                  (3)
 Panel A. Non-compliant                               county average birth weight
 pct pop 1 mile                            10.15                 -7.879               -7.879
                                        [5.927,14.38]        [-20.35,4.597]       [-20.23,4.473]

 pct pop 1 mile X surface                                                          18.03
                                                                                [4.976,31.09]
 N                                        30009                 4200                34209
 Panel B. Non-compliant                       probability birth weight < 2500 grams
 pct pop 1 mile                        -0.000872               0.00103             0.00103
                                  [-0.00182,0.0000796] [-0.00192,0.00399] [-0.00189,0.00396]

 pct pop 1 mile X surface                                                              -0.00190
                                                                                 [-0.00498,0.00117]
 N                                          30009                  4200                 34209
 Panel C. Compliant                                    county average birth weight
 pct pop 1 mile                              3.111                 3.110                 3.110
                                        [-0.861,7.083]        [-4.426,10.65]        [-4.402,10.62]

 pct pop 1 mile X surface                                                          0.000404
                                                                                [-8.497,8.498]
 N                                       37023                 11088                48111
 Panel D. Compliant                           probability birth weight < 2500 grams
 pct pop 1 mile                        -0.000333              -0.00183             -0.00183
                                  [-0.00138,0.000714] [-0.00419,0.000522] [-0.00418,0.000515]

 pct pop 1 mile X surface                                                                 0.00150
                                                                                    [-0.00107,0.00407]
 N                                         37023                   11088                   48111
 demographic controls                        X                       X                       X
 unit and year fixed effects                 X                       X                       X
 collapsed to facility level                 X                       X                       X
 95% confidence intervals in brackets
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < .01
Notes: This table describes the effects of Clean Water Act grants on birth outcomes depending on public
water source. Column 1 estimates Ypy = pctpy + Xpy + p + y + py for facilities whose downstream
counties had some public water systems that drew from surface water, and column 2 re-estimates this
specification for counties whose public water systems only drew from groundwater. Column 3 estimates the
                                        DD
associated triple difference: Ypy = 0      pctpy +  DDD pctpy  sp + Xpy + Xpy  sp + y  sp p + p + y + py
where sp is a dummy variable that equals one for facilities with downstream counties that drew at least
some drinking water from surface water sources. All regressions include demographic controls and unit and
year fixed effects. Panels A and B run this analysis for non-compliant facilities, and Panels C and D repeat
this analysis for compliant facilities as a robustness check. Average birth weight is the dependent variable
in Panels A and C, and probability of low birth weight is the dependent variable in Panels B and D.
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a); Solley et al. (1988)

                                                    37
                                            Table 8: Heterogeneous Effects

                                     (1)                             (2)             (3)              (4)
                                    white                         nonwhite      early grants     later grants
 pct pop 1 mile X non-compliant    11.37                            14.32          14.04            11.95
                                [3.778,18.97]                  [-7.037,35.68]   [1.241,26.84]   [1.422,22.48]
 demographic controls                 X                               X               X                X
 unit and year fixed effects          X                               X               X                X
 collapsed to facility level          X                               X               X                X
 N                                  35406                          35406            51639            31080
                               
    p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < .01
Notes: This table re-estimates the specifications in column 3 of Table 4 on sub-samples of the population.
Columns 1 and 2 divide the sample by race and only include counties that had a sizeable nonwhite population,
and columns 3 and 4 divide the sample by grant timing.
Source: National Center for Health Statistics (1968-1988a)




                                                          38
