                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SHIFTING PUNISHMENT ON MINORITIES:
                     EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE OF SCAPEGOATING

                                         Michal Bauer
                                        Jana Cahlíková
                                        Julie Chytilová
                                        Gérard Roland
                                        Tomas Zelinsky

                                      Working Paper 29157
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w29157


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2021




We thank seminar audiences from the University of Frankfurt am Main, the University of
Edinburgh, the Max Planck Institute in Munich, the Max Planck Institute in Bonn, the University
of California Berkeley and participants at conferences of the Society for the Advancement of
Behavioral Economics, ERINN, and the Economic Science Association. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The data collection was supported by a grant from the Czech Science
Foundation (17-13869S), and by the Slovak Research and Development Agency (APVV-0125-12
and APVV-19-0329). Bauer and Chytilová acknowledge support from ERC-CZ/AV-B
(ERC300851901).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Michal Bauer, Jana Cahlíková, Julie Chytilová, Gérard Roland, and Tomas Zelinsky.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shifting Punishment on Minorities: Experimental Evidence of Scapegoating
Michal Bauer, Jana Cahlíková, Julie Chytilová, Gérard Roland, and Tomas Zelinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 29157
August 2021
JEL No. C93,D74,D91,J15

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper provides experimental evidence showing that members of a majority group
systematically shift punishment on innocent members of an ethnic minority. We develop a new
incentivized task, the Punishing the Scapegoat Game, to measure how injustice affecting a
member of one's own group shapes punishment of an unrelated bystander ("a scapegoat"). We
manipulate the ethnic identity of the scapegoats and study interactions between the majority
group and the Roma minority in Slovakia. We find that when no harm is done, there is no
evidence of discrimination against the ethnic minority. In contrast, when a member of one's own
group is harmed, the punishment "passed" on innocent individuals more than doubles when they
are from the minority, as compared to when they are from the dominant group. These results
illuminate how individualized tensions can be transformed into a group conflict, dragging
minorities into conflicts in a way that is completely unrelated to their behavior.

Michal Bauer                                   Gérard Roland
CERGE-EI, a joint workplace                    Department of Economics
 of Charles University and                     University of California, Berkeley
 the Czech Academy of Sciences                 627 Evans Hall, #3880
Politickych veznu 7                            Berkeley, CA 94720
Prague 1                                       and NBER
Czech Republic                                 groland@econ.berkeley.edu
and IZA
michal.bauer@cerge-ei.cz                       Tomas Zelinsky
                                               Durham University
Jana Cahlíková                                 Leazes Road,
Max Planck Institute for                       Durham DH1 1TA
Tax Law and Public Finance,                    United Kingdom
Munich 80539                                   tomas.zelinsky@durham.ac.uk
Germany
jana.cahlikova@tax.mpg.de

Julie Chytilová
Institute of Economic Studies
Faculty of Social Science
Charles University
Opletalova 26, Prague 1, 110 00
Czech Republic
chytilova@fsv.cuni.cz
1. Introduction

How can localized social ills spiral into widespread aggressive behavior, often with tragic consequences
for whole societies? Although it is widely acknowledged that aggressive behavior against ethnic minorities,
including pogroms, often arise unexpectedly and spread quickly even in previously peaceful communities
(Fearon and Laitin 2000; Bardhan 2005; Esteban and Ray 2008)1, little is known empirically about the
mechanisms that underlie these changes in behavior.

         In this paper, we study people's biases in punishment behavior, in response to wrongdoing targeted
towards members of one's own group. A novel aspect is that we focus on situations when punishers cannot
punish the wrongdoer but only "bystanders", as in many real-life situations. Inspired by work in social
psychology and political science (Doob et al. 1939; Allport 1954; Girard 1979; Staub 1992; Glick 2005),
we take seriously the idea that people may have a tendency to pass revenge on innocent individuals from
negatively-stereotyped minority groups. We refer to such behavior as minority scapegoating.2 To study this
behavioral phenomenon, we develop a new experimental task and document that a desire to "pass" the
punishment on innocent individuals more than doubles when such persons are from an ethnic minority, as
compared to when bystanders are from the dominant group. Such shifting of punishment on minorities
violates a fundamental fairness principle (Kant 1965 and classical philosophers) embedded in the legal
codes of most modern societies, i.e. that people should be punished only for wrongs they are responsible
for and that they intentionally committed. Demonstrating such bias in punishment preferences of dominant
groups is important, because it may drag minorities into conflicts that are completely unrelated to their
behavior and transform individualized tensions into group conflicts.



1
  Minority groups are targets of violence in many parts of the world (Horowitz 1985; Yanagizawa-Drott 2014).
Historical evidence suggests that aggressive attitudes and behaviors, including pogroms and attempted genocides,
increase during periods of social unrest and economic problems within the majority group (Anderson, Johnson, and
Koyama 2017; Voigtlander and Voth 2012; Grosfeld, Sakalli, and Zhuravskaya 2020). Survey evidence from the US
and Europe indicates that hostility towards `other' groups, especially weaker groups like migrants or sexual minorities,
increases when social cohesion within the majority group starts to fall apart, creating a sense of normative threat
(Stenner 2005; Stenner and Haidt 2018).
2
  The term "scapegoat" has biblical origins, coming from the Book of Leviticus--it refers to a sacrificial goat to which
the ancient Israelites symbolically transferred their sins. A scapegoat was originally understood as a person or an
animal that symbolically absorbed sins of others and took them away from those who committed them (Crossman
2019). According to social psychology, scapegoating occurs when punishment of the true source of the anger is
inhibited and people shift their aggression towards other individuals (Newman and Caldwell 2005; Allport 1954; Glick
2005). Staub (1992, p. 48) describes this behavior as follows: "When there is no aggressor or the aggressor is too
powerful or the source of responsibility cannot be identified or the responsibility is one's own (or one's group),
identifying a scapegoat will have "beneficial" psychological effects". Scholars have also suggested that such displaced
punishment typically targets individuals or groups who are weak and vulnerable, as well as already deprecated
minority groups, perhaps because it is easier to ex post (irrationally) blame them for one's own misfortunes and to
attribute negative imputed characteristics to justify aggression against them (Bettelheim and Janowitz 1950).

                                                           2
        Identifying people's desire to pass punishment on innocent individuals, and its determinants, is
empirically challenging with observational data. First, it is nearly impossible to rule out the role of the
standard economic incentives to harm innocent individuals, such as simple self-interested grabbing of
resources from them. In addition, in most real-life situations there is an element of uncertainty about who
originated the harm. Members of the dominant group may punish innocent individuals from minority
groups, because they attribute responsibility for misfortunes to actions of minority groups. A controlled
experimental environment allows eliminating these confounding mechanisms, and focusing on whether
shifts in punishment onto minorities are embedded in preferences or decision heuristics. Specifically, our
aim is to identify an individual desire to engage in harmful behavior towards unrelated parties, in response
to experienced hostility against someone one cares about. In light of the literature on scapegoating, the main
question is whether indirect revenge becomes stronger when the unrelated party (bystander) is a member
of a minority group. Answering this question requires an experimental setup that allows a researcher to (i)
measure how people behave when punishment of wrongdoers is inhibited and people can punish only
individuals who could not have causally contributed to the original harmful act, (ii) measure punishment
responses in one-shot anonymous interactions that are costly for the punisher, and that provide no scope for
material benefits of punishment, and (iii) compare behavior towards a weaker minority group and towards
the own group.

        To address these challenges, we employ a novel experimental paradigm, the Punishing the
Scapegoat Game. In this game, impartial spectators from the majority ethnic group can impose a monetary
punishment on others at own cost, after observing that someone malevolently destroyed the earned income
of an individual from their own group. The existing incentivized experiments on punishment of socially
undesirable behavior focus exclusively on direct punishment of individuals who make active decisions
whether or not to violate a social norm, including the Third Party Punishment Game3 on which we build.
In contrast, a key element of the Punishing the Scapegoat Game is that we add a fourth person, the passive
Scapegoat who does not know the wrongdoer and who is not involved in any way in the original
wrongdoing. This feature allows us to separate the person who commits a harmful act and a person whom
the impartial spectator can punish. We exogenously manipulate information about the ethnicity of the
Scapegoat to test whether people are more prone to redirect the punishment onto minority group members,
if they cannot punish the Wrongdoer.




3
 The Third Party Punishment game has been originally developed by Fehr and Fischbacher (2004) and later became
one of the prominent experimental tasks to study direct punishment of norm-violators, see, for example, Bernhard,
Fischbacher, and Fehr (2006); Goette, Huffman, and Meier (2006); Henrich et al. (2010).

                                                       3
        We are interested in how behavior of spectators (Punishers) from the majority ethnic group
responds to information on whether a Wrongdoer caused harm to a Victim from the majority ethnic group
and how serious the harm was.4 We measure whether the gap in punishment of the Roma Scapegoat as
compared to the majority Scapegoat is larger in a situation when the Punishers respond to observing harmful
behavior targeting a member of their group than in a situation when no such harm was done. An important
feature of using such difference-in-difference approach to identify scapegoating is that we can test whether
out-group bias in punishment happens above and beyond out-group bias in circumstances when people do
not respond to harm happening to their own group.

        We study the interaction between real ethnic majority and minority group members. The setting is
Eastern Slovakia, a region experiencing high unemployment, where the majority population lives side-by-
side with an economically disadvantaged, segregated, and negatively stereotyped Roma ethnic minority,
which represents approximately 15% of the local population. Scattered across many European countries,
including Slovakia, the Czech Republic, France, Italy, and Hungary, Roma people are the largest ethnic
minority in Europe. Thus, Eastern Slovakia is an apt natural setting to test whether aggression can be easily
triggered towards members of a minority group that is relatively weak and negatively stereotyped.

        We show that a non-negligible fraction of Punishers (23%) redirect punishment onto Scapegoats
(bystanders) when they cannot punish the Wrongdoer. Importantly, the identity of the Scapegoat matters a
lot. We find that the interaction between the intensity of harm committed by the Wrongdoer and the
Scapegoats' identity has a large and robust effect on the punishment of the Scapegoat. When Wrongdoers
harm the Victim, the punishment is twice as severe when the Scapegoat is from the Roma minority than
when the Scapegoat is from the majority group. When Wrongdoers do not harm the Victim, ethnic majority
Punishers do not discriminate against Scapegoats from the ethnic minority. Therefore, discrimination
against the Roma minority Scapegoats arises only when Wrongdoers harm the Victim.

        We consider several alternative mechanisms for why people exhibit a magnified tendency to
retaliate against the minority. First, we show that it is not driven by collective punishment, i.e. by the case
in which both the Wrongdoer and the Scapegoat are from the minority group. We find that the minority
Scapegoats are punished more often and more severely than majority Scapegoats even when the original
harm is committed by a member of the majority group, and thus when Wrongdoers and Scapegoats do not
share the same ethnicity. Next, we argue that over-attribution of responsibility stemming from uncertainty
about who committed the wrongdoing or statistical discrimination due to beliefs about how punishment



4
 The harm committed by the Wrongdoer to the Victim was real. In a supplementary activity, the Wrongdoers made a
decision whether and by how much to reduce earnings of a Victim earned for a tedious work assignment (8 euro).

                                                      4
may affect future interactions cannot explain our findings either, by virtue of the experimental design.
Further, the patterns we observe also cannot be simply an outcome of stable unconditional out-group
hostility against the minority that would manifest itself under any circumstances. Our results are consistent
with discriminatory preferences being latent in "peaceful" times , but activated in environments when
decision-makers respond to harm done to someone from their own group. There are two plausible
psychological channels for why latent discriminatory preferences are predicted to more easily manifest
themselves when people engage in taking revenge. Negative emotions associated with observing harm
affecting someone from the own group may lower self-control and deep urges to discriminate may appear
more easily. Also, the salience of conflict may provide a larger scope for excuses for individuals who desire
to treat members of a certain group unfavorably while aiming to retain a self-image of being a moral person.

         Finally, we study whether shifting of punishment on another group characterizes decisions of the
dominant group towards a weaker minority, or also vice versa. To do so, we measure the behavior of Roma
Punishers in the same experimental set up. We do not find evidence of biases in punishment of a Scapegoat
bystander from the majority group among Roma decision-makers. This is in line with the view that shifting
of punishment onto innocent individuals is psychologically easier when the target is a member of a
negatively stereotyped, vulnerable, and smaller group (Bettelheim and Janowitz 1950; Allport 1954).

         In addition to making decisions whether or not to lower the payoff of the Scapegoat, decision-
makers also made choices whether to punish the Wrongdoer directly. In this task also, we observe a
magnified tendency to engage in revenge: punishers from the majority group punish wrongdoers from the
minority more harshly than members of their own group. Together, we establish that the biases in
punishment preferences of the dominant group against the minority group we study are not limited to
situations when members of the minority are responsible for harmful actions, but, importantly, mark
behavior also in situations when it is clear that minority members have nothing to do with the harm done.

         Our experimental design is most closely related to existing lab-in-field experiments on punishment
of norm violations across group boundaries (Goette, Huffman, and Meier 2006; Bernhard, Fischbacher, and
Fehr 2006). Earlier work has made progress in studying group biases in the direct punishment of active
norm violators. In particular, among indigenous tribes in Papua New Guinea, Bernhard et al. (2006)
document that third parties who share group membership with victims punish out-group members more
than in-group members, which is similar to the patterns of direct Wrongdoer punishment that we find.5 We
contribute by developing an experimental task that sheds light on determinants of the punishment of passive


5
 Focusing on a different type of real-life social groups (based on poticial party affliation, soccer club support and
membership to different platoons in Swiss Army), a similar pattern has been found in Schiller, Baumgartner, and
Knoch (2014) and Baumgartner et al. (2012), but not in Goette, Huffman, and Meier (2006) and Goette et al. (2012).

                                                         5
individuals. In this way, we can show that revenge may spill-over and affect behavior not only towards a
wrongdoer but also towards unrelated individuals from an ethnic minority.6,7

         More broadly, the paper contributes to experiments that study existence of in-group vs. out-group
biases based on real-life group attributes, such as ethnicity (Fershtman and Gneezy 2001; Goette, Huffman,
and Meier 2006; Falk and Zehnder 2013; Bauer et al. 2018; Berge et al. 2020; Kranton et al. 2020). In-
group favoritism and out-group discrimination have also been measured using a minimal-group
experimental paradigm, by creating artificial group boundaries in the laboratory, based on, for example,
having T-shirts of the same color or sharing preferences for art (Tajfel 1981; Chen & Li 2009). Here we
show that out-group biases depend on the decision-environment ­ they are more pronounced when
decisions happen in an environment characterized by wrongdoing against someone from the dominant
group, as compared to biases revealed in decisions made in "peaceful" circumstances.

         Further, our results speak to the ongoing debate about whether giving people opportunities to
punish leads to desirable social outcomes or not. Many studies have documented that punishment can have
a pro-social norm enforcement function (Fehr and Gächter 2002; Gächter, Renner, and Sefton 2008;
Henrich et al. 2010). Recent work has started to explore the conditions in which providing an opportunity
to punish may not have positive social effects (Herrmann, Thoni, and Gächter 2008; Abbink et al. 2010;
Goette et al. 2012). For instance, Herrmann et al. (2008) find that, in some societies, a non-negligible
fraction of people punish individuals who are relatively cooperative (a behavior called `anti-social
punishment'), and that such behavior eliminates the pro-social effects of punishment. We show that anti-
social punishment and scapegoating are two distinct behavioral phenomena: while we find no group bias
in anti-social punishment (i.e., people do not punish cooperators from the other group more than their in-
group members), we find systematic biases against the minority in the punishment of the Scapegoat.

         Finally, the paper is related to recent experiments documenting the role of contextual factors on
social behavior. It has been shown that people are less prone to behave morally when placed in decision-
environments which provide "moral wiggle room" and a larger scope for excuses (Bénabou and Tirole
2011) by, for example, obscuring the role of the decision-maker in determining an outcome (Dana, Weber,


6
  Another interesting line of experiments with a punishment option studies the attribution of responsibility and shifts
in blame caused by the diffusion of responsibility for unkind actions across multiple individuals (Bartling and
Fischbacher 2012). Here, we study redirecting punishment towards individuals who are completely passive.
Responsibility for unkind behavior can thus not be attributed to them. Also, our focus is on the role of ethnicity of the
passive person.
7
 Interestingly, both Bernhard, Fischbacher, and Fehr (2006) and Goette, Huffman, and Meier (2006) find that people
punish more severally wrongdoing targeting members of their own group, as compared to members of an out-group.
This result motivated us to keep the identity of the victim fixed, and to focus on punishment responses for wrongdoing
against own ethnic group.

                                                           6
and Kuang 2006; Falk, Neuber, and Szech 2020; Bauer et al. 2021). Our results suggest that when people
engage in punishment, they may have less scruples to act on their latent discriminatory preferences.



2. Experimental Design

The experimental design is presented in six subsections. First, we provide a short background on the Roma
ethnic minority. Second, we describe the sample selection. Third, we present the Punishing the Scapegoat
Game we developed to measure punishment of the Scapegoat ­ an uninvolved bystander ­ in response to
harmful behavior targeting a member of Punisher's group. We also describe the Punishing the Wrongdoer
Game, in which Punishers could directly punish the Wrongdoer. Fourth, we describe how we manipulate
information about the identity of the Scapegoat and the Wrongdoer. Fifth, we describe how we elicited real
wrongdoing from a supplementary sample of individuals who were given the option to malevolently reduce
the earned income of other individuals. Last, we provide further details about our experimental procedures.



2.1 Background on the Roma ethnic minority in Europe

Eastern Slovakia represents an apt natural setting to study behavior of the dominant group towards a
negatively stereotyped and weaker ethnic minority. The Roma people, a minority of Northern Indian origin,
constitute the largest ethnic minority in Europe, estimated at 10-12 million persons.8 They live in generally
poor socio-economic conditions and experience social exclusion all over Europe.9 The average education
levels of Roma are low (only 20% finish upper-secondary education), they are poorly integrated into labor
markets (less than one third are in paid employment), they generally live in substandard housing, and they
have worse health and lower life expectancy than the majority populations. It is estimated that 85% of Roma
in Europe live below national poverty lines. In Eastern Slovakia, the setting we study, the Roma represent
around 15% of the local population. Around 65% of Slovakian Roma live segregated from the majority
population, often in isolated settlements or on the edges of villages and towns. Previous research shows
that the Roma are subject to prejudice and face discrimination in labor and housing markets (Bartos et al.
2016). According to reports by the European Commission, almost one quarter of Europeans (38% of
Slovaks) state that they would be uncomfortable having a Roma neighbor and 34% of Europeans (60% of




8
 The background section draws heavily on our earlier paper (Bauer et al. 2018) about the Roma, which uses a different
data set collected in the same setting.
9
 The most significant populations are in Central and Eastern European countries (Bulgaria, Romania, Slovakia,
Hungary and the Czech Republic), but Roma also live in France, Greece and Italy.

                                                         7
Slovaks) think citizens in their country would feel uncomfortable about their children having Roma
classmates.

        Since World War II, when the Roma were persecuted along with the Jews, there has not been any
systematic violent conflict involving the Roma. Nevertheless, the frequency of anti-Roma violence has been
increasing in recent decades, especially in Central and Eastern Europe (Council of Europe 2012). Anti-
Roma marches have been staged in dozens of towns and cities across the region, and have commonly
escalated in property damage and/or violence. Walls separating the majority population from their Roma
neighbors have been built in numerous cities in Slovakia, Romania and Bulgaria. The most recent wave of
hate speech and violence against Roma occurred during the Covid-19 pandemic and was interpreted by
several commentators, including the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Minority Issues (UN News
2021; openDemocracy 2021), as "scapegoating" of Roma for the coronavirus pandemic.



2.2 Sample selection

The data collection took place between May and September 2017, across various localities in Eastern
Slovakia. We study punishment behavior among a diverse (though not representative) sample of young
adults of the majority Slovak ethnicity (N=337). We focus on young adults, because earlier research
indicates that perpetrators of aggressive behavior against other ethnic groups, including hate crimes, are
typically young (e.g., Levin and McDevitt 2002).

        The subjects are students aged 18-23 from the last two grades of secondary school (57% of the
sample) and a local university (43%). The secondary school students come from seven different schools,
located in two regions--Kosice and Presov--and include students from the three most common types of
high schools in Slovakia: general, technical, and business/commerce. In each region, we randomly selected
at least one school of each type; all schools selected agreed to participate. The school headmasters
determined which classes would take part. We randomly selected participants from all interested adult
students (aged 18 and above) in those classes and the experiments were implemented in their respective
schools. University students were recruited at the campus of the Technical University of Kosice, and
therefore the vast majority were enrolled in technical or economic majors. The sample characteristics are
presented in Table A1 (in Supplementary Online Appendix A): the subjects are on average 19.3 years old,
and 42% are female. Their parents completed at least secondary education in almost all cases; 25% of
fathers and 32% of mothers also hold a university degree.




                                                    8
        Further, we study the behavior of a sample of young adults from the Roma minority (N=484)10. We
randomly selected 21 villages and towns with an estimated Roma population of over 1,000 (the list of
eligible communities was based on the Atlas of Roma Communities 2013), across the same two regions. We
contacted a village representative, typically a mayor, asking for permission to conduct research and to
appoint a local contact person who was responsible for inviting participants (of 42 villages contacted, 21
agreed to take part). The local coordinators were instructed to select approximately 25 participants per
village, Slovak-speaking, 18-24 years of age, literate, ideally living in different parts of the village and
belonging to different social groups within the community. The experiments took place in local community
centers. As expected, the Roma subjects had less education and came from a poorer socio-economic
background (Table A2) compared to the subjects from the majority group: 15% were students, 49% were
unemployed and among those no longer studying, 55% had finished only primary school.



2.3 Experimental tasks

The Punishing the Scapegoat Game is illustrated in Panel A of Figure 1. A Punisher is matched with three
people ­ a Wrongdoer, a Victim and a Scapegoat, who are neutrally labeled Person A, Person B and Person
C when described to the Punisher. Specifically, on a tablet computer, the Punisher observes three pictures:
the first one with twenty potential Wrongdoers, the second one with twenty potential Victims, and the third
one with twenty potential Scapegoats. Each picture displays twenty passport-style photos, homogenous in
terms of ethnicity, and taken against a neutral background. The Punisher knows that s/he is matched with
one person from each set of twenty photographs but does not know with whom specifically. The Punisher
is informed that each of these three people (Wrongdoer, Victim, and Scapegoat) completed a work
assignment and earned 8 euro for their work. Further, the Punisher learns that after completing their work,
the Wrongdoer had an option to reduce the earnings of the Victim by 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8 euro, and that the
Scapegoat was utterly passive. Punishers learn that the Wrongdoer, the Victim, and the Scapegoat are each
from a different location, do not know each other, and that only the Wrongdoer had the option to reduce
the earnings of someone else, and only the Victim's earnings could have been reduced. The task of the
Punisher is to decide whether and by how much to reduce Scapegoat's payment. Thus, the decisions aim to
capture scapegoating behavior: Punishers face a situation in which their ability to address the true source




10
  We have intentionally selected a larger sample than from the majority group, because piloting of the experiment
revealed that around 25% of the Roma sample did not properly understand the experimental instructions, based on
crosscheck questions on understanding. In the analysis, we report results for the whole sample, as well as for a sub-
sample that excludes individuals whose responses indicated limited understanding of the instructions. The results are
robust.

                                                         9
of the social problem faced by the own group is inhibited ­ they cannot punish the Wrongdoer ­ but they
can instead shift punishment onto a different person and treat him as a Scapegoat.

                                              [Figure 1 around here]

         Punishment is costly: reduction of each euro costs the Punisher 0.10 euro. Punishers' decisions are
elicited for all five possible actions of the Wrongdoer towards the Victim, using a strategy method. When
making the decision, in a simple tablet interface, the Punishers choose a preferred punishment level for each
possible action of the Wrongdoer by pushing a "minus" or "plus" button--each tap on the tablet leads to a
2.00 euro decrease/increase of the earnings of the Wrongdoer or the Scapegoat. After each tap, the payoffs
of the Wrongdoer, the Victim, the Scapegoat, and Punisher's own payoff are updated and clearly specified
on the screen (sample decision screens are depicted in Figure A1). Importantly, the decision about the
Scapegoat's payoff was framed neutrally, without referring to "punishment" or "scapegoat". Specifically,
the Punishers were asked to decide whether to "reduce the Person C's money by X euro by paying X*10
cents". In order to avoid any scope for instrumental punishment of the Scapegoat, the Punisher knew that
the Wrongdoer would not be informed of the decision affecting the Scapegoat. The full experimental
protocol is provided in the Supplementary Online Appendix B.

         In addition, each Punisher made a decision in an additional task which we refer to as the Punishing
the Wrongdoer Game. The features of the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game were identical with the
Punishing the Scapegoat Game (e.g., structure of payoffs, cost of punishment, visual design, strategy
method), except that the Punishers were asked to decide whether and by how much to reduce Wrongdoer's
payoff. The two tasks described above were conducted in random order, and the participants did not know
about the existence of the second task until after they finished the first one. Each task was payoff-relevant
at 10% probability (but the tasks could never both be payoff-relevant)11, in which case the real decision of
the Wrongdoer together with the Punisher's choice in that scenario determined the final payoffs of the
Wrongdoer, the Victim, the Scapegoat and the Punisher. In order to avoid aversion to punishment motivated
by disadvantageous inequality between the Punisher and Scapegoat, we set the Punisher's endowment at 9
euro and thus even if s/he chose the maximum punishment level, his/her final payoff was 8.20 euro, i.e.
higher than the payoff of all other players.




11
  To make both tasks incentive-compatible in this way, at the end of the experiment, one ball was picked at random
from a bag containing ten balls. Before starting Task 1, the Punishers knew that there was a star on one of the balls
and Task 1 would be payoff-relevant if this ball was selected. After learning about the existence of Task 2, subjects
were told that there was a triangle on another of the ten balls, and if that ball was selected, Task 2 would be payoff-
relevant.

                                                          10
2.4 Manipulating the identity of Scapegoat and Wrongdoer

The Victim is always of the same ethnicity as the Punisher. Importantly, we exogenously manipulate signals
of ethnicity of the Scapegoat and of the Wrongdoer, in order to identify how ethnicity affects the decisions
of the Punishers, as illustrated in Figure 1. In the Scapegoat SAME condition, the Scapegoat has the same
ethnicity as the Punisher, whereas in the Scapegoat OTHER condition, the Scapegoat comes from the other
ethnic group. Similarly, in the Wrongdoer SAME condition, the Wrongdoer is of the same ethnicity as the
Punisher, while in the Wrongdoer OTHER condition, the Wrongdoer comes from the other ethnic group.
The signals of ethnicity of the Scapegoat and of the Wrongdoer are manipulated orthogonally. In this 2×2
"between-subject" design, each Punisher is randomly allocated to one of the four possible combinations of
Wrongdoer SAME/OTHER and the Scapegoat SAME/OTHER conditions. Randomization checks indicate
that the randomization was successful (Column 7 of Tables A1 and A2).

        We use photographs to signal ethnicity. Photographs provide a clear signal of a group attribute,
because Roma people (who are of Indian origins and have a darker skin color) are visually distinct from the
Slovak majority (white). For each group of workers, we displayed pictures of twenty individuals instead of
one, in order to avoid a case in which sympathies/antipathies towards a specific person in a picture might
drive decisions. Also, the individuals displayed in the pictures were homogenous in terms of gender and
age (all were young male, 18-23 years old), in order to avoid differential treatment based on these attributes.

        Since we study differential behavior towards real groups, note that the pictures in SAME and
OTHER may signal characteristics other than ethnicity, particularly socioeconomic status. Thus, a natural
question is whether our design measures discrimination against other ethnic groups or against poorer or less
educated individuals. To address this question, we asked each Punisher, after making their experimental
choices, about their perceptions of socioeconomic status (employment status, father's education) of
individuals displayed as Scapegoats and Wrongdoers. We show that our results are robust to controlling for
differences in perceptions across the SAME and OTHER conditions.



2.5 Elicitation of wrongdoing

Prior to the punishment experiment (May and early June 2017), we organized the following supplementary
work activity among a sample of different individuals, in order to make real the situation a Punisher was
confronted with, including the harm committed by the Wrongdoer to the Victim, and also to make the
Punisher's choices consequential.

        We recruited workers from the majority group and workers from the Roma ethnic group. Since the
experimental design requires six distinct groups of individuals who do not know each other (majority

                                                      11
Wrongdoers, Roma Wrongdoers, majority Victims, Roma Victims, majority Scapegoats and Roma
Scapegoats), we recruited workers in six different localities. In each locality, we hired 20-23 workers, all
young men, aged 18-23, and a professional photographer took a passport photo of each worker.12 We
selected the photographs of twenty workers and composed a picture consisting of these twenty photos. The
pictures were used to signal the ethnicity of the Wrongdoer, the Victim and the Scapegoat to the Punishers
in the Punishing the Scapegoat Game and in the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game, and to signal the ethnicity
of the Victim to the Wrongdoers.

        Workers performed eight hours of a simple and useful task, aimed at improving the local
environment (e.g., cleaning; painting desks; painting a fence; collecting and sorting tree boughs in the
woods) and could earn up to 8 euros per hour of work. In the experiment, we treat each hour of work as a
separate work assignment. Thus, eight different work hours of the same worker entered the decisions of
eight different Punishers. This procedure ensures that each Punisher observes a real situation in which the
Wrongdoer, the Victim and the Scapegoat displayed in the pictures worked for one hour and could earn up
to 8 euros for this work assignment. The Punishers were not informed that the workers worked for more
than one hour.13

        Upon completion of the work assignment, each Wrongdoer made a decision whether to reduce up
to 8 euro of the potential earnings of the Victim. Specifically, they could leave Victim's earnings for an
hour of work as they were, or lower them by 2, 4, 6, or 8 euro. Since we wanted to create a strong urge to
punish among Punishers, we deliberately elicited a particularly malevolent form of harmful behavior: it
reduces the earned income of the Victim and does not create a pecuniary benefit for anyone, including the
Wrongdoer.14 We find that a non-negligible fraction of Wrongdoers chose to do harm (see the histogram in
Figure A2), in line with beliefs about prevalence of harming, elicited among Punishers, as described below.



12
  The workers signed a consent form, agreeing to their participation in research and the use of their photograph for
the purposes of the research.
13
   Workers from two localities (one majority and one Roma) were assigned to the position of Victims for all eight
work hours. Pictures from these two localities were always used to display a potential Victim. Workers from the
remaining four localities were assigned to the position of Wrongdoers for four work hours (and made four decisions
whether to reduce earning of a Victim) and to the position of Scapegoats for the remaining four work hours. Pictures
from these localities were randomly assigned to display either the potential Wrongdoer or the potential Scapegoat, in
order to ensure that specific photographs in each of the pictures do not drive the differences between the punishment
of the Wrongdoer and the Scapegoat.
14
  Note that in the standard Third Party Punishment game, the players receive resources as "manna from heaven",
while in our experiment, inspired by recent experiments on redistribution of earned income (Cappelen et al. 2007;
Almas, Cappelen, and Tungodden 2020), we add the work stage, which creates a sense of entitlement, after which the
Wrongdoer destroyed earned resources of the Victim. Also, while prior experiments study punishment of violators of
norms that govern the positive side of social behavior (Goette, Huffman, and Meier 2006; Goette et al. 2012), we
focus on the responses of Punishers to unambiguously nasty behavior --destruction of the Victim's earnings.

                                                         12
This finding is also consistent with the results of recent studies that show that anti-social behavior is not an
anomaly, when tasks are implemented in which the decision-maker has to sacrifice some of his/her own
money to reduce the other's payoff and where this destruction cannot be justified by standard fairness
considerations.15

           The Wrongdoers knew that their decisions would have real payoff consequences, and would be
anonymous: the Victim would be given the remaining amount without any additional information. They
also knew that the Victim could not reduce their (the Wrongdoer's) wage. Further, they were informed (as
all other workers) that their own earnings could be affected by decisions of other people but did not know
any details about the Punisher's task.

           Given the expected destruction rates among the Wrongdoers and punishment rates among the
Punishers, we could guarantee each worker the payment of 20 euros shortly after they finished the work.
This amount is equivalent to the minimum wage in Slovakia at the time of the data collection (2.50 euro
per hour). The workers were further informed that they would receive up to 44 additional euro in three
months, based on the decisions of other people. Thus, the maximum payment they could receive was 64
euro, equivalent to 8 euro per hour of work. The average amount paid to workers was 45.3 euros and the
minimum amount was 40 euros.



2.6 Procedures

We paid particular attention to maximize a correct understanding of the tasks. First, the experimenters
explained the instructions one-on-one.16 Second, the working/wrongdoing stage of the experiment and the
decisions were explained in detail using a simple tablet interface with the photos of Wrongdoers, Victims,
and Scapegoats (Figure A1).17 Third, before making decisions, the Punisher had to answer six
comprehension questions, demonstrating understanding of the roles of the three types of workers. If any of
the answers were not correct, the experimenter explained the whole setup once again, and the


15
  Among adult non-student samples, the proportion of harmful choices was 20% in Kenya (Bauer, Chytilová, and
Miguel 2020), 19% in Slovakia (Bauer et al. 2021), 30% in India (Fehr, Hoff, and Kshetramade 2008) and 23% in
Namibia (Prediger, Vollan, and Herrmann 2014). It is also worth noting that subjects in the supplementary activity in
our study were young male from socially and economically disadvantaged groups, and the existing evidence suggests
that people with low SES are more prone to engage in anti-social behavior (Bauer, Chytilová, and Pertold-Gebicka
2014; Prediger, Vollan, and Herrmann 2014; Bauer et al. 2021).
16
   On a typical day, three experimenters implemented the experiments in one location. Each subject was randomly
allocated to one of the experimenters. All (ten) experimenters were from the majority ethnic group, and they were
randomly allocated to conditions within each location. The results are robust to controlling for experimenter fixed
effects.
17
     The app was programmed using z-Tree (Fischbacher 2007).

                                                         13
comprehension questions were asked a second time. As a robustness check, we exclude from the sample
individuals who did not provide correct answers when the questions were asked for the second time.

        To avoid perception of social pressure, the experimenters could not observe the subjects' decisions.
For each possible action of the Wrongdoer, the experimenter described the situation, and then gave the
subject privacy to anonymously make decisions on the tablet computer whether and how much to lower the
payoffs of the Scapegoat (or the Wrongdoer). The experiments were conducted in private; other participants
could not hear the instructions or observe the decisions that the subjects made on the tablets.

        After completing the main tasks, we elicited beliefs about the action of the Wrongdoer, asking the
Punishers to guess which of the five options the Wrongdoer chose (subjects were rewarded 1 euro for a
correct guess). We also elicited beliefs in more detail, asking how many of the twenty potential Wrongdoers
they thought chose each action, to gauge beliefs about the distribution of responses.18 A short post-
experiment questionnaire followed. To elicit the perceptions of the Wrongdoer's and Scapegoat's social
status, the Punishers were asked to guess their employment status (student/employed/unemployed) and the
educational level of their father. Subjects also filled in a short questionnaire on their own demographics
(gender, education, family size, marital status, parental education and employment, religiosity, and
household amenities).

        To determine final payoffs, at the end of the experiment, each Punisher chose one ball out of ten at
random from a bag, which determined whether their decision in the Punishing the Scapegoat Game and in
the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game was payoff-relevant or not. An actual decision of an anonymously
matched Wrongdoer determined which decision situation in a given task was payoff-relevant (out of five).



3. Results

In the main analysis presented in Section 3.1, we focus on choices of decision-makers from the majority
group in the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. In Section 3.2, we analyze choices in the Punishing the
Wrongdoer Game. In Section 3.3, we provide additional results, including the analysis of decision-makers
from the Roma minority, and discuss how our findings relate to minority scapegoating and other existing
theories of discrimination (collective responsibility, statistical discrimination, and taste-based
discrimination).




18
  We did not elicit the more detailed beliefs for the Roma minority Punishers, because the explanation was too time-
consuming and a large percentage of subjects did not understand this aspect of the experiment properly during the
pilot.

                                                        14
3.1 Punishment of the Scapegoat

In this sub-section, we explore whether the initial harm committed by the Wrongdoer gives rise to harmful
behavior towards the Scapegoat and whether the identity of the Scapegoat matters. Figure 2 displays the
results for the punishment of the Scapegoat across the five specific amounts of Victim's earnings that the
Wrongdoer could decide to destroy (0, 2, 4, 6 and 8 euros). Panel A shows the average amount of euros
that the Punishers decided to destroy in the SAME condition, when the Scapegoat is also from the majority
population, and in the OTHER condition, when the Scapegoat is a member of the Roma ethnic minority.
Panel B depicts the proportion of the Punishers who decide to punish in each case. Table 1 presents the
results of the regression analysis.

                                           [Figure 2 around here]

        We find several interesting patterns. First, a substantial fraction of Punishers responds to observing
the Wrongdoer's misbehavior by lowering the payoff of the Scapegoat (Panel B of Figure 2) and the
Punishers are sensitive to the intensity of the harm done by the Wrongdoer to the Victim. Only 4% of
subjects reduce the payoff of the Scapegoat when the Wrongdoer did zero harm, but the number increases
to 24% for the situations when the Wrongdoer destroyed all 8 euro of Victim's earnings. 23% of subjects
reduce the payoff of the Scapegoat by a larger amount in a situation when maximum harm is committed, as
compared to when no harm is done by the Wrongdoer. In terms of the size of the punishment, when the
Wrongdoer does no harm, we observe only a small reduction of the Scapegoat's payoff (0.12 euro on
average), whereas in a situation with maximum harm, it increases to 1.10 euro (Panel A of Figure 2).

                                           [Table 1 around here]

        Next, we study whether the ethnic identity of the Scapegoat matters. In circumstances when no
harm is done by the Wrongdoer, there is no evidence of discrimination against the Roma ethnic minority--
on average their payoff is lowered by 0.11 euro, while the payoff of the Scapegoat from the majority
population is lowered by an average of 0.13 euro. Importantly, when analyzing situations in which the
Wrongdoer harmed the Victim, we find a systematic difference in responses between the Scapegoat SAME
and Scapegoat OTHER conditions-- punishment of Scapegoats is twice as severe when the Scapegoat is
from the Roma minority than when the Scapegoat is from the majority population. Specifically, in
Scapegoat SAME, an increase in harm intensity by one additional euro motivates Punishers to lower the
Scapegoat's earnings by an additional 0.08 euro. In Scapegoat OTHER, the effect doubles to 0.16 euro, and
the difference between SAME and OTHER is statistically significant at the 1% level (p=0.002, Column 1
of Table 1). Due to such magnified punishment of the Scapegoat in OTHER, discrimination against the

                                                     15
ethnic minority gradually rises with greater harm intensity and becomes statistically significant for
situations when the Wrongdoer destroyed 4, 6 or 8 euros of the Victim's earnings (Figure 3, p-values =
0.008, 0.002, 0.011, respectively).

                                           [Figure 3 around here]

        The interaction effect of the Wrongdoer's level of harm committed and OTHER on punishment of
the Scapegoat is driven by the extensive as well as the intensive margin (Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1), and
in both cases it is statistically significant at the 5% level. Each additional euro destroyed by the Wrongdoer
leads to an increase in the proportion of those who decide to punish the Scapegoat, by 2 percentage points
in Scapegoat SAME and by 3 percentage points in Scapegoat OTHER. Among those who decide to
scapegoat, the amount destroyed from the Scapegoat's earnings increases by 0.20 euro in Scapegoat SAME
and by 0.39 euro in Scapegoat OTHER.

        The results are robust to controlling for various additional variables (Table A3). Columns 1-7
document that the coefficients for harm intensity and for the interaction between harm intensity and OTHER
hardly change when we control for design features, including experimenter fixed effects, the subject's
observable characteristics, location fixed effects and parental education level. The coefficients remain
statistically significant at the 1% level, and the magnitude stays the same. The results are similar if we use
a non-linear specification for the harm caused by the Wrongdoer (Columns 1-2 of Table A4).

        The use of the strategy method to elicit choices for various possible actions of the Wrongdoer has
the advantage of providing a rich picture of the Punisher's behavior. On the other side, this approach may,
in principle, induce Punishers towards greater differentiation in behavior in different situations and thus
lead to greater observed sensitivity of Punishers to intensity of the harm done by the Wrongdoer.
Importantly, however, our main focus is on estimating the differences in the Punisher's sensitivity to harm
intensity across the Scapegoat's ethnicity (SAME vs. OTHER). Since the decision environment is the same
across these conditions, there is no obvious reason why any experimenter demand effects should matter
more in OTHER than in SAME. This concern is further alleviated by the fact that we implemented the
SAME and OTHER conditions using a between-subject design, and thus subjects could not be induced to
differentiate the punishment of Scapegoats of the majority vs. minority ethnicity.

        In addition, many existing experiments studied differences in choices when the strategy method
versus the direct-response method is used. Jordan, McAuliffe, and Rand (2016) focus specifically on the
Third Party Punishment Game and find that the use of the strategy method does not influence punishment
decisions. Brandts and Charness (2011) provide an overview of 29 studies focusing on various experimental
tasks. They find that although the use of the strategy method affected the levels of behavior in some of the


                                                     16
tasks, it is to be noted that in all of the experiments, a treatment effect identified with the strategy method
was also observed with the direct-response method. Thus, we believe it is unlikely that any experimenter
demand effect could explain the main pattern we observe -- magnified punishment of the Scapegoat in
OTHER as compared to SAME.

        Finally, we study heterogeneity and explore whether the observed biases in the punishment of the
Scapegoat are driven by an easily identifiable subgroup of individuals (Table A5). We focus on three
characteristics of majority Punishers, for which there is enough variation in our sample, and divide the
sample based on gender, student status (secondary school vs. university students) and parental education
(as a proxy for socio-economic status). The results are qualitatively similar across parental education and,
interestingly, they also hold for university students. This suggests that even the future `elites' are not
immune to group biases in punishment. In terms of gender differences, the interaction effect is primarily
driven by men.

        To summarize, we find that members of the minority group receive systematically harsher
punishment than members of the majority group for actions of unrelated individuals. In subsection 3.3, we
present additional results and consider potential alternative explanations.



3.2 Punishment of the Wrongdoer

In terms of direct punishment of the Wrongdoer, we also find that the Punishers are sensitive to the intensity
of harm done. The greater the harm caused by the Wrongdoer, the stronger the punishment (Figure A3).
The punishment response is stronger, approximately around five times, when the subjects can directly
punish the Wrongdoer, as compared to punishment of the Scapegoat.19

        When no harm is done by the Wrongdoer, we do not detect any discrimination against the Roma
minority. Importantly, the sensitivity to harm intensity is again systematically larger in OTHER as
compared to SAME, both in terms of the extent of the punishment (Panel A of Figure A3) and of the
likelihood that subjects punish the Wrongdoer (Panel B). In the regression analysis (Table A6), the
coefficients for an interaction term between harm intensity and OTHER are statistically significant at the
1% level, both for the extensive and intensive margins. The results are robust to using various specifications
and control variables, including order of the task, experimenter and location fixed effects (Table A7) and



19
  As expected, punishment of the Scapegoat and punishment of the Wrongdoer are strongly positively correlated.
Specifically, for the maximum harm committed by the Wrongdoer, 21% of Punishers do not punish anyone, 54%
punish only the Wrongdoer, 23% punish both the Wrongdoer and the Scapegoat, while only 2% punish only the
Scapegoat.

                                                      17
are qualitatively similar for different sub-samples based on gender, student status and parental education
(Table A8).

        Finally, we show that the magnified revenge in OTHER as compared to SAME gives rise to
discrimination against the Roma minority (Figure A4). When the harm is large (4, 6 or 8 euros), Wrongdoers
from the minority group are punished more harshly, by 13-20%, than Wrongdoers from the decision-
makers' own group (p-values = 0.051, 0.095, 0.013 respectively). In the situation in which the Wrongdoer
committed maximum harm (destroyed all 8 euros), the punishment gap is the most profound (4.75 euros in
SAME vs. 5.69 euros in OTHER, on average). To sum up, when no harm is done to a member of the
majority group, the decision-makers from the majority group do not discriminate against the ethnic
minority. At the same time, Wrongdoers from the Roma ethnic minority are punished more severely than
Wrongdoers from the majority population, for the same harmful actions.



3.3 Mechanisms behind the shifting of punishment on minorities

In this sub-section, we discuss and present additional results that speak to the underlying mechanisms of
the main effects. We argue that the results support the interpretation that the observed greater inclination to
shift punishment on the Roma minority originates in latent discriminatory preferences. We also show that
the main effects are unlikely to be driven by statistical discrimination, over-attribution of responsibility, or
due to "punishment by association" (collective punishment). We also consider whether the effects can be
explained by differences in perceptions about the socio-economic status of Roma and non-Roma. Finally,
we discuss whether the shifting of punishment on an out-group is specific to behavior of a dominant group
towards ethnic minorities, or whether it extends to any interactions across ethnic boundaries.



3.3.1 Why is shifting of punishment larger when the Roma minority is a Scapegoat?

Statistical discrimination and over-attribution of responsibility. By virtue of the experimental design,
beliefs and statistical discrimination are unlikely to explain our findings. First, subjects were randomly
allocated into SAME and OTHER conditions and were provided the same information about the nature and
the extent of the harm before making their punishment decisions. This essentially rules out the possibility
that greater punishment of Roma minority members in our experiment can be explained by subjects thinking
that Roma Wrongdoers committed more serious harm than Wrongdoers from the majority group. Also, we
directly elicited beliefs about the destructiveness of Wrongdoers in SAME and in OTHER conditions, and




                                                      18
do not find evidence supporting the idea that subjects believed Roma Wrongdoers to be more likely to harm
Victims than majority Wrongdoers.20

         Moreover, the observed bias in punishment is unlikely to be driven by differences in beliefs about
future interactions ­ for example, by the possibility that Punishers would punish the majority Scapegoats
(or Wrongdoers) less due to greater fear that they would in the future face revenge from them, either within
or outside of the (field) lab. Punishers knew Scapegoats and Wrongdoers would not have any opportunity
to take revenge after their punishment decision, the interactions were one-shot and anonymous, with
Scapegoats and Wrongdoers coming from different locations.

         Finally, Punishers faced no uncertainty about who was responsible for the wrongdoing, since the
experimental protocol made it clear that Wrongdoers caused the harm to the Victim, while Scapegoats did
not. Thus, shifting of the punishment in our experiment is unlikely to arise because of over-attribution of
responsibility, and subsequent blaming of minority groups for injustices done to the majority group
members. While these can be relevant drivers of punishment when the source of harm is unclear, they are
ruled out here by experimental design.



Collective responsibility. A plausible mechanism for why people may punish innocent individuals from
other ethnic groups is the notion of collective responsibility. "Punishment by association" is described as
retaliation directed not only against the wrongdoer, but also against other members of his group who have
no direct association with the perpetrator or direct control over his actions (Lickel, Schmader, and Hamilton
2003; Cushman, Durwin, and Lively 2012). Thus, in our experiment, collective responsibility would predict
that punishment of minority Scapegoats is triggered specifically in a situation where the Wrongdoer was
also from the minority group. To test this, we take advantage of the orthogonal experimental variation of
identity of the Wrongdoer and of the Scapegoat.

         Figure A5 displays the results graphically for all four possible combinations of ethnic identity of
the Wrongdoer and of the Scapegoat, where the outcome of interest is the punishment of the Scapegoat. In
all four situations, subjects respond to greater harm done with greater punishment of the Scapegoat. This
response is, however, not stronger in situations when the Scapegoat has a shared ethnicity with the



20
  Panel A of Table A9 shows the distributions of beliefs, which are not significantly different for the Wrongdoer from
the majority population and for the Wrongdoer from the Roma ethnic minority. Most subjects believe that the
Wrongdoer did not commit any harm (61% in SAME and 64% in OTHER). Yet, a non-negligible number believe that
the Wrongdoer destroyed some part of the earnings of the Victim and 6% of participants in SAME and 8% in OTHER
believe that maximum harm was committed. We arrive to the same conclusion with our second, more detailed,
measure of beliefs (Panel B).

                                                         19
Wrongdoer (solid lines), providing initial indication that punishment by association does not drive our
results. Further, in a regression analysis, we restrict the sample to subjects who were informed that the
Wrongdoer was from the majority group. Thus, magnified punishment of the minority Scapegoat cannot be
explained by the desire to punish collectively based on the shared ethnicity of Wrongdoer and Scapegoat.
Yet, we still find a strong bias in punishment, as indicated by the positive and statistically significant
coefficient for the interaction term between harm intensity inflicted by the majority Wrongdoer and the
Scapegoat OTHER condition (p=0.006, Column 1 of Table A10).21 In addition, in Column 4, we hold the
Roma identity of the Scapegoat constant and estimate whether scapegoating becomes stronger in a situation
where the Wrongdoer is also from the Roma minority, as compared to when the Wrongdoer is from the
majority group. We do not find evidence for this--when Scapegoats are OTHER, the coefficient for the
interaction term between harm intensity and Wrongdoer OTHER is in fact negative and not statistically
significant.22

         Altogether, this set of results does not support the interpretation that the observed magnified
punishment of Scapegoats from the Roma minority is driven by collective responsibility.23 In fact, we find
that the minority Scapegoats are more harshly punished regardless of the ethnic identity of the Wrongdoer.
In other words, the minority is punished for any injustice done to the member of the majority group,
including those that originate from within the majority group.



Latent discriminatory preferences. Plain unconditional outgroup hate, a strong form of taste-based
discrimination, implies that decision-makers may treat the ethnic minority systematically more harshly than
members of their own group, independently of the social context. Thus, differential treatment of the
discriminated group should be relatively stable. Yet, we find that this is not the case, since we observe that



21
  This result also indicates that our findings on differential treatment of minority Scapegoat is unlikely to be explained
by pure conformism ­ Punishers simply copying the behavior of Wrongdoers. Assuming that conformism increases
with a similarity of the decision, this explanation would imply larger punishment of majority as compared to minority
Scapegoats, if both the Wrongdoer and Victim are from the majority group. This is an opposite pattern to what we
find.
22
  In Column 3 of Table A10, we study the role of collective responsibility for the Scapegoat from the majority
population. In this case, we also find no evidence that collective responsibility plays a role, since the sensitivity to
harm intensity is not greater if the Wrongdoer is of the same ethnicity as the Scapegoat, i.e. from the majority
population.
23
  Note that, by design, we focus on the pure form of enforcement of collective responsibility, but at the same time we
close some of the mechanisms behind collective punishment that might be relevant in real life, in particular the role
of instrumental punishment. In our experiment, the Punisher knows that the Scapegoat will not be informed about the
Wrongdoer's action (and thus what action triggered his punishment), and that the Wrongdoer will not be informed
about any punishment, and thus the Punisher cannot send a moral message to the Wrongdoer by punishing the
Scapegoat.

                                                           20
when there is no harm committed against a Victim, and thus no injustice, there is no evidence of
discrimination against the minority. Discrimination against the Roma minority is activated when subjects
observe harm committed against a member of their own group and have an opportunity to punish an
unrelated party or the Wrongdoer, suggesting that people harbor latent discriminatory preferences that are
manifested only in some situations.

        Several features of the decision environment associated with making decisions after observing
harm committed against a member from the own group make it psychologically easier for people who
harbor latent discriminatory preference to act on them. First, discriminatory urges may be controlled at
normal emotional states, while witnessing blatant injustice may trigger anger and reduce such self-control.
Observing conflict and unethical behavior can reduce self-image costs from acting based on a latent animus.
Finally, reduced earnings of the Victim from the own group can provide an excuse for destroying income
of the ethnic minority member, justified by not letting the Victim lag behind the minority Scapegoat in
terms of relative income. Empirically separating between these plausible channels that may activate latent
discriminatory preferences and lead to minority scapegoating is beyond the scope of this paper.


3.3.2 Group attribute
We first aim to gauge whether the observed bias in punishment can be explained by differences in perceived
socio-economic status, rather than ethnic minority status per se, since the pictures in SAME and OTHER
may signal not only ethnicity, but also socioeconomic status (SES). To do so, we elicited subjects'
perceptions of the socio-economic status of the individuals in the photos, after completing their
experimental choices. Specifically, the participants reported their estimates of the employment status and
the father's education of the pictured individuals. As expected, the perceptions of individuals in SAME and
OTHER indeed differ widely (Table A11). People in photos signaling Roma minority are significantly more
likely to be perceived as unemployed, less likely to be students, and less likely to have educated fathers.

        We test whether the coefficient for the interaction effect between harm intensity and OTHER is
robust to controlling for perceptions of unemployment and its interaction with harm intensity, and to
controlling for perceptions of the father's education and its interaction with extent of harm inflicted. Table
A12 shows the results for punishment of the Scapegoat and Table A13 for punishment of the Wrongdoer.
In both tasks, we find that the estimated interaction effects between harm intensity and OTHER on
punishment are similar to the baseline estimates. Also, we observe that Punishers who believe that OTHER
Scapegoats or Wrongdoers are from a low SES background are not more likely to punish, compared to
Punishers who believe Scapegoats or Wrongdoers are not from low SES, once we control for
SAME/OTHER conditions.


                                                     21
         These patterns suggest that differences in perceptions of socio-economic status, which are
associated with SAME and OTHER conditions, cannot fully explain our findings. That said, note that the
allocation to OTHER and SAME conditions is exogenous since it was randomly allocated, while the
perceptions of parental education and employment status of the people in the photos are endogenous, and
thus this analysis needs to be taken with a grain of salt.

         Next, the literature on scapegoating suggests that such behavior is specific to decision-makers from
the dominant group when interacting with members of negatively stereotyped, vulnerable and smaller
groups (Allport 1954; Bettelheim and Janowitz 1950), rather than vice versa. To test this idea, we measured
the behavior of Roma punishers in the same experimental set up and compared their punishment behavior
with punishers from the majority group. Indeed, we find weaker evidence of biases in punishments by the
minority group against the majority group, as compared to biases of the majority group against the minority
group.

         Specifically, we find that Roma subjects punish the Scapegoat, and the extent of scapegoating
increases with harm intensity. Importantly, when we compare choices in Scapegoat SAME and Scapegoat
OTHER, we do not find evidence of co-ethnic bias in any of the five situations with different harm intensity
(Figure A6). Also, in the regression analysis, the coefficient for the interaction between harm intensity and
Scapegoat OTHER is small in magnitude and not statistically significant (p=0.737, Column 1 of Table
A14). In terms of direct punishment of the Wrongdoer, we find a weaker but qualitatively similar pattern
as we did for the majority population. When no harm is done by the Wrongdoer, we find no evidence of
discrimination against the majority population, but harmful actions of the Wrongdoer against a Roma
subject trigger magnified revenge towards OTHER (majority) Wrongdoers as compared to SAME (Roma)
Wrongdoers. The coefficient for an interaction term between the harm intensity and OTHER is statistically
significant at the 10% level (p=0.097, Column 1 of Table A15).24 Consequently, a gap in the punishment
of majority vs. Roma Wrongdoers opens up with greater harm intensity and becomes marginally statistically
significant for maximum harm (p-value=0.099, Figure A7). Note that among Roma Punishers, incomplete
understanding is a potential concern, since only 77% of the subjects answered all comprehension questions




24
  While the patterns are qualitatively similar, the strength of the effects and the extent of punishment differ across the
samples of decision-makers from the Roma and from the ethnic majority population. First, the extent of punishment
in a situation where no harm is committed by the Wrongdoer is higher among Roma than among ethnic majority
decision-makers (0.91 vs. 0.24 euro, respectively). Second, the extent of punishment in the situation of maximum
harm is lower among Roma than majority decision-makers (2.71 vs. 5.23 euro, respectively). Thus, Roma decision-
makers were less sensitive to harm intensity. Specifically, in the SAME condition, each additional euro destroyed by
the Wrongdoer leads to an increase in punishment by 0.19 euro by Roma and by 0.56 euro by ethnic majority decision-
makers.

                                                           22
correctly. It is reassuring that when we exclude the 23% of subjects who demonstrated imperfect
understanding, the estimates are similar to the original results (Column 5 of Tables A14 and A15).



4. Conclusion

Social scientists have long speculated that members of dominant social groups tend to shift punishment for
social ills originating within their own group onto innocent members of other, weaker groups. This
behavior, termed scapegoating, is sometimes considered to be an important psychological mechanism in
the emergence of pogroms, witch-hunts, and large-scale violence. However, anecdotal and historical
evidence cannot rule out the role of standard economic motives in harming innocent members of minority
groups, and an experimental test of this behavioral phenomenon in controlled environments had been
missing so far. This is what we provided in this paper. We have developed a new incentivized task, the
Punishing the Scapegoat Game, to uncover how observing harmful actions against members of one's own
group shapes the punishment of innocent individuals. We study the behavior of young adults in Eastern
Slovakia, a region experiencing intergroup tensions. In line with the idea that minorities are often treated
as scapegoats by dominant groups, we show that Punishers from the ethnic majority group systematically
redirect punishment onto innocent members of the Roma minority group for harmful actions committed by
other people. Further, when they can punish actual Wrongdoers, they punish Wrongdoers from the minority
group more harshly than Wrongdoers from the majority group, for the same wrongdoing. Importantly, the
observed out-group bias in punishment happens above and beyond out-group bias in circumstances when
people do not respond to harm done to their own group.

        This paper leaves several questions open for future research. We study interactions between one
majority group and one minority group (Roma people), in one setting in which the minority is largely
segregated, economically disadvantaged, and ostracized. Although anecdotal evidence suggests that
scapegoating is a relatively broad phenomenon, clearly, more research is needed to assess whether the
patterns we observe are generalizable to other settings, and also to pin down which specific group attributes
make certain individuals or groups convenient scapegoats. In this paper, we also study the influence of
observing social ills--someone doing harm to a member of one's own group for no apparent reason.
Although it is beyond the scope of our study, an interesting direction is to explore whether similar
aggressive discriminatory responses are activated when experiencing personal ills, such as stress or an
important income shock. We believe the experimental paradigm illustrated in this paper is a well-suited
tool to address some of these questions.




                                                     23
         At face value, our findings have several potentially important implications. First, we show that pure
observation of injustice and wrongdoing against the individual's own group activates latent discriminatory
preferences, both when treating innocent individuals as well as wrongdoers. This indicates that courts, and
other settings in which people make punishment choices, are particularly discrimination-prone
environments, in line with evidence of strong biases against minorities in judicial decisions (Alesina and
Ferrara 2014; Rehavi and Starr 2014; Shayo and Zussman 2011). Second, the results suggest that ethnic
minorities are at greater risk when social problems and unfair behavior become salient features of the
societal environment. So far, economists have typically attributed sudden spikes in aggressive behavior
towards weaker groups to changes in economic incentives or beliefs about the likelihood of facing a penalty
for aggressive behavior (Blattman and Miguel 2010; Grosfeld, Sakalli, and Zhuravskaya 2020; Miguel
2005), assuming that revealed (anti-) social preferences towards other groups are stable. In our experiment,
economic incentives are held constant and thus cannot explain the scapegoating behavior observed. Of
course, this does not imply that economic incentives do not play an important role in real-life aggression
towards minority groups. However, our evidence suggests that may not be the complete picture. It
strengthens the case for taking seriously "behavioral" channels through which deterioration of the social
environment may fuel inter-group conflicts.



Acknowledgements
We thank Alexander Cappelen, Ernst Fehr, Michael Kosfeld, Filip Matjka, Matthias Sutter, Bertil Tungodden,
seminar participants at the University of Munich, Max Planck Institute in Bonn, UC Berkeley, University of
Edinburgh, Goethe University in Frankfurt, Norwegian School of Economics, and participants at the ECBE conference
2020, EEA Virtual Congress 2020, Symposium for Social Cohesion in Ethnically Diverse Societies in Tilburg, and
ERINN Annual Conference 2021 for many helpful comments. The data collection was supported by a grant from the
Czech Science Foundation (17-13869S), and by the Slovak Research and Development Agency (APVV-0125-12 and
APVV-19-0329). Bauer and Chytilová acknowledge support from ERC-CZ/AV-B (ERC300851901).


The research was approved by the Ethical committee at the Technical University of Kosice (12/7/2016) and by the
Director of the Institute of Economic Studies at the Faculty of Social Sciences, Charles University.




                                                         24
References

Abbink, Klaus, Jordi Brandts, Benedikt Herrmann, and Henrik Orzen. 2010. "Intergroup Conflict and
    Intra-Group Punishment in an Experimental Contest Game." American Economic Review 100 (1):
    420­47.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2014. "A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing." American
     Economic Review 104 (11): 3397­3433.
Allport, Gordon W. 1954. The Nature of Prejudice. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Almas, Ingvild, Alexander Cappelen, and Bertil Tungodden. 2020. "Cutthroat Capitalism versus Cuddly
    Socialism: Are Americans More Meritocratic and Efficiency-Seeking than Scandinavians?" Journal
    of Political Economy 128 (5): 1753­88.
Anderson, Robert Warren, Noel D. Johnson, and Mark Koyama. 2017. "Jewish Persecutions and Weather
    Shocks: 1100­1800." Economic Journal 127 (602): 924­58.
Bardhan, Pranab. 2005. Scarcity, Conflict and Cooperation. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Bartling, Björn, and Urs Fischbacher. 2012. "Shifting the Blame: On Delegation and Responsibility."
      Review of Economic Studies 79 (1): 67­87.
Bartos, Vojtch, Michal Bauer, Julie Chytilová, and Filip Matjka. 2016. "Attention Discrimination:
     Theory and Field Experiments with Monitoring Information Acquisition." American Economic
     Review 106 (6): 1437­75.
Bauer, Michal, Jana Cahlíková, Dagmara Celik-Katreniak, Julie Chytilová, Lubomír Cingl, and Tomás
    Zelinský. 2021. "Nastiness in Groups." Mimeo.
Bauer, Michal, Jana Cahlíková, Julie Chytilová, and Tomás Zelinský. 2018. "Social Contagion of Ethnic
    Hostility." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (19): 4881­86.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Edward Miguel. 2020. "Using Survey Questions to Measure
    Preferences: Lessons from an Experimental Validation in Kenya." European Economic Review,
    103493.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Barbara Pertold-Gebicka. 2014. "Parental Background and Other-
    Regarding Preferences in Children." Experimental Economics 17 (1): 24­46.
Baumgartner, Thomas, Lorenz Goette, Rahel Guegler, and Ernst Fehr. 2012. "The Mentalizing Network
    Orchestrates the Impact of Parochial Altruism on Social Norm Enforcement." Human Brain
    Mapping 33 (6): 1452­69.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2011. "Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets." Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 126 (2): 805­55.
Berge, Lars Ivar Oppedal, Kjetil Bjorvatn, Simon Galle, Edward Miguel, Daniel Posner, Bertil
     Tungodden, and Kelly Zhang. 2020. "Ethnically Biased? Experimental Evidence from Kenya."
     Journal of the European Economic Association 18 (1): 134­64.
Bernhard, Helen, Urs Fischbacher, and Ernst Fehr. 2006. "Parochial Altruism in Humans." Nature 442
    (7105): 912­915.
Bettelheim, B., and M. Janowitz. 1950. Dynamics of Prejudice: A Sociological Study of Veterans. New
     York: Harper and Brothers.

                                                  25
Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel. 2010. "Civil War." Journal of Economic Literature 48 (1):
     3­57.
Brandts, Jordi, and Gary Charness. 2011. "The Strategy versus the Direct-Response Method: A First
    Survey of Experimental Comparisons." Experimental Economics 14 (3): 375­98.
Cappelen, Alexander W, Astri Drange Hole, Erik Sorensen, and Bertil Tungodden. 2007. "The Pluralism
    of Fairness Ideals: An Experimental Approach." American Economic Review 97 (3): 818­27.
Chen, Yan, and Sherry Xi Li. 2009. "Group Identity and Social Preferences." American Economic Review
    99 (1): 431­457.
Council of Europe. 2012. Human Rights of Roma and Travellers in Europe. Strasbourg: Council of
    Europe Publishing.
Crossman, Ashley. 2019. "Definition of Scapegoat, Scapegoating, and Scapegoat Theory." ThoughtCo.,
     2019.
Cushman, Fiery, A. J. Durwin, and Chaz Lively. 2012. "Revenge without Responsibility? Judgments
    about Collective Punishment in Baseball." Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 48 (5): 1106­
    10.
Dana, Jason, Roberto A. Weber, and Jason Xi Kuang. 2006. "Exploiting Moral Wiggle Room:
    Experiments Demonstrating an Illusory Preference for Fairness." Economic Theory 33 (1): 67­80.
Doob, Leonard W., Neal E. Miller, Orval Hobart Mowrer, Robert Sears, and John Dollard. 1939.
    Frustration and Aggression. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Esteban, Joan-Maria, and Debraj Ray. 2008. "On the Salience of Ethnic Conflict." American Economic
     Review 98 (5): 2185­2202.
Falk, Armin, Thomas Neuber, and Nora Szech. 2020. "Diffusion of Being Pivotal and Immoral
      Outcomes." Review of Economic Studies 87 (5): 2205­29.
Falk, Armin, and Christian Zehnder. 2013. "A City-Wide Experiment on Trust Discrimination." Journal
      of Public Economics 100: 15­27.
Fearon, James D., and David D. Laitin. 2000. "Violence and the Social Construction of Ethnic Identity."
     International Organization 54 (4): 845­77.
Fehr, Ernst, and Urs Fischbacher. 2004. "Third-Party Punishment and Social Norms." Evolution and
     Human Behavior 25 (2): 63­87.
Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gächter. 2002. "Altruistic Punishment in Humans." Nature 415 (6868): 137­40.
Fehr, Ernst, Karla Hoff, and Mayursh Kshetramade. 2008. "Spite and Development." American Economic
     Review: Papers and Proceedings 98 (2): 494­499.
Fershtman, Chaim, and Uri Gneezy. 2001. "Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An Experimental
     Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1): 351­377.
Fischbacher, Urs. 2007. "Z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-Made Economic Experiments."
     Experimental Economics 10 (2): 171­77.
Gächter, Simon, Elke Renner, and Martin Sefton. 2008. "The Long-Run Benefits of Punishment." Science
    322 (5907): 1510­1510.
Girard, Rene. 1979. Things Hidden Since the Foundation Ofthe World. Stanford, CA: Stanford University

                                                   26
     Press.
Glick, Peter. 2005. "Choice of Scapegoats." In On the Nature of Prejudice, edited by John F Dovidio,
     Peter Glick, and Laurie Budman, 244­61. Blackwell Publishing.
Goette, Lorenz, David Huffman, and Stephan Meier. 2006. "The Impact of Group Membership on
     Cooperation and Norm Enforcement." American Economic Review 96 (2): 212­16.
Goette, Lorenz, David Huffman, Stephan Meier, and Matthias Sutter. 2012. "Competition Between
     Organizational Groups: Its Impact on Altruistic and Antisocial Motivations." Management Science
     58 (5): 948­60.
Grosfeld, Irena, Seyhun Orcan Sakalli, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2020. "Middleman Minorities and
     Ethnic Violence: Anti-Jewish Pogroms in the Russian Empire." Review of Economic Studies 87 (1):
     289­342.
Henrich, J., S.J. Heine, A. Norenzayan, and others. 2010. "The Weirdest People in the World."
     Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33 (2­3): 61­83.
Henrich, Joseph, Jean Ensminger, Richard Mcelreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett, Alexander Bolyanatz,
     Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, and Edwins Gwako. 2010. "Markets, Religion, Community
     Size, and the Evolution of Fairness and Punishment." Science 1480 (5972): 1480­84.
Herrmann, Benedikt, Christian Thoni, and Simon Gächter. 2008. "Antisocial Punishment across
    Societies." Science 319 (5868): 1362­67.
Horowitz, Donald L. 1985. Ethnic Groups in Conflict. London: University of California Press.
Jordan, Jillian, Katherine McAuliffe, and David Rand. 2016. "The Effects of Endowment Size and
     Strategy Method on Third Party Punishment." Experimental Economics 19 (4): 741­63.
Kant, Immanuel. 1965. The Metaphysical Elements of Justice. New York: Bobbs-Merill Company.
Kranton, Rachel, Matthew Pease, Seth Sanders, and Scott Huettel. 2020. "Deconstructing Bias in Social
     Preferences Reveals Groupy and Not-Groupy Behavior." Proceedings of the National Academy of
     Sciences 117 (35): 21185­93.
Levin, Jack, and Jack McDevitt. 2002. Hate Crimes Revisited: America's War Against Those Who Are
     Different. Basic Books.
Lickel, Brian, Toni Schmader, and David L. Hamilton. 2003. "A Case of Collective Responsibility: Who
     Else Was to Blame for the Columbine High School Shootings?" Personality and Social Psychology
     Bulletin 29 (2): 194­204.
Miguel, Edward. 2005. "Poverty and Witch Killing." Review of Economic Studies 72 (4): 1153­72.
Newman, Leonard S., and Tracy L. Caldwell. 2005. "Alloport's `Living Inkblots': The Role of Defensive
   Projection in Stereotyping and Prejudice." In On the Nature of Prejudice: Fifty Years after Allport,
   edited by John F. Dovidio, Peter Glick, and Laurie Rudman, 377­93. Oxdford: Blackwell
   Publishing.
openDemocracy. 2021. "The Shameful Resurgence of Violent Scapegoating in a Time of Crisis."
    Https://Www.Opendemocracy.Net/En/Can-Europe-Make-It/Shameful-Resurgence-Violent-
    Scapegoating-Time-Crisis/.
Prediger, Sebastian, Björn Vollan, and Benedikt Herrmann. 2014. "Resource Scarcity, Spite and
     Cooperation." Journal of Public Economics 119: 1­9.

                                                   27
Rehavi, M. Marit, and Sonja B. Starr. 2014. "Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Charging and Its
    Sentencing Consequences." Journal of Political Economy 122 (6): 1320­54.
Schiller, Bastian, Thomas Baumgartner, and Daria Knoch. 2014. "Intergroup Bias in Third-Party
     Punishment Stems from Both Ingroup Favoritism and Outgroup Discrimination." Evolution and
     Human Behavior 35 (3): 383­93.
Shayo, Moses, and Asaf Zussman. 2011. "Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism." Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 126 (3): 1447­84.
Staub, Ervin. 1992. The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and Other Group Violence. Cambridge,
     MA: Cambridge University Press.
Stenner, Karren. 2005. The Authoritarian Dynamic. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stenner, Karren, and Jonathan Haidt. 2018. "Authoritarianism Is Not a Momentary Madnes, but an
     Eternal Dynamic with Liberal Democracies." In Can It Happen Here? Authoritarianism in America,
     edited by Cass R. Sunstein, 174­93. New York: HarperCollins.
Tajfel, Henry. 1981. Human Groups and Social Categories: Studies in Social Psychology. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
UN News. 2021. "Hate Speech and Violence Still Rising against Roma despite Recognition Gains, Says
    Rights Expert." Https://News.Un.Org/En/Story/2021/04/1089232.
Voigtlander, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2012. "Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of
     Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1339­92.
Yanagizawa-Drott, David. 2014. "Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1947­94.




                                                   28
                                          TABLE 1: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT

                                                       Punishment of         Punishment of        Punishment of         Punishment of

                                                       the Scapegoat         the Scapegoat         the Scapegoat         the Scapegoat

 Dependent variable                                      (intensity)              (yes)              (intensity)           (intensity)

                                                                                                  Punishment of

                                                                                                  the Scapegoat =

 Sample                                                      All                   All                   yes                   All

                                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)

 Harm intensity                                           0.08***               0.02***               0.20***               0.08***

                                                            (0.02)               (0.00)                (0.07)                (0.02)

 Scapegoat OTHER                                            -0.00                 0.03                  -0.57                 -0.04

                                                            (0.08)               (0.03)                (0.37)                (0.09)

 Harm intensity*Scapegoat OTHER                           0.09***                0.01**                0.19**               0.09***

                                                            (0.03)               (0.01)                (0.08)                (0.03)

 Wrongdoer OTHER                                            -0.14                 -0.03                 -0.32                 -0.14

                                                            (0.13)               (0.03)                (0.24)                (0.13)

 Controls                                                 baseline              baseline              baseline                 full

 Mean baseline (Scapegoat SAME, 0 harm)                      0.13                 0.04                  3.14                  0.13

 Observations                                               1,685                 1,685                  329                 1,685

 R-squared                                                  0.072                 0.050                 0.240                0.133

Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent
variable in Columns 1,3,4 is the extent of punishment of the Scapegoat (EUR 0-8). In Column 2, the dependent variable indicates that the
Punisher chose non-zero punishment of the Scapegoat. "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR
0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that the Scapegoat comes from a different
ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group
than the Punisher. Baseline controls include the gender and age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating that the Punishing the
Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. Full controls also include experimenter fixed effects, a dummy
variable indicating that the Punisher is a university student (vs. a secondary school student), location fixed effects, education of parents
(dummy variables for mother/father with a university degree, dummy variables for education unknown), and a dummy variable indicating
that the subject answered all control questions correctly on the first or second attempt. The sample is composed of Punishers from the
majority group.




                                                                     29
                             FIGURE 1: ILLUSTRATION OF THE EXPERIMENTAL TASKS
(A) PUNISHING THE SCAPEGOAT GAME




(B) PUNISHING THE WRONGDOER GAME




   Notes: The main sample are Punishers, who come either from the majority group or from the Roma ethnic minority. Punishers
   learn about the harm committed by the Wrongdoers towards the Victims and can punish an innocent bystander--the
   Scapegoat (Panel A), or can directly punish the Wrongdoer (Panel B). The ethnic identity of the Scapegoat and the Wrongdoer
   is manipulated orthogonally: "SAME" indicates that the player (Wrongdoer/Victim/Scapegoat) is of the same ethnicity as the
   Punisher, while "OTHER" indicates that he is from the other ethnic group.




                                                              30
                   FIGURE 2: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT, BY SCAPEGOAT'S ETHNICITY
(A) INTENSITY OF PUNISHMENT




(B) PREVALENCE OF PUNISHMENT




   Notes: Mean punishment of the Scapegoat (Panel A) and the share of Punishers who choose non-zero punishment of the
   Scapegoat (Panel B), by the ethnicity of the Scapegoat and the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim. Punishers (and
   Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Scapegoat SAME" indicates that the Scapegoat also comes from the majority
   ethnic group, while "Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that Scapegoat is ethnic Roma. Differences between the conditions are
   tested using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test; p-values are presented at the top. The sample is composed of Punishers from the
   majority group.




                                                             31
           FIGURE 3: DISCRIMINATION AGAINST OTHER SCAPEGOATS (MAJORITY SAMPLE)




Notes: Estimated coefficients for "Scapegoat OTHER", with 95% confidence intervals. The dependent variable is the extent
of punishment of the Scapegoat (EUR 0-8). The coefficients are estimated by separate OLS regressions for the five possible
levels of harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim. We control for the gender and age of the Punisher, and for a dummy
variable indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. Punishers
(and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different
ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. The sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                           32
                              [FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION]



                   Scapegoating: Experimental Evidence

       Michal Bauer, Jana Cahlíková, Julie Chytilová, Gérard Roland, Tomás Zelinský



                         Supplementary Online Appendix A
                         This file contains appendix figure and tables


Appendix Figures A1-A7
Appendix Tables A1-A15




                                              33
                                            FIGURE A1: EXAMPLES OF DECISION SCREENS
Panel A: Punishing the Scapegoat Game




Panel B: Punishing the Wrongdoer Game




Notes: Panel A shows the decision screen for the Punishing the Scapegoat Game, for the situation in which the Wrongdoer (Person A) destroyed 6
of the earnings of the Victim (Person B). In this example, the Punisher is choosing to reduce the earnings of the Scapegoat by 2. Panel B shows the
decision screen for the Punishing the Wrongdore Game, for the situation in which the Wrongdoer (Person A) destroyed all 8 of the Victim's earnings
(Person B). In this example, the Punisher is choosing to reduce the earnings of the Wrongdoer (Person C) by 4. The default/starting point in all
situations is always Person A and Person C getting all 8. In the experiment, each picture shows 20 different passport-style photographs, which vary
based on the condition. Here we show an example for the Wrongdoer SAME and Scapegoat OTHER condition. For privacy reasons, we blur the
actual pictures in publicly available materials.


                                                                      34
           FIGURE A2: HISTOGRAM OF THE HARM IMPOSED ON THE VICTIMS BY THE WRONGDOERS


               .5



               .4



               .3
Fraction




               .2



               .1



               0
                              0          2            4         6          8
                                             Harm intensity




                                               35
    FIGURE A3: PUNISHMENT OF THE WRONGDOER, BY WRONGDOER'S ETHNICITY (MAJORITY SAMPLE)
(A) INTENSITY OF PUNISHMENT




(B) PREVALENCE OF PUNISHMENT




   Notes: Mean punishment of the Wrongdoer (Panel A) and the share of Punishers who choose non-zero punishment of the
   Wrongdoer (Panel B), by the ethnicity of the Wrongdoer and the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim. Punishers
   (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer SAME" indicates that the Wrongdoer also comes from the
   majority ethnic group, while "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer is ethnic Roma. Differences between the
   conditions are tested using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test; p-values are presented at the top. The sample is composed of
   Punishers from the majority group.




                                                           36
         FIGURE A4: DISCRIMINATION AGAINST OTHER WRONGDOERS (MAJORITY SAMPLE)




Notes: Estimated coefficients for "Wrongdoer OTHER", with 95% confidence intervals. The dependent variable is the extent
of punishment of the Wrongdoer (EUR 0-8). The coefficients are estimated by separate OLS regressions for the five possible
levels of harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim. We control for the gender and age of the Punisher, and for a dummy
variable indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. Punishers
(and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different
ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. The sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                           37
FIGURE A5: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT, BY WRONGDOER'S AND SCAPEGOAT'S ETHNICITY (MAJORITY SAMPLE)




      Notes: Mean punishment of the Scapegoat, by the ethnicity of the Scapegoat and the Wrongdoer and by the extent of harm
      caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim. Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Scapegoat SAME" and
      "Wrongdoer SAME" indicate that the Scapegoat/the Wrongdoer also comes from the majority ethnic group, while "Scapegoat
      OTHER" and "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicate that the Scapegoat/the Wrongdoer is ethnic Roma. The sample is composed of
      Punishers from the majority group.




                                                               38
FIGURE A6: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT, BY SCAPEGOAT'S ETHNICITY (ROMA MINORITY SAMPLE)




 Notes: Mean punishment of the Scapegoat, by the ethnicity of the Scapegoat and the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the
 Victim. Punishers (and Victims) are from the Roma ethnic group. "Scapegoat SAME" indicates that the Scapegoat also comes
 from the Roma ethnic group, while "Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that Scapegoat has majority ethnicity. Differences between
 the conditions are tested using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test; p-values are presented on top. The sample is composed of
 Punishers from the Roma ethnic minority group.




                                                           39
       FIGURE A7: PUNISHMENT OF THE WRONGDOER, BY WRONGDOER'S ETHNICITY (ROMA MINORITY SAMPLE)




Notes: Mean punishment of the Wrongdoer, by the ethnicity of the Wrongdoer and the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim. Punishers (and
Victims) are from the Roma ethnic group. "Wrongdoer SAME" indicates that the Wrongdoer also comes from the Roma ethnic group, while
"Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that Wrongdoer has majority ethnicity. Differences between the conditions are tested using the Wilcoxon rank-sum
test; p-values are presented on top. The sample is composed of Punishers from the Roma ethnic minority group.




                                                                   40
                   TABLE A1: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS AND RANDOMIZATION CHECKS (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

                                                        (1)         (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                                                       Means across treatments



                                                      Whole                     Wrongdoer        Wrongdoer        Scapegoat       Scapegoat        Diff (F-
   Sample                                             sample         N           SAME             OTHER            SAME            OTHER            test)
   Female                                              0.42         337           0.45             0.39             0.45            0.39            0.31
   Age                                                19.31         337           19.30             19.33            19.35          19.28            0.91
   Student (high school)                               0.57         337            0.57              0.56            0.57            0.57            0.97
   Student (university)                                0.43         337            0.43              0.44            0.43            0.43            0.97
   Primary school degree                               0.54         337            0.54              0.53            0.55            0.53            0.89
   Secondary school degree                             0.40         337            0.38              0.41            0.38            0.42            0.61
   University degree                                   0.07         337            0.07              0.06            0.08            0.05            0.60
   Child                                               0.00         337            0.01              0.00            0.01            0.00            0.37
   Household size                                      4.24         337            4.32              4.17            4.17            4.31            0.31
   Regularly goes to church                            0.32         337            0.35              0.29            0.33            0.31            0.48
   Father with secondary school                        0.74         330            0.75              0.73            0.77            0.72            0.57
   Father with university                              0.25         330            0.25              0.26            0.23            0.28            0.66
   Mother with secondary school                        0.68         336            0.69              0.66            0.69            0.66            0.65
   Mother with university                              0.32         336            0.30              0.34            0.30            0.33            0.64
   Father employed                                     0.96         309            0.96              0.97            0.97            0.96            0.65
   Mother employed                                     0.88         320            0.87              0.89            0.88            0.88            0.81
   Family owns a car                                   0.91         337            0.93              0.89            0.90            0.92            0.31
   Family owns a computer                              0.99         336            0.99              1.00            1.00            0.99            0.37
   Family owns a smartphone                            0.96         337            0.96              0.96            0.96            0.96            0.94
   Family owns a tablet                                0.64         337            0.67              0.60            0.71            0.56            0.01
   Control questions first attempt
                                                       5.93         337            5.96              5.89            5.95            5.90            0.11
   (max=6)
   Control questions second attempt
                                                       5.99         337            6.00              5.97            5.99            5.98            0.22
   (max=6)
   All control questions correct                       0.99         337            1.00              0.98            0.99            0.99            0.20
   N                                                    337         337            167               170              168             169
Notes: Descriptive statistics of the majority sample (Column 1). Columns 3-6 present means for subjects in the specified experimental conditions.
Experimental balance is tested in Column 7 using an F-test, showing that dummy variables "Wrongdoer OTHER" and "Scapegoat OTHER" do not
significantly predict the specified descriptive variable. Variable " All control questions correct" indicates that the subject answered all control questions
correctly at first or second attempt. For all variables, the values are missing for unspecified answers and for "I do not know" answers; Column 2 gives
the number of non-missing values.




                                                                           41
              TABLE A2: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS AND RANDOMIZATION CHECKS (ROMA MINORITY SAMPLE)
                                                     (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)
                                                                                                 Means across treatments



                                                   Whole                  Wrongdoer        Wrongdoer       Scapegoat      Scapegoat       Diff (F-
   Sample                                          sample         N        SAME             OTHER           SAME           OTHER           test)
   Female                                           0.55         484        0.54             0.57            0.56           0.55           0.76
   Age                                              20.23        484          20.36           20.10          20.17          20.28           0.25
   Student (secondary school)                       0.14         484          0.12             0.16           0.16           0.12           0.12
   Student (university)                             0.01         484          0.02             0.01           0.02           0.01           0.48
   Employed                                         0.17         484          0.18             0.16           0.18           0.16           0.66
   Unemployed                                       0.49         484          0.49             0.48           0.46           0.51           0.42
   At home                                          0.19         484          0.19             0.19           0.18           0.20           0.90
   Primary school degree                            0.57         484          0.56             0.58           0.56           0.58           0.79
   Secondary school degree                          0.43         484          0.44             0.42           0.44           0.42           0.79
   Married                                          0.31         484          0.29             0.33           0.32           0.31           0.59
   Child                                            0.48         484          0.50             0.45           0.48           0.47           0.61
   Household size                                   6.02         484          6.00             6.05           6.09           5.95           0.88
   Regularly goes to church                         0.27         484          0.26             0.28           0.24           0.29           0.43
   Father with secondary school                     0.39         401          0.37             0.42           0.39           0.39           0.60
   Father with university                           0.04         401          0.03             0.05           0.04           0.04           0.47
   Mother with secondary school                     0.32         414          0.32             0.33           0.33           0.32           0.97
   Mother with university                           0.03         414          0.03             0.02           0.02           0.03           0.67
   Father employed                                  0.55         392          0.55             0.55           0.56           0.53           0.87
   Mother employed                                  0.38         436          0.41             0.35           0.39           0.38           0.37
   Family owns a car                                0.32         484          0.32             0.31           0.32           0.31           0.93
   Family owns a computer                           0.52         484          0.50             0.54           0.53           0.51           0.69
   Family owns a smartphone                         0.85         484          1.06             0.65           1.06           0.65           0.37
   Family owns a tablet                             0.39         484          0.36             0.42           0.42           0.37           0.18
   Control questions first attempt
                                                    4.27         483          4.18             4.36           4.16           4.38           0.19
   (max=6)
   Control questions second attempt
                                                    5.53         482          5.47             5.58           5.53           5.52           0.50
   (max=6)
   All control questions correct                    0.77         484          0.76             0.78           0.77           0.77           0.88
   N                                                 484         484           241             243             241            243
Notes: Descriptive statistics of the Roma minority sample (Column 1). Columns 3-6 present means for subjects in the specified experimental
conditions. Experimental balance is tested in Column 7 using an F-test, showing that dummy variables "Wrongdoer OTHER" and "Scapegoat
OTHER" do not significantly predict the specified descriptive variable. Variable " All control questions correct" indicates that the subject answered
all control questions correctly at first or second attempt. For all variables, the values are missing for unspecified answers and for "I do not know"
answers; Column 2 gives the number of non-missing values.




                                                                       42
                                         TABLE A3: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT, ROBUSTNESS CHECKS (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

Dependent variable                                                                        Punishment of the Scapegoat (intensity)

                                                                                                                                                         Subjects who
                                                                                                                                                         answered all        Excluding
                                                                                                                                                            control          potentially
                                                                                                                                                          questions         hypothetical
Sample                                                  All           All            All            All           All           All           All          correctly        observations
                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)              (8)               (9)
Harm intensity                                       0.08***        0.08***       0.08***        0.08***       0.08***       0.08***        0.08***         0.08***           0.11***
                                                      (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.02)             (0.02)
Scapegoat OTHER                                        -0.00         -0.01          -0.01          -0.00        -0.01          -0.01         -0.03            -0.02              0.03
                                                      (0.08)         (0.08)        (0.08)          (0.08)       (0.08)        (0.08)         (0.09)          (0.08)             (0.09)
Harm intensity*Scapegoat OTHER                       0.09***        0.09***       0.09***        0.09***       0.09***       0.09***        0.09***         0.08***            0.08**
                                                      (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)             (0.04)
Wrongdoer OTHER                                        -0.14         -0.14          -0.15          -0.14        -0.14          -0.12         -0.12            -0.16             -0.13
                                                      (0.13)         (0.13)        (0.13)          (0.13)       (0.13)        (0.13)         (0.13)          (0.13)             (0.15)
Controls
    Baseline controls                                    x                            x              x             x             x             x                x                 x
    Design features                                                                   x                                                        x
    Sample University (vs. High school)                                                              x                                         x
    Location fixed effects                                                                                         x                           x
    Education of parents                                                                                                         x             x
Mean baseline (Scapegoat SAME, 0 harm)                 0.13           0.13          0.13           0.13          0.13          0.13           0.13            0.13               0.13
Observations                                           1,685         1,685         1,685           1,685        1,685          1,685         1,685           1,670              1,241
R-squared                                              0.072         0.068         0.100           0.072        0.091          0.085         0.126           0.070              0.092
Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the extent of punishment towards the
Scapegoat (EUR 0-8). "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Scapegoat OTHER"
indicates that the Scapegoat comes from a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group that
the Punisher. Baseline controls include gender and age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat
Game. Design features include experimenter fixed effects. Education of parents includes dummy variables for mother/father with a university degree, and dummy variables for unknown education.
In Column 8, we exclude all subjects who did not answer all control questions correctly at first or second attempt. In Column 9, we exclude all observations for harm levels, which a decision-
maker believed were chosen by none of the twenty potential Wrongdoers. The sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                                              43
            TABLE A4: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT AND THE WRONGDOER, NON-LINEAR SPECIFICATIONS
                                         (MAJORITY SAMPLE AND ROMA MINORITY SAMPLE)

                                                             Punishment of        Punishment of         Punishment of        Punishment of
                                                             the Scapegoat        the Wrongdoer         the Scapegoat        the Wrongdoer
   Dependent variable                                          (intensity)          (intensity)           (intensity)          (intensity)
   Sample                                                                   Majority                               Roma minority
                                                                   (1)                    (2)                 (3)                   (4)
   Small harm (2 euro)                                          0.30***                1.27***             0.41***               0.65***
                                                                  -0.08                 -0.12                -0.11                -0.11
   Medium harm (4 euro)                                         0.36***                2.35***             0.66***               1.24***
                                                                  -0.09                 -0.17                -0.13                -0.15
   Large harm (6 euro)                                          0.56***                3.72***             0.77***               1.39***
                                                                  -0.12                 -0.23                -0.15                -0.18
   Maximum harm (8 euro)                                        0.67***                4.41***             0.67***               1.54***
                                                                  -0.15                 -0.29                -0.16                 -0.2
   Wrongdoer OTHER                                                -0.14                -0.24**               0.04                 -0.02
                                                                  -0.13                 -0.11                -0.17                -0.16
   Wrongdoer OTHER*Small harm (2 euro)                                                   0.2                                       0.07
                                                                                        -0.15                                     -0.17
   Wrongdoer OTHER*Medium harm (4 euro)                                                0.63***                                    -0.01
                                                                                        -0.22                                     -0.22
   Wrongdoer OTHER*Large harm (6 euro)                                                 0.72**                                      0.31
                                                                                         -0.3                                     -0.26
   Wrongdoer OTHER*Maximum harm (8 euro)                                               1.16***                                     0.5
                                                                                        -0.38                                     -0.31
   Scapegoat OTHER                                                -0.02                                        0
                                                                  -0.07                                      -0.17
   Scapegoat OTHER*Small harm (2 euro)                            0.13                                       0.02
                                                                  -0.11                                      -0.16
   Scapegoat OTHER*Medium harm (4 euro)                         0.42***                                      -0.01
                                                                  -0.15                                      -0.18
   Scapegoat OTHER*Large harm (6 euro)                          0.65***                                      -0.09
                                                                   -0.2                                      -0.21
   Scapegoat OTHER*Maximum harm (8 euro)                        0.62***                                      0.15
                                                                  -0.23                                      -0.24
   Controls                                                     baseline               baseline            baseline              baseline
   Mean baseline                                                  0.13                  0.35                 0.97                  0.9
   Observations                                                   1,685                 1,685                2,420                2,420
   R-squared                                                      0.074                 0.419                0.019                0.076
Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent
variable in Columns 1 and 3 is the extent of punishment towards the Scapegoat (EUR 0-8), the dependent variable in Columns 2 and 4 is the
extent of punishment towards the Wrongdoer (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) in Columns 1 and 2 are from the majority ethnic group,
Punishers (and Victims) in Columns 3 and 4 are from the Roma ethnic group. "Small harm (2 euro)", "Medium harm (4 euro)", "Large harm (6
euro)", and "Maximum harm (8 euro) are dummy variables specifying the level of harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim; zero harm (0
euro) is the omitted category. "Scapegoat OTHER"/"Wrongdoer OTHER" indicate that the Scapegoat/the Wrongdoer comes from a different
ethnic group than the Punisher. Baseline controls include gender and age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating that the Punishing the
Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game.




                                                                       44
           TABLE A5: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT, HETEROGENEITY ANALYSIS (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

Dependent variable                                                         Punishment of the Scapegoat (intensity)
                                                                                                              Parents         At least one
                                                                                                            with at most     parent with at
                                                                                 High                        secondary         university
Sample                                                Men         Women         school      University       education         education
                                                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)
Harm intensity                                       0.05**       0.11***      0.09***         0.06**         0.08***            0.07**
                                                      (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)         (0.03)           (0.02)            (0.03)
Scapegoat OTHER                                       -0.10         0.09         -0.04         -0.00             0.05             -0.09
                                                      (0.12)       (0.10)       (0.09)         (0.15)           (0.08)            (0.16)
Harm intensity*Scapegoat OTHER                      0.13***         0.03        0.08**         0.10**          0.09**             0.09*
                                                      (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.04)           (0.04)            (0.05)
Wrongdoer OTHER                                       -0.01        -0.35*        -0.15         -0.15             0.01             -0.32
                                                      (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.15)         (0.22)           (0.17)            (0.22)
Controls                                            baseline      baseline     baseline       baseline        baseline          baseline
Mean baseline (Scapegoat SAME, 0 harm)                 0.19         0.05         0.08           0.19             0.06              0.24
Observations                                           980           705          960           725              975               685
R-squared                                             0.074         0.094        0.101         0.084            0.092             0.063
Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent
variable is the extent of punishment towards the Scapegoat (EUR 0-8). Columns 1 and 2 report results by the gender of the Punisher.
Columns 3 and 4 report results for Punishers who are secondary school students and university students, respectively. Columns 5 and 6
report results for Punishers who have both parents with at most secondary school education and those who have at least one parent with a
university degree, respectively (self-reported, omitting subjects with missing answers). "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the
Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that the
Scapegoat comes from a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer
comes from a different ethnic group that the Punisher. Baseline controls include gender and age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable
indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. The sample is composed of
Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                  45
                                         TABLE A6: PUNISHMENT OF THE WRONGDOER

                                                        Punishment of         Punishment of         Punishment of        Punishment of

                                                        the Wrongdoer         the Wrongdoer        the Wrongdoer         the Wrongdoer

 Dependent variable                                        (intensity)             (yes)              (intensity)           (intensity)

                                                                                                    Punishment of

                                                                                                   the Wrongdoer

 Sample                                                        All                  All                  = yes                  All

                                                               (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)

 Harm intensity                                             0.56***              0.07***               0.63***               0.56***

                                                             (0.03)                (0.00)               (0.04)                (0.04)

 Wrongdoer OTHER                                            -0.26**                -0.03               -0.53**               -0.32**

                                                             (0.11)                (0.03)               (0.23)                (0.13)

 Harm intensity*Wrongdoer OTHER                             0.14***              0.02***               0.14***               0.14***

                                                             (0.05)                (0.01)               (0.05)                (0.05)

 Controls                                                   baseline             baseline              baseline                full

 Mean baseline (Wrongdoer SAME, 0 harm)                       0.35                  0.10                 3.41                  0.35

 Observations                                                1,685                 1,685                 1,044                1,685

 R-squared                                                   0.417                 0.201                 0.540                0.453

Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent
variable in Columns 1,3,4 is the extent of punishment of the Wrongdoer (EUR 0-8). In Column 2, the dependent variable indicates that the
Punisher chose non-zero punishment of the Wrongdoer. "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-
8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different
ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. Baseline and full controls are defined in Table 1. Full controls also include a dummy variable
"Scapegoat OTHER" (equal to one if the Scapegoat comes from a different ethnic group than the Punisher). The sample is composed of
Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                      46
                                         TABLE A7: PUNISHMENT OF THE WRONGDOER, ROBUSTNESS CHECKS (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

Dependent variable                                                                        Punishment of the Wrongdoer (intensity)
                                                                                                                                                         Subjects who
                                                                                                                                                         answered all        Excluding
                                                                                                                                                            control          potentially
                                                                                                                                                          questions         hypothetical
Sample                                                 All            All           All              All          All           All            All         correctly        observations
                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)               (9)
Harm intensity                                       0.56***       0.56***        0.56***        0.56***       0.56***       0.56***        0.56***         0.56***           0.62***
                                                      (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.03)        (0.04)         (0.03)        (0.04)           (0.03)            (0.04)
Wrongdoer OTHER                                      -0.26**       -0.24**        -0.28**         -0.26**      -0.27**        -0.28**       -0.31**          -0.28**          -0.35***
                                                      (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.12)         (0.11)        (0.12)         (0.11)        (0.13)           (0.11)            (0.13)
Harm intensity*Wrongdoer OTHER                       0.14***       0.14***        0.14***        0.14***       0.14***       0.14***        0.14***         0.14***           0.14***
                                                      (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)           (0.05)            (0.05)
Controls
    Baseline controls                                   x                             x               x            x             x              x               x                 x
    Design features                                                                   x                                                         x
    Sample University (vs. High school)                                                               x                                         x
    Location fixed effects                                                                                         x                            x
    Education of parents                                                                                                         x              x
Mean baseline (Wrongdoer SAME, 0 harm)                 0.35          0.35           0.35             0.35        0.35          0.35           0.35             0.35              0.37
Observations                                          1,685          1,685         1,685          1,685         1,685          1,685         1,685            1,670             1,241
R-squared                                             0.417          0.408         0.429          0.420         0.440          0.419         0.453            0.417             0.504
Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the extent of punishment towards the
Wrongdoer (EUR 0-8). "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer OTHER"
indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. Baseline controls include gender and age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating
that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. Design features include a dummy variable "Scapegoat OTHER" (equal to one if the Scapegoat
comes from a different ethnic group than the Punisher) and experimenter fixed effects. Education of parents includes dummy variables for mother/father with a university degree, and dummy
variables for unknown education. In Column 8, we exclude all subjects who did not answer all control questions correctly at first or second attempt. In Column 9, we exclude all observations for
harm levels, which a decision-maker believed were chosen by none of the twenty potential Wrongdoers. The sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                                                47
           TABLE A8: PUNISHMENT OF THE WRONGDOER, HETEROGENEITY ANALYSIS (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

Dependent variable                                                     Punishment of the Wrongdoer (intensity)


                                                                                                             Parents         At least
                                                                                                              with at       one parent
                                                                                 High                          most          with at
                                                                                school       University     secondary       university
Sample                                                Men         Women         sample        sample        education       education
                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)
Harm intensity                                      0.61***      0.51***        0.62***       0.49***        0.57***         0.56***
                                                     (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.04)         (0.06)        (0.04)          (0.06)
Wrongdoer OTHER                                      -0.18       -0.37***        -0.22*        -0.40*          -0.21           -0.35
                                                     (0.18)        (0.14)        (0.13)         (0.21)        (0.13)          (0.21)
Harm intensity*Wrongdoer OTHER                      0.14**         0.12*          0.07        0.23***          0.11*          0.18**
                                                     (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.06)         (0.07)        (0.06)          (0.08)
Controls                                            baseline     baseline       baseline      baseline       baseline        baseline
Mean baseline (Wrongdoer SAME, 0 harm)                0.30          0.40          0.23           0.51          0.28            0.46
Observations                                          980           705           960            725            975            685
R-squared                                            0.477         0.355         0.451          0.404          0.403          0.446
Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent
variable is the extent of punishment towards the Wrongdoer (EUR 0-8). Columns 1 and 2 report results by the gender of the Punisher.
Columns 3 and 4 report results for Punishers who are secondary school students and university students, respectively. Columns 5 and 6
report results for Punishers who have both parents with at most secondary school education and those who have at least one parent with a
university degree, respectively (self-reported, omitting subjects with missing answers). "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the
Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the
Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. Baseline controls include gender and age of the
Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game.
The sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                  48
             TABLE A9: BELIEFS REGARDING THE BEHAVIOR OF THE WRONGDOER (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

                                                                                            Wrongdoer         Wrongdoer         Diff (Fisher
                                                                                Harm         SAME              OTHER            exact test)
                                                                                  (1)            (2)               (3)               (4)
Panel A: Beliefs Task 1--Wrongdoer destroys:                                       0            60.5              63.5
                                                                                   2            18.6              14.7
                                                                                   4            11.4              11.2
                                                                                   6            3.6                2.4
                                                                                   8            6.0                8.2
                                                                                                                                   0.759
                                                                                            Wrongdoer         Wrongdoer             Diff
                                                                                Harm         SAME              OTHER             (ranksum)
                                                                                  (1)            (2)               (3)               (4)
Panel B: Beliefs Task2--Out of 20 Wrongdoers, how many destroy:                    0            8.6                8.5             0.860
                                                                                   2            3.4                3.0             0.322
                                                                                   4            3.2                2.9             0.441
                                                                                   6            2.2                2.4             0.403
                                                                                   8            2.6                3.1             0.015
Notes: Beliefs of the Punishers from the majority ethnic group regarding which harm levels were chosen by the Wrongdoers. In Task 1
(Panel A), the Punishers were asked to guess which action was chosen by the Wrongdoer and rewarded 1 euro for a correct answer. The
shares for majority ethnicity Wrongdoers and Roma ethnicity Wrongdoers are reported in Columns 2 and 3, respectively. The equality of
the distributions is tested in Column 4 using a Fisher exact test. In Task 2 (Panel B), the Punishers were asked to guess how many of the
twenty potential Wrongdoers chose each level of harm. The estimated number of Wrongdoers is reported in Columns 2 and 3 for the
Wrongdoers of majority ethnicity and for the Wrongdoers of Roma ethnicity, respectively (we exclude 20 subjects whose reports do not
sum up to twenty). Differences between conditions are tested using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test; p-values are specified in Column 4. The
sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                  49
                                TABLE A10: TESTING FOR COLLECTIVE PUNISHMENT

  Dependent variable                                           Punishment of the Scapegoat (intensity)

                                                Wrongdoer           Wrongdoer             Scapegoat           Scapegoat

  Sample                                          SAME                OTHER                 SAME               OTHER

                                                    (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)

  Harm intensity                                  0.07**              0.09***              0.09***              0.19***

                                                   (0.03)              (0.02)               (0.02)               (0.03)

  Scapegoat OTHER                                   0.06                -0.07

                                                   (0.14)              (0.08)

  Harm intensity*Scapegoat OTHER                 0.12***                0.06

                                                   (0.04)              (0.04)

  Wrongdoer SAME                                                                             0.02

                                                                                            (0.13)

  Harm intensity*Wrongdoer SAME                                                             -0.02

                                                                                            (0.04)

  Wrongdoer OTHER                                                                                                -0.15

                                                                                                                 (0.09)

  Harm intensity*Wrongdoer OTHER                                                                                 -0.04

                                                                                                                 (0.05)

  Controls                                       baseline             baseline             baseline             baseline

  Mean baseline                                     0.19                0.07                 0.07                 0.14

  Observations                                      835                  850                 840                  845

  R-squared                                        0.101                0.061               0.036                0.084

Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The
dependent variable is the extent of punishment of the Scapegoat (EUR 0-8). "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the
Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer SAME" and
"Wrongdoer OTHER" indicate that the Wrongdoer comes from the same ethnic group or a different ethnic group (Roma minority)
than the Punisher, respectively. "Scapegoat SAME" and "Scapegoat OTHER" indicate that the Scapegoat comes from the same ethnic
group or a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher, respectively. Baseline controls are defined in Table 1. The
sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                              50
        TABLE A11: PERCEIVED SOCIO-ECONOMIC STATUS OF SAME/OTHER WRONGDOERS AND SCAPEGOATS
                                                            (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

                                                                 Wrongdoer's                                           Scapegoat's
                              Wrongdoer         Wrongdoer         father low        Scapegoat         Scapegoat         father low
                              Unemployed          Student         education        Unemployed          Student          education
   Dependent variable         (perceived)       (perceived)      (perceived)       (perceived)       (perceived)       (perceived)
   Sample                          All               All               All              All               All              All
                                   (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
   Wrongdoer OTHER               0.52***          -0.69***          0.65***
                                  (0.04)           (0.04)            (0.04)
   Scapegoat OTHER                                                                    0.40***          -0.61***          0.63***
                                                                                       (0.04)           (0.04)            (0.04)
   Constant                      0.07***          0.85***            0.02**           0.08***          0.78***            0.02*
                                  (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.01)            (0.02)           (0.03)            (0.01)


   Controls                         no               no                no                no               no                no
   Observations                    337               337              337               337               337              337
   R-squared                      0.309             0.478            0.466             0.201             0.371            0.443
Notes: OLS, robust standard errors in parentheses. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent variables are perceived
socio-economic characteristics of the Wrongdoer (Column 1-3) and the Scapegoat (Column 4-6), elicited from the Punishers at the end of
the experiment. Punishers are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer OTHER"/"Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that the
Wrongdoer/the Scapegoat come from a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. The sample is composed of Punishers
from the majority group.




                                                                     51
TABLE A12: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT, CONTROLLING FOR THE PERCEIVED SOCIO-ECONOMIC ATTRIBUTES
                                                           (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

    Dependent variable                                                     Punishment of the Scapegoat (intensity)
    Sample                                                          All               All               All               All
                                                                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
    Harm intensity                                               0.08***           0.08***           0.08***           0.08***
                                                                  (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.02)
    Scapegoat OTHER                                                -0.00             -0.08             -0.04             -0.08
                                                                  (0.08)            (0.08)            (0.10)            (0.10)
    Harm intensity*Scapegoat OTHER                               0.09***            0.07**            0.08**             0.07*
                                                                  (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.04)            (0.04)
    Scapegoat Unemployed (perceived)                                                0.18**                              0.18**
                                                                                    (0.09)                              (0.09)
    Harm intensity*Scapegoat Unemployed                                              0.04                                0.04
                                                                                    (0.04)                              (0.04)
    Scapegoat's father low education (perceived)                                                       0.06              0.01
                                                                                                      (0.09)            (0.09)
    Harm intensity*Scapegoat's father low education                                                    0.01              0.00
                                                                                                      (0.04)            (0.04)
    Wrongdoer OTHER                                                -0.14             -0.10             -0.13             -0.10
                                                                  (0.13)            (0.13)            (0.13)            (0.13)
    Controls                                                     baseline          baseline          baseline          baseline
    Mean baseline (Scapegoat SAME, 0 harm)                         0.13              0.13              0.13              0.13
    Observations                                                   1,685             1,685             1,685             1,685
    R-squared                                                      0.072             0.080             0.073             0.080
  Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The
  dependent variable is the extent of punishment towards the Scapegoat (EUR 0-8). "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the
  Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that
  the Scapegoat comes from a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. "Scapegoat Unemployed (perceived)" indicates
  that the Punisher believes that the (SAME or OTHER) Scapegoat is unemployed. "Scapegoat's father low education (perceived)"
  indicates that the Punisher believes that the (SAME or OTHER) Scapegoat has a father with at most primary school education.
  "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group that the Punisher. Perceived socio-economic
  characteristics of the Scapegoat were elicited from the Punishers at the end of the experiment. Baseline controls include gender and
  age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the
  Scapegoat Game. The sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                  52
TABLE A13: PUNISHMENT OF THE WRONGDOER, CONTROLLING FOR THE PERCEIVED SOCIO-ECONOMIC ATTRIBUTES
                                                           (MAJORITY SAMPLE)

    Dependent variable                                                      Punishment of the Wrongdoer (intensity)
    Sample                                                           All               All               All              All
                                                                     (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
    Harm intensity                                                0.56***           0.56***           0.56***           0.56***
                                                                   (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)            (0.03)
    Wrongdoer OTHER                                                -0.26**          -0.33**            -0.23*            -0.29*
                                                                   (0.11)            (0.16)            (0.14)            (0.17)
    Harm intensity*Wrongdoer OTHER                                0.14***            0.11*             0.14**             0.11
                                                                   (0.05)            (0.06)            (0.06)            (0.07)
    Wrongdoer Unemployed (perceived)                                                  0.13                                0.14
                                                                                     (0.17)                              (0.18)
    Harm intensity*Wrongdoer Unemployed                                               0.07                                0.07
                                                                                     (0.06)                              (0.06)
    Wrongdoer's father low education (perceived)                                                        -0.04            -0.07
                                                                                                       (0.13)            (0.13)
    Harm intensity*Wrongdoer's father low education                                                     0.01             -0.01
                                                                                                       (0.06)            (0.06)
    Controls                                                      baseline          baseline          baseline          baseline
    Mean baseline (Wrongdoer SAME, 0 harm)                          0.35              0.35              0.35              0.35
    Observations                                                    1,685            1,685             1,685             1,685
    R-squared                                                       0.417            0.420             0.417             0.420
   Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The
   dependent variable is the extent of punishment towards the Wrongdoer (EUR 0-8). "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the
   Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the majority ethnic group. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates
   that the Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group (Roma minority) than the Punisher. "Wrongdoer Unemployed (perceived)"
   indicates that the Punisher believes that the (SAME or OTHER) Wrongdoer is unemployed. "Wrongdoer's father low education
   (perceived)" indicates that the Punisher believes that the (SAME or OTHER) Wrongdoer has a father with at most primary school
   education. Perceived socio-economic characteristics of the Wrongdoer were elicited from the Punishers at the end of the experiment.
   Baseline controls include gender and age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game
   took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. The sample is composed of Punishers from the majority group.




                                                                  53
                            TABLE A14: PUNISHMENT OF THE SCAPEGOAT (ROMA MINORITY SAMPLE)

                                                   Punishment
                                                       of the        Punishment of        Punishment of        Punishment of       Punishment of
                                                    Scapegoat        the Scapegoat        the Scapegoat        the Scapegoat       the Scapegoat
Dependent variable                                  (intensity)           (yes)             (intensity)          (intensity)         (intensity)
                                                                                          Punishment of
                                                                                         the Scapegoat =                               All CQ
Sample                                                  All                 All                 yes                  All              correctly
                                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (4)
Harm intensity                                       0.09***            0.01***              0.16***              0.09***             0.10***
                                                      (0.02)             (0.00)               (0.04)               (0.02)               (0.02)
Scapegoat OTHER                                       -0.02               0.03                 -0.38                0.01                -0.12
                                                      (0.16)             (0.04)               (0.27)               (0.16)               (0.17)
Harm intensity*Scapegoat OTHER                         0.01               -0.00                0.03                 0.01                0.01
                                                      (0.03)             (0.00)               (0.05)               (0.03)               (0.03)
Wrongdoer OTHER                                        0.04               -0.02                0.27                 -0.01               0.04
                                                      (0.17)             (0.04)               (0.18)               (0.16)               (0.18)
Controls                                             baseline           baseline             baseline                full             baseline
Mean baseline (Scapegoat SAME, 0 harm)                 0.97               0.26                 3.77                 0.97                0.80
Observations                                          2,420               2,420                 906                 2,420               1,860
R-squared                                             0.017               0.008                0.064                0.093               0.021
Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent variable in
Columns 1,3,4 is the extent of punishment towards the Scapegoat (EUR 0-8). In Column 2, the dependent variable indicates whether the Punisher chose
non-zero punishment of the Scapegoat. "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims)
are from the Roma ethnic group. "Scapegoat OTHER" indicates that the Scapegoat comes from a different ethnic group (majority) than the Punisher.
"Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group that the Punisher. Baseline and full controls are defined in Table
1. In Column 5, we exclude all subjects who did not answer all control questions correctly at the first or second attempt. The sample is composed of
Punishers from the Roma ethnic minority group.




                                                                       54
                                TABLE A15: PUNISHMENT OF THE WRONGDOER (ROMA MINORITY SAMPLE)

                                                      Punishment of         Punishment of        Punishment of         Punishment of         Punishment of
                                                      the Wrongdoer         the Wrongdoer        the Wrongdoer         the Wrongdoer         the Wrongdoer
Dependent variable                                      (intensity)              (yes)             (intensity)           (intensity)           (intensity)
                                                                                                 Punishment of
                                                                                                 the Wrongdoer                                   All CQ
Sample                                                       All                   All                = yes                   All               correctly
                                                             (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)
Harm intensity                                            0.19***              0.02***               0.26***               0.19***               0.21***
                                                           (0.03)                 (0.00)              (0.04)                (0.03)                (0.03)
Wrongdoer OTHER                                             -0.09                 -0.03                0.06                  -0.15                -0.16
                                                           (0.16)                 (0.03)              (0.26)                (0.16)                (0.16)
Harm intensity*Wrongdoer OTHER                              0.06*                 0.01                 0.06                 0.06*                0.09**
                                                           (0.04)                 (0.01)              (0.05)                (0.04)                (0.04)
Controls                                                  baseline             baseline              baseline                 full               baseline
Mean baseline (Wrongdoer SAME, 0 harm)                      0.90                  0.27                 3.41                  0.90                  0.79
Observations                                                2,420                 2,420               1,141                 2,420                 1,860
R-squared                                                   0.073                 0.032               0.142                 0.153                 0.094
Notes: OLS, standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at a Punisher level. *** denotes p<0.01, ** p<0.05, and * p<0.1. The dependent variable in Columns
1,3,4 is the extent of punishment towards the Wrongdoer (EUR 0-8). In Column 2, the dependent variable indicates that the Punisher chose non-zero punishment
of the Wrongdoer. "Harm intensity" captures the harm caused by the Wrongdoer to the Victim (EUR 0-8). Punishers (and Victims) are from the Roma ethnic
group. "Wrongdoer OTHER" indicates that the Wrongdoer comes from a different ethnic group (majority) than the Punisher. Baseline controls include gender and
age of the Punisher, and a dummy variable indicating that the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game took place before the Punishing the Scapegoat Game. Full controls
include also a dummy variable "Scapegoat OTHER" (equal to one if the Scapegoat comes from a different ethnic group than the Punisher), experimenter fixed
effects, location fixed effects, education of parents (dummy variables for mother/father with at least secondary school education, dummy variables for unknown
education), and a dummy variable indicating that the subject answered all control questions correctly at the first or second attempt. In Column 5, we exclude all
subjects who did not answer all control questions correctly at the first or second attempt. The sample is composed of Punishers from the Roma ethnic minority
group.




                                                                             55
                            [FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION]


                  Scapegoating: Experimental Evidence

      Michal Bauer, Jana Cahlíková, Julie Chytilová, Gérard Roland, and Tomás Zelinský


                       Supplementary Online Appendix B
                       This file contains the experimental protocol


Experimental instructions - Punisher
Experimental instructions - Wrongdoer




                                             1
                         EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUCTIONS ­ PUNISHER
[English translation; instructions were given in Slovak language, explained to the subjects one-on-one]
 [The order of the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game and Punishing the Scapegoat Game was randomized.
The baseline version of the instructions below are for the case when Punishing the Wrongdoer Game was
implemented first, text in blue color shows the adjustment for when the Punishing the Scapegoat Game was
implemented first.]

1. Introduction
[After subjects come, check their IDs and make sure they are 18 or older.]
Good morning, please take a seat. My name is XXX. Today you will go through several tasks that will
together take about 45 minutes. You will get at least 8 euro and 20 cents for completing the tasks. The
money will be paid to you after we finish. If you decide that you don't want to continue with the tasks, you
can leave at any time. If you leave before the end, you will get 2 euro. In the tasks, you will be making
decisions. Your decisions will stay anonymous; we will never tell anybody how you decided. Now please
read this and sign that you are willing to participate in the tasks.
[Send subjects to an experimenter]
[Before the subject comes, fill the introductory screen of the app according to the Log file]
                      [When the subject comes, the app is at the "START" screen]
Please, take a seat. My name is XX and we'll go through several tasks together. At the beginning, you get
9 euro from us. This amount can be slightly reduced, which depends solely on your decisions. You will get
at least 8 euro and 20 cents.
Please listen to the instructions carefully. I want you to understand everything before we begin. You can
also ask questions at any time.
A few weeks ago we recruited people from several locations in Eastern Slovakia to work for us.
Today, I will show you photos of these people from three locations.
                        [Move to the next screen ­ with photos /1: Introduction/]
For simplicity, I will call these photos A, B and C. When I talk about a Person A, I have in mind a
Roma/non-Roma person from Photo A [point to Photo A], but we do not know exactly which person from
that photo. Similarly, when I talk about Person B, I have in mind a Roma/non-Roma person from Photo B
[point to Photo B]. And finally, when I talk about Person C I have in mind a Roma/non-Roma person from
Photo C [point to Photo C]. Since each photo was taken at a different location, Person A, B and C do not
know each other.
Everybody completed the work and earned 8 euro. Everybody also knew her/his earnings may depend on
choices of other people.
                        [Move to the next screen ­ with photos /2: Introduction/]



                                                     2
After they finished working, Person A saw the Photo B [point to the photos]. Person A was told that Person
B also worked and earned 8 euro for the same job, but worked at a different location. Person A did not get
any other information about Person B. Then, Person A got a chance to harm Person B. Person A could
choose how much of the money earned by Person B he wanted to destroy.
  [Move to the next screen ­ with photos /3: Introduction/ - stay on this screen until control questions]
Person A could choose one out of five possibilities: destroy all 8 euro of Person B, destroy 6 euro, destroy
4 euro, destroy 2 euro or not destroy anything and keep Person B's money unchanged at 8 euro. Person B
did not see anybody's photo and could not harm anybody. Put differently, Person A's money stayed at 8
euro, whereas Person B gets 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8 euro--depending on whether and by how much the Person A
decided to harm him.
In addition, there is also Person C from yet a different location [point to Photo C]. Person C also earned 8
euro for working for us. Person C did not see anybody's photo, could not harm anybody and could be
harmed neither by Person A nor by Person B.
To summarize: All three persons ­ A, B, and C worked and earned 8 euro for that. Person A was the
only person who saw a photo of somebody else ­ he saw Person B's photo and could harm Person B
by destroying part or all of his income. Persons B and C didn't see anybody's photo, and at the same
time, could not harm anybody.
Do you have any questions?
Now I will ask you some questions to make sure that you understand and remember the situation I just
described. This summary of the situation can help you answer the questions [point to the screen].
[Record the answers and if the participant did not fully understand, describe the setting again and ask the
comprehension questions one more time, record the answers.]
    1.   Do Persons A, B, and C come from the same or different locations in Eastern Slovakia?
    2.   Do Persons A, B and C know each other?
    3.   How much money did Person A earn for the work? And Person B? And Person C?
    4.   Please name all persons who saw a photo of somebody else.
    5.   Please name all persons who could harm somebody else.
    6.   Please name all persons who could be harmed by somebody else.
                  [Move to the next screen ­ First task, and immediately tap "NEXT"]




                                                     3
2. Task 1 ­ Punishing the Wrongoer Game/Punishing the Scapegoat Game
[Note: Examples of decision screens are available in Section 7]
Now we will start with your Task.
Persons A, B, and C did not get the money yet, but we will pay them soon, after you make your decisions.
In this task, you can punish a Roma/non-Roma from Photo A for harming a Roma/non-Roma from Photo
B. [In this task, you cannot punish a Roma/non-Roma from Photo A for harming a Roma/non-Roma from
Photo B, but you can reduce the money of a Roma/non-Roma from Photo C.] You can choose one out of
five options by tapping the "MINUS" or "PLUS" buttons, whereas your earnings are always displayed in
the bottom right corner:
[Illustrate on the tablet by tapping the "Minus/Plus" buttons ­ tap to 0 first, then one by one explain all
options. Draw subject's attention to their earnings displayed in the bottom right corner; it is not necessary
to say the amounts out loud.]

        You can reduce the Person A's/Person C's money by 8 euro by paying 80 cents. Then Person
        A/Person C gets zero euros.
        You can reduce the Person A's/Person C's money by 6 euro by paying 60 cents. Then Person
        A/Person C gets 2 euro.
        You can reduce the Person A's/Person C's money by 4 euro by paying 40 cents. Then Person
        A/Person C gets 4 euro.
        You can reduce the Person A's/Person C's money by 2 euro by paying 20 cents. Then Person
        A/Person C gets 2 euro.
        Of course, you can also choose to keep the money of Person A/Person C untouched at 8 euro, for
        which you do not pay anything
You cannot change anybody else's money. Also, remember that nobody can reduce your payment. You
will get between 8.20 and 9 euro for participating today, depending on your decisions. You will get the
money immediately after we finish.
Person A has already decided whether and how much he wants to harm Person B, but for now, you don't
know what he chose. I will ask you to make a decision for all five possible situations ­ for when Person A
decided not to destroy any money and keep Person B's money unchanged at 8 euro, and for when he chose
to harm Person B by destroying 2 euro, 4 euro, 6 euro, or all of his 8 euro.
Your choice in this task may have real consequences for Person A/Person C. In the end, we will randomly
draw one out of ten balls from this bag [Show the bag. There are 10 balls in it: 8 blank ones, one with a
star and one with a triangle]. One of the ten balls has a star on it. If we draw the ball with the star, Person
A/Person C will get the money according to your choice in this task. We will check what Person A chose
and then see how you decided for that situation to calculate the final payments for Person A/Person C and
for you. Since your choice in this task may have real consequences for Person A/Person C, please think
carefully about your decision.
Your decision is completely anonymous. Person A/Person C will receive the money based on your decision,
but will not receive any further information.
Do you have any questions?
First, we will go through a few examples:

                                                      4
[Tap "NEXT": Task 1 ­ Examples + Next]
[Current screen: Task 1 ­ Example 1 with pictures]
   1. A first example. [Let the subjects tap the screen themselves]. In this situation, Person A chose to
      harm the Person B by destroying 4 euro, as you can see here in the picture. Therefore, at the
      moment, Person A's has 8 euro, Person B's money has 4 euro and Person C's has 8 euro [show on
      the tablet]. Now, you can decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of
      Person A/Person C. You cannot change anybody else's money. You can make the decision by
      simply tapping the "minus" and "plus" buttons to choose the preferred amount of money for Person
      A/Person C. Let's assume you decided to keep Person's A/Person C's money at 8 euro. In such a
      case Person A gets 8 euro, person B gets 4 euro and Person C gets 8 euro [ point at the earnings
      displayed on the screen]. You get 9 euro [point at the earnings displayed on the screen]. Once you
      have decided, you can tap "OK" [tap "OK" button now], and a confirmation window with the
      chosen amount appears. If you agree, tap "OK" again. If you want to change your decision, tap
      "BACK".
      [Tap "OK" ­ move to example 2]
   2. Another example: We are still in the situation in which Person A decided to destroy 4 euro of Peron
      B, as you can see here. Now assume that you decided to reduce Person's A/Person C's money by
      8 euro. [Change Person's A/Person C's money to 0 euro.] Now, Person A gets 0 euro/8 euro,
      Person B gets 4 euro and person C gets 8 euro/0 euro [point at the earnings displayed on the screen].
      Because you have to pay 80 cents to reduce Person's A/Person C' money, you get 8 euro and 20
      cents [point at the earnings displayed on the screen]. Once you have decided, tap "OK" [tap "OK"
      button now], and a confirmation window with the chosen amount appears. If you agree, tap "OK"
      again. If you want to change your decision, tap "BACK".
      [Tap "OK" ­ move to example 3]
   3. A different example: We are still in the situation in which Person A decided to destroy 4 euro of
      Peron B, as you can see here. Now assume that you decided to reduce Person's A/Person C's money
      by 4 euro. [Change Person's A/Person C's money to 4 euro.] In that case, Person A gets 4 euro/8
      euro, Person B gets 4 euro and person C gets 8 euro/4 euro [point at rewards on the screen].
      Because you have to pay 40 cents to reduce Person's A / Person's C money, you get 8 euro and 60
      cents [point to the earnings on the screen]. Once you have decided, tap "OK" [tap "OK" button
      now] and confirm again.
   Do you have any questions?
   Now it's time for you to make the decisions. We will go, one by one, through all the five possible
   situations.




                                                     5
                   [Move to the next screen ­ Situation 1 ­ Explanation + Next]
                     [Current screen: Situation 1 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the first situation. In this situation, Person A decided not to destroy any of Person's
   B money and kept his money unchanged at 8 euro, as you can see here. At this moment,
   Person B thus has 8 euro [point to the screen and emphasize!].
   Now you can decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   A/Person C. You cannot change anybody else's money. Tap the "minus" and "plus" buttons
   as you need. When you are done, tap the "OK" button. Beware all the situations before
   were examples, now this is your real decision which will count. I will turn away when
   you decide, so that you can make your decision in complete privacy. Take your time with
   the decision, we have enough time. When you are done with the first situation, let me know,
   and we'll together proceed to a new situation.
[Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 1 ­ Decision]
[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pict ures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]
                      [Current screen: Situation 2 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the second situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy 2 euro of Person
   B, as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has 6 euro [point to tablet and
   emphasize!].
   Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   A/Person C. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 2 ­ Decision]
[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]
                     [Current screen: Situation 3 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the third situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy 4 euro of Person B,
   as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has 4 euro [point to tablet and
   emphasize!].
   Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   A/Person C. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 3­ Decision]
[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]
                     [Current screen: Situation 4 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the fourth situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy 6 euro of Person B,
   as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has 2 euro [point to tablet and
   emphasize!].
   Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   A/Person C. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 4­ Decision]
[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]


                                                 6
                          [Current screen: Situation 5 ­ Explanation with pictures]
        This is the fifth situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person
        B, as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has no money [point to tablet and
        emphasize!].
        Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
        A/Person C. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 5­ Decision]
    [Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
    makes the decision.]
                              [Now move to the next screen ­ Task 2 and "Next"]



3. Task 2 ­ Punishing the Scapegoat Game/Punishing the Wrongdoer Game
[Note: Examples of decision screens are available in Section 7]
Now we will move to a second task.
In this task, you cannot punish a Roma/non-Roma from Photo A for harming a Roma/non-Roma from Photo
B, but you can reduce the money of a Roma/non-Roma from Photo C. [In this task, you can punish a
Roma/non-Roma from Photo A for harming a Roma/non-Roma from Photo B.] Again, you can choose one
out of five possibilities [illustrate on the tablet by tapping the "Minus/Plus" buttons ­ tap to 0 first, then
one by one explain all options. Draw subject's attention to their earnings displayed in the bottom right
corner]:

        You can reduce the Person C's/Person A's money by 8 euro by paying 80 cents. Then Person
        C/Person A gets zero euros.
        You can reduce the Person C's/Person A's money by 6 euro by paying 60 cents. Then Person
        C/Person A gets 2 euro.
        You can reduce the Person C's/Person A's money by 4 euro by paying 40 cents. Then Person
        C/Person A gets 4 euro.
        You can reduce the Person C's/Person A's money by 2 euro by paying 20 cents. Then Person
        C/Person A gets 2 euro.
        Of course, you can also choose to keep the money of Person C/Person A untouched at 8 euro, for
        which you do not pay anything
You cannot change anybody else's money. Also, remember that nobody can reduce your payment.
As before, I will ask you to make a decision for all five possible situations.
Your choice in this task may have real consequences for Person C/Person A. As I already told you, we will
randomly draw one out of ten balls from this bag at the end [Show the bag. There are 10 balls in it: 8 blank
ones, one with a star and one with a triangle]. One of the ten balls has a triangle on it. If we draw the ball
which has a triangle on it, Person C/Person A will get the money according to your choice in this task. Since
your choice in this task may have real consequences for Person C/Person A, please think carefully about
your decision.




                                                      7
Remember that only one of your decisions can have real consequences ­ either your decision about the
money of the Person A/Person C ­ if we draw a ball with a star ­or your decision about the money of the
Person C/Person A ­ if we draw a ball with a triangle.
Your decision is completely anonymous. Person C/Person A will receive the money based on your decision,
but will not receive any further information.
Do you have any questions?
Now, we will again go through a couple of examples:
[Tap "NEXT": Task 2 ­ Examples + Next]
[Current screen: Task 2 ­ Example 1 with pictures]
In this situation, Person A decided to destroy 4 euro of Person B, as you can see here. Therefore, at the
moment, Person A has 8 euro, Person B has 4 euro and Person C has 8 euro [show on the tablet]. Now,
you can decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person C/Person A. You
cannot change anybody else's money. You can again make the decision by simply tapping the "minus"
and "plus" buttons.
[Go through all the examples, staying at the same screen, experimenter taps the buttons]
    1. First example: First assume you decided to keep Person C's/Person A's money at 8 euro. In such
       a case Person A gets 8 euro, person B gets 4 euro and Person C gets 8 euro [point at earnings
       displayed on the screen]. You get 9 euro [point at the earnings displayed on the screen].
    2. Another example: Now assume that you decided to reduce Person C's/Person A's money by 8
       euro. [Change Person's C/Person A's money to 0 euro.] Now, Person A gets 8 euro/0 euro,
       Person B gets 4 euro and person C gets 0 euro/8 euro [point at rewards on the screen]. Because
       you have to pay 80 cents to reduce Person C's/Person A's money, you get 8 euro and 20 cents
       [point at the earnings on the screen].
    3. A different example: Now assume that you decided to reduce Person C's/Person A's money by 4
       euro. [Change Person's C/Person A's money to 4 euro.] Now, Person A gets 8 euro/4 euro, Person
       B gets 4 euro and person C gets 4 euro/8 euro [point at rewards on the screen]. Because you have
       to pay 40 cents to reduce Person C's/Person A's money, you get 8 euro and 60 cents [point at the
       earnings on the screen]. As before, once you have decided, you can tap "OK" [tap "OK" button
       now], a confirmation window with the chosen amount will appear. If you agree, tap "OK" again. If
       you want to change your decision, tap "BACK".
    Do you have any questions?
    Again, we will go, one by one, through all the five possible situations.
    [Go through all the five situations]




                                                     8
                   [Move to the next screen ­ Situation 1 ­ Explanation + Next]
                     [Current screen: Situation 1 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the first situation. In this situation, Person A decided not to destroy any of Person's
   B money and kept his money unchanged at 8 euro, as you can see here. At this moment,
   Person B thus has 8 euro [point to the screen and emphasize!].
   Now you can decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   C/Person A. You cannot change anybody else's money.
   Beware all the situations before were examples, now this is your real decision which
   will count. I will turn away when you decide, so that you can make your decision in complete
   privacy. Take your time with the decision, we have enough time. When you are done with
   the first situation, let me know, and we'll together proceed to a new situation.
[Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 1 ­ Decision]

[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]
                     [Current screen: Situation 2 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the second situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy 2 euro of Person
   B, as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has 6 euro [point to tablet and
   emphasize!].
   Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   C/Person A. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 2 ­ Decision]

[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]
                     [Current screen: Situation 3 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the third situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy 4 euro of Person B,
   as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has 4 euro [point to tablet and
   emphasize!].
   Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   C/Person A. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 3­ Decision]

[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]
                     [Current screen: Situation 4 ­ Explanation with pictures]
   This is the fourth situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy 6 euro of Person B,
   as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has 2 euro [point to tablet and
   emphasize!].
   Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
   C/Person A. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 4­ Decision]

[Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
makes the decision.]
                     [Current screen: Situation 5 ­ Explanation with pictures]

                                                 9
        This is the fifth situation. In this situation, Person A decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person
        B, as you can see here. At this moment, Person B thus has no money [point to tablet and
        emphasize!].
        Now you should decide whether and by how much you want to reduce the money of Person
        C/Person A. [Click OK. An introductory screen appears: Situation 5­ Decision]
    [Now hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks "Next", a screen with pictures appears, and s/he
    makes the decision.]
     [Now move to the next screen ­ Task 3 and "Next"]



4. Task 3 ­ Beliefs elicitation
Now we will move to Task 3.
As I explained before, Person A could harm Person B. Person A could choose one out of five possibilities:
destroy all 8 euro of Person B, destroy 6 euro, destroy 4 euro, destroy 2 euro or not destroy any money and
keep Person B's money unchanged at 8 euro.
In this task, I will ask you to guess how Person A decided. If you guess correctly, we will add another euro
to your earnings. You can see all the options on the tablet here. Tap on the option that you want to choose
and then tap the "OK" button.
[Tap "OK", a new screen appears: Task 3 ­ Decision 1, hand the tablet to the participant, s/he clicks
"Next" and makes a decision.]
[A new screen: Task 3 ­ Decision 2]
[Fill it in together with the participants.]
Now I will ask you a similar question, but in a greater detail. How many people out of those 20 in photo A
do you think chose any of the following options? Tell me a number of people for each option and I'll write
it down; overall, your responses should sum up to 20.
So, how many out of the 20 people do you think wanted to destroy all 8 euro of Person B? _______ How
many wanted to destroy 6 euro? _____ How many wanted to destroy 4 euro? ______ How many wanted to
destroy 2 euro? _____ And how many didn't want to destroy any money of Person B and wanted to keep
his money unchanged at 8 euro? _______
[Fill in together with participants; it's not necessary for their responses to sum up to 20.]




                                                     10
5. Questionnaires

[Go through the screens together with the participants.]
[Task 1, Situation 5 ­ Assessment]
In this situation, where Person A decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person B, you decided to destroy X euro
of Person A/Person C [point at the screen]. Why did you make such a decision?
[If the participant does not come up with a reason in 10 seconds:] Does anything come to your mind? If
not, we can leave it blank.
[Task 1, Situation 5 ­ Fairness]
Imagine a situation, in which Person A decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person B. Somebody like you saw
it and decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person A/Person C. [Show the situation on the screen] Do you find
it very unfair, quite unfair, somewhat unfair, or somewhat fair, quite fair, or very fair?
[Task 2, Situation 5 ­ Assessment]
In this situation, where Person A decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person B, you decided to destroy X euro
of Person C/Person A [point at the screen]. Why did you make such a decision?
[If the participant does not come up with a reason in 10 seconds:] Does anything come to your mind? If
not, we can leave it blank.
[Task 2, Situation 5 ­ Fairness]
Imagine a situation, in which Person A decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person B. Somebody like you saw
it and decided to destroy all 8 euro of Person C/Person A. [Show the situation on the screen] Do you find
it very unfair, quite unfair, somewhat unfair, or somewhat fair, quite fair, or very fair?
[Person A, C ­ guesses]
Try to guess: What do you think, is Person A is a student, employed or unemployed?
Try to guess: What education does the father of Person A have?
Do you know anybody from this photograph A? [If yes:] How many people? From where?
Try to guess: What do you think, is Person C is a student, employed or unemployed?
Try to guess: What education does the father of Person C have?
Do you know anybody from this photograph C? [If yes:] How many people? From where?




                                                   11
[Demographic questionnaire]
Gender, age, education level, economic activity, marital status, number of children, going to church,
education and employment status of the parents, number of people living in the same household, household
possessions (car, personal computer/laptop, smartphone, tablet)

6. Conclusion
[Draw a ball to determine which task is payoff relevant, enter it into the app.]
[Final earnings are shown on the screen, fill in the payoff receipt.]
That's it, thanks a lot for participating! Please go outside to my colleague who will give you your payment.




                                                     12
7. Examples of decision screens
7.1. Punishing the Scapegoat Game




Note: Examples of the decision screens for the Punishing the Scapegoat Game, for the situation where the Wrongdoer (Person A) destroyed 6 of
the Victim (Person B). The default/starting point in all situations is always Person A and Person C getting all 8, as shown in the top figure. In the
bottom figure, the Punisher is choosing to reduce 2 of the Wrongdoer and paying 0.20 for that (see the Punisher's earnings in the bottom right).
In the experiment, each picture shows 20 different passport-style photographs, which vary based on the condition. Here we show an example for
the Wrongdoer SAME and Scapegoat OTHER condition. For privacy reasons, we blur the actual pictures in publicly available materials.




                                                                        13
7.2. Punishing the Wrongdoer Game




Note: Examples of the decision screens for the Punishing the Wrongdoer Game, for the situation where the Wrongdoer (Person A) destroyed all 8
of the Victim (Person B). The default/starting point in all situations is always Person A and Person C getting all 8, as shown in the top figure. In the
bottom figure, the Punisher is choosing to reduce 4 of the Wrongdoer and paying 0.40 for that (see the Punisher's earnings in the bottom right). In
the experiment, each picture shows 20 different passport-style photographs, which vary based on the condition. Here we show an example for the
Wrongdoer SAME and Scapegoat OTHER condition. For privacy reasons, we blur the actual pictures in publicly available materials.




                                                                         14
                       EXPERIMENTAL INSTRUCTIONS ­ WRONGDOER
[English translation; instructions were given in Slovak language]

1. Introduction ­ when being hired for work
- First, I will ask you to read the consent form, make sure you understand everything and sign it. In
    case something is unclear, just raise your hand, I will come to you and explain the details.
-   You will work for 8 hours. The compensation for your work will be 2.50 euro for each hour, which
    means20 euro in total. In addition, you may get more money ­ up to 44 euro extra, depending on the
    choices of other people.
-   The compensation of 20 euros will be paid to you tomorrow after you finish the work. Any additional
    money, between 0 and 44 euros, will be paid to you in August/September.



2. Wrongdoer decision
[After the work is finished, in two groups of 10-12 subjects]
[After subjects come, check their IDs for name and age (18 or older), give a set of unique ID stickers to
each participant.]
Good morning/afternoon/evening, please take a seat. My name is XXX. Today you will go through several
tasks that will overall take about 15 minutes. In the tasks, you will be making decisions. Your decisions
will stay anonymous; we will never tell anybody how you decided.
Please listen to the instructions carefully. I want you to understand everything before we begin. If something
is not clear, raise your hand, I'll come to you, and you can ask questions.
There were people working for us in several other locations in Eastern Slovakia. I will show you a photo
of these people from one location other than yours [show the photo].
In this task, you can decide what to do with the 8 euro two different Roma/non-Roma persons from this
photo earned for the work. We do not know exactly which persons, but it's for sure someone from the
photo. For each person, you can choose one of these five possibilities:

        You can destroy all 8 euro of a person from the photo. The person will get 0 euro.
        You can destroy 6 euro of a person from the photo. The person will get 2 euro.
        You can destroy 4 euro of a person from the photo. The person will get 4 euro.
        You can destroy 2 euro of a person from the photo. The person will get 6 euro.
        You can choose not to destroy any money of a person from the photo and keep his money
        unchanged at 8 euro.
Your decisions will have real consequences ­ a person from the photo will get paid as you decide. Your
decision is completely anonymous. The person will receive the money based on your decision, but will not
receive any further information. He does not see your photo and cannot destroy your income.
Do you have any questions?



                                                     15
OK, now you can decide whether and how much money of a person from the photo you want to destroy.
[Hand the answer sheets over to the participants.] Please take this sheet of paper. First, place your ID
sticker in the top right corner of the sheet. In the top part, please circle the option you want to choose for
one person from the photo. In the bottom part, circle the option you want to choose for another person from
the photo. When you are done, please put the paper in the envelope. I will turn away when you decide, so
that you can make your decision in complete privacy.
Thanks for your decision. I will collect the envelopes now.
Now you will have to make two more decisions about 8 euro earned by two persons from this other photo.
As before, for each of the two persons, you can choose to destroy all 8 euro, destroy 6 euro, 4 euro, 2 euro,
or you can choose not to destroy anything and keep the person's money unchanged at 8 euro.
Remember that your decisions will have real consequences ­ a person from the photo will get paid as you
decide. Your decision is completely anonymous. The person will receive the money based on your decision,
but will not receive any further information. He does not see your photo and cannot destroy your income.
Please take this sheet of paper. [Hand answer sheets to participants.] Don't forget to place your ID sticker
in the top right corner of the sheet. In the top part, please circle the option you want to choose for one person
from the photo. In the bottom part, circle the option you want to choose for another person from the photo.
When you are done, please put the paper in the envelope. I will turn away when you decide, so that you
can make your decision in complete privacy.
Thanks for your decision. I will collect the envelopes now.
Now I will ask you to fill in a short questionnaire:

3. Questionnaire and conclusion

[Demographic questionnaire]
Age, education, parental education, economic activity (student/employed/unemployed), marital status,
number of children, number of people living in the same household, household possessions (car, personal
computer/laptop, smartphone, tablet)


I will also ask each of you to proceed to a colleague of mine who will take a photo of yourself.
That's it, thanks for participating! Now I will call you one by one and you will get the 20 euros for
yesterday's work. Please wait until you are called.




                                                       16
